UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/46ZPV.87
3 August 1992
ENGLISH
Forty-sixth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 87th MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 29 July 1992, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. SHIHABI	(Saudi Arabia)
Tribute to the memory of Mohamed Boudiaf, President of the Supreme State Council of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria
Tribute to the memory of Francis Bugotu, Pertinent Representative of Solomon Islands to the United Nations
- Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations (Article 19 of the Charter) [114] (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work: report of the General Committee [8] (continued)
(a)	Request for the reopening of agenda item 116 submitted by the United States of America
/...
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-60996 9393V (E)
V48/PV.87
Ka-a)
(b)	Not« by th« 8«cr«tary-G»n«ral r«fu«itlng r«op«ning of th« consideration of aganda item 120
Program« of work
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF MOHAMED BOUDIAF, PRESIDENT OF THE SUPREME STATE COUNCIL OF THE PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ALGERIA
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF FRANCIS BUGOTU, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF SOLOMON ISLANDS TO THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic); It is my sad duty, this morning, to express condolences on the tragic death of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Boudiaf, President of the Supreme State Council of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria.
Before the tragedy that took his life, Mr. Mohamed Boudiaf was one of the most eminent personalities of the Algerian National Movement and a great son of Algeria, of the Arab nation and of the African continent. He played a historic role in the long struggle for Algerian independence and was a dedicated patriot, working all his life for the highest interests of his country and his people. At the beginning of this year, out of his untiring dedication to his country, Mr. Boudiaf responded to the call of national duty to serve his country as President of the Supreme State Council, for which he ultimately sacrificed his life.
President Boudiaf*s tragic death is a great loss for Algeria and for all of us here, who appreciate Algeria's role in the history of the Arab nation, the African continent, the Non-Aligned Movement and the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I reguest the representative of Algeria to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of Algeria and to the bereaved family.
It is also my sad duty to recall to the Assembly the passing away of His Excellency Mr. Francis Bugotu, Permanent Representative of Solomon Islands to the United Nations.
X/M/W.B7 3-5
(¡tajiuliut)
Ambassador Bugotu had a distinguished and constructive career as a respected civil servant and diplomat. At the time of his death, on 9 July 1992, Ambassador Bugotu was also serving as Ambassador to the Unltod States and as High Commissioner to Canada. Ho will be rosssbtrsd for the devotion with which he served his country and the cause of the Unltod Nations.
On behalf of all his friends and colleagues assembled hero, I should like to express to his family and to the Government and people of Solomon Islands our profound and sincere condolences.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Arabic): While individuals perish, peoples live on. A human being passes from the scone, but principles endure. In that spirit, the noble Ideals and principles for which the late leader Mr. Mohamed Boudiaf devoted his life have not vanished with him. To the contrary, they have grown stronger, not only among the Algerian people but also in the hearts of people the world over who cherish stability, security and peace.
When the news of the assassination of Mohamed Boudiaf traveled around the world, I happened to be in Dakar on the occasion of the Summit Conference of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). Like everyone else, I has taken aback and alarmed, thinking first of the singular destiny of this righteous man whom life had repeatedly propelled into wholly unique circumstances. My thoughts then turned to Algeria, whose struggle for independence I lived as if my own - that Arab country racked with concerns about its destiny, which had once again paused, uncertain. I condemned the appalling attack and conveyed
to the family of Mohamed Boudiaf my sincere and heartfelt condolences.
Amidst the African Heads of Stats or Government gathered at Dakar, I was
readily able to gauge how action in this 
public arena succeeded in 
but a few months - barely six in the case of Mohamed Boudlaf - in transforming a man hitherto unknown to the masses into a powerful, vivid and evocative figure. The image of honesty and integrity, and of fidelity to principles that Mohamed Boudlaf was beginning to make known far beyond his country's borders turned in a few hours into a symbol that even some of those who had opposed or perhaps misunderstood him shared in their hearts.
That symbol of probity and of devotion to the common good that Mohamed Boudlaf will forever represent in his country's memory, is daily growing stronger, clearer and more highly respected. It is the most stinging response individuals can make to violence and fanaticism; it is the most trenchant reply to his murderers.
I want now to pay a tribute to the memory of Francis Bugotu, Ambassador of Solomon Islands to the United Nations.
I was profoundly saddened to learn of the passing of Ambassador Francis Bugotu on 9 July. In his two years at the United Nations, Ambassador Bugotu displayed the same commitment to promoting international understanding he had shown throughout his distinguished career in Solomon Islands and in his service abroad.
I wish to join with others in paying a tribute to his memory. May I convey my profound condolences to the Government of Solomon Islands and to Mr. Bugotu's family.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I invite representatives to stand and observe a Minute of silence in tribute to the memory of the late President of the Supresm State Council of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria. His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Boudiaf, and of the late Permanent Representative of Solomon Islands to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Francis Bugotu.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I call on the representative of Madagascar, Mr. Noel Rakotondramboa, who will speak on behalf of the African States.
Mr. RAKOTONDRAMBOA (Madagascar) (interpretation from French): It is my honour to speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
We were dismayed to learn of the violent death on 29 June of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Boudiaf, President of the Supreme State Council of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria. In him, Africa lost another of its valiant sons; we saw in him both a historic leader of the Algerian revolution and, first and foremost, a courageous statesman firmly determined to restore political, economic and social stability in his country. He shouldered his responsibilities at a time that was crucial for the destiny of his country, fully aware of the dangers and challenges they entailed, and despite his age.
On behalf of the Group of African States, I convey our heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the Supreme State Council, to the Government and people of Algeria, and to the family of the deceased.
It is also with deep sadness that we learned of the death on 9 July of His Excellency Mr. Francis Bugotu, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and Permanent Representative of Solomon Islands to the United Nations. Though his tenure among us was brief, we have the best of memories
KMS/4
A/4«/W.»7 8-10
of hi«. During hit brilliant career in the service of his country and his people, he successfully held a number of major posts.
I wish on behalf of the Group of African States to convey our sincere condolences to the Government and people of Solomon Islands, as well as to the family of the deceased.
Tht PKSIPBIT (interpretation from Arabic)« I call neat on the representative of Papua Mew Guinea, Ambassador Benagi Benagi Lohia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Ml.. LOHIA (Papua Hew Guinea)« Great leaders are born to the people, to the community and to the world, all in the good plans of our gods, who placed us on Earth. The plan is for us to come and to go in a way that is good, both on Earth and in heaven. But the death of the late President Mohamed Boudiaf was not one of those forms of passing acceptable to living dear ones and to colleagues. Therefore, the world and this Assembly must condemn all such cruel acts against great leaders and great people - and even against ordinary people.
J8M/M0
(Mx. totda. ?win Mtw gaia«)
The world community must stand tail holding high tha principles of good living and of respect for life and good deeds. Leaders are given to people to provide leadership for their good and for the good of the people of the world. If there is to be peace and security in the world, it must start from individuals and groups. Therefore, we, as individuals, peoples from the grass roots to the highest authorities in all our nations, must secure the authority of law and justice for all.
Therefore, it was with great sadness that the Asian Group learned of the passing of an important and dedicated leader of Algeria. On their behalf, it is my honoured duty to request our colleague the Permanent Representative of Algeria and his delegation to convey to their Government and people our heartfelt condolences and to let them know that we share with them and all their friends their burden of sorrow.
By the same token, we grieve the loss of Ambassador Francis Bugotu, a very dear friend and colleague, a man who served h s people both from the village to the Government of Solomon Islands, and then to the South Pacific region, where he became the Secretary-General of the South Pacific Commission. Having served for many years in the Pacific, Ambassador Bugotu was then sent to the United Nations to serve not only his people in the region and his country but the world community as a whole.
God has plans for everyone. He knew that Francis had served his people, his family and the world community, and that times like these come to all of us. Whilst he has passed away, we know that his spirit is with us.
It is a traditional belief in many of our communities, in Asia, Africa, Latin America and everywhere, that all flesh born to the world perishes, but that the spirit lives on. It is from this belief that we gain strength and a
JSM/MO	VW/W.I7
12
■•ns« of to^sthsrMii, brotherhood and sisterhood.
We pay a tribute to our dear friend and colleague, and a leader in his own right, and request that the Charge d'affaires of the Mission of Solomon Islands convey to the Government and people of Solomon Islands and to the bereaved familiy of Francis Bugotu the condolences of the States members of the Asian Group to the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic)t I call on the representative of Ukraine, Mr. Viktor Kryxhanivskly, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. KRYZHANIVSKIY (Ukraine): In my capacity as Chainaan of the Group of Eastern European States, I should like to pay a tribute to the late President Mohamed Boudiaf. An outstanding politician, he contributed greatly to obtaining his country's independence. Despite being in exile for almost 30 years, President Boudiaf was always with his people. Be never stopped his efforts to build bis country into a prosperous and democratic society. In a very complicated period of time for bis country, Mohamed Boudiaf was sworn in ar Bead of the Presidential Council of Algeria. He displayed his courage and took full responsibility for the destiny of his country. Though Mohamed Boudiaf's tragic death prevented him from impleiaenting all of his plans and dreams, the memory of the outstanding politician and individual that he was will remain with us.
I should also like to pay a tribute to the late Ambassador Francis Bugotu. For the last few years, Ambassador Bugotu had represented his country in the United Nations while at the same time serving as Ambassador to the United States and High Commissioner to Canada. He contributed greatly to the strengthening of Solomon Islands' independence and, as a Permanent
<MTi KEYRhiaXYRklY« UliEalM) Representative to the United nation*, to cooperation among States in their efforts to strengthen international peace and security. His memory will long endure.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic)i I call on the representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Mr. Kingsley Layne, who will speak on behalf of th* Latin American and Caribbean Group.
Mr. LAYNE (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines)i The Governments and people* of the member countries comprising th* Latin American and Caribbean Group extend their sincere condolences to the Government and people of Algeria on the untimely and tragic death of President Mohamed Boudiaf, which occurred on 29 June 1992.
We also wish to express heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of Solomon Islands as they mourn the loss of His Excellency Mr. Francis Bugotu, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
The assassin's bullet has silenced the voice of yet another great personality. President Boudiaf will always be remembered for his role in his country's struggle for independence. As an elder statesman, his wise counsels and sound judgements will forever be lost. His country and many others will greatly miss him and the leadership he gave, particularly at this time. The perpetrators of this dastardly act must be punished to the full extent of the law.
The news of the sudden passing of Ambassador Francis Bugotu on 9 July 1992 was received with shock and profound sadness.
As colleagues, we cannot help but remember the genial Francis with his
winning smile and pleasant personality. It is somehow fitting that he died
VM/PV.I7 14-1?
(Mr. Layne. St. Vincent and the grw^lM«)
playing the sport ha loved, among many friends and colleagues from the entire South Pacific region, who were attending the twenty-third South Pacific Forum, which waa being hosted by Solomon Islands, Ambassador Bugotu's credentials as a representative of his country have
won him the respect and admiration of people within his homeland, in the South Pacific region and generally, within the international community.
The Solomon Islands now mourn the loss of a distinguished son, an educator, a diplomat, a politician and a aportsawn. The South Pacific region and the international community have lost a friend and a statesman. Ho will be sadly missed.
On bohalf of the Latin American and Carriboan Group of countries, the
respective delegations of Algeria and Solomon Islands are kindly requested to convey expressions of our sympathy to the bereaved families of President Boudiaf and Ambassador Bugotu.
V4J/W.B7 16
IbiL_HKIfim (interpretation from Arabic)! I call on Mr. Thoeai Hajnocsi of Austria, who will apeak on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr, HAJNOCZI (Austria)i On behalf of the Group of Western European and othar States, I have the sad duty to convey, through the delegation of Algeria, our sincere condolences to the Governwnt and people of Algeria on the tragic and untimely death of His Excellency Mohaaed Boudiaf, President of Algeria and President of its Supreme State Council. We are still ahocked by the heinous assassination of the late President of Algeria. Ho will be remembered as an outstanding leader of his country, both during the liberation process and at this critical juncture of Algeria's history. Ho stood for courage and values. With his passing away, the people and Government of Algeria have lost a dedicated patriot and hero, and tho international community has lost a statesman whose contributions to promoting peace and international understanding will be missed.
Let me also seise this occasion to express our grief and sorrow at the death of our esteemed and amiable colleague, the late Permanent Representative of the Solomon Islands, Mr. Francis Bugotu. Our respectful condolences go to his family, the United Nations Mission and the Government of the Solomon Islands.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I call on the representative of the United States, the host country.
Mr, HICKS (United States of America): As representative of the host country, it is with deep sadness that I speak to express the profound condolencer. of the Government and people of the United States of America, and the personal sympathy of Ambassador Perkins, to the people and Government of
(Mr. Hick«. United Stat««) Algeria upon the tragic death of the Suprem State Council President, Mohamed Boudiaf. Ho was a patriot who served his country both in its struggle for liberation and in its hour of greatest need.
Me deeply regret the assassination of President Boudiaf and the death and injuries of others during the 29 Juno violence in the town of Annaba. Me condemn this act of political violence and have called upon all parties in Algeria to avoid further bloodshed. Violence simply cannot bo the solution to Algeria's problems.
As representative of the host country, it is also with deep sorrow that I recognise the untimely loss of our colleague, Asbassador Francis Bugotu, Permanent Representative of the Solomon Islands to the United Nations. Ambassador Bugotu was a dedicated representative of his country and a deft defender of its interests in this international chamber and other global forums. He served his country with dignity and dedication unt'l his unexpected death during the South Pacific Heads of Government meeting on 9 July 1992.
On behalf of the Government and people of the United States of America, I wish to convey our deepest condolences and those of Ambassador Perkins to the family of Ambassador Bugotu and to the Government, people and delegation he served so ably.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I call on the representative of Algeria.
Mr, HADID (Algeria) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, I should like first, on behalf of my Government, to express our deep thanks to you, to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to all the spokespersons of the regional groups, as
BHS/ck	A/4B/PV.87
IS
(MLuJl^Mfltill) well as to tha representative of the boat country, all of whom ware kind enough to extend their sympathy and express their condolences to us. The tragic passing of President Mohamed Boudiaf, the victim of a cowardly assassination, is a heavy burden for the people of Algeria, who have been distresseed by this unspeakable crime against a figure who symbolised the Algerian national movement, a militant of unanimously recognised integrity, a man of dialogue and openness, who fought to his very last breath for the triumph of freedom, dignity and progress. The memory of President Boudiaf will remain forever alive in the minds of an entire people with whom he will always be identified.
The Algerian people and its leaders, determined to pursue the work of President Boudiaf, who committed Algeria to a resolute march towards stability, democracy and progress, find a precious source of comfort in the display of friendship and support which have come to us from throughout the world.
We have been very touched today at the renewal of this expression of feelings of sympathy and support, and I should like, on behalf of my Government, once again to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, to the e Secretary-General and to all the delegations that have joined, through the spokespersons of the regional groups or individually, in paying homage to President Boudiaf.
I shall not fail to transmit to the Government of Algeria as well as to the members of the family of President Boudiaf all the expressions of sympathy which have come to us in this Assembly.
I should also like to join the voice of my delegation with the condolences addressed to the Government and delegation of the Solomon Islands
BHS/ck
(Mr. Madid. Algeria)
upon th« occasion of th« paining away ot Ambassador Bugotu. H« will bo sadly mined by hii many friends in the United Nations, where he was esteemed by us all.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic)! May I repeat my condolences to the Algerian Government and people.
I now call on Mr. Bata'anisia of the Solomon Islands.
Mr, BATA’ANISIA (Solomon Islands)! I have the honour to say a few words of thanks to everyone on the special occasion when we pay tribute to our dear colleague. His Excellency Francis Bugotu, the Solomon Islands Ambassador and Permanent Repreaentati.e to the United Nations, who passed away on
9 July 1992, while attending the Heads of the South Pacific Forum meeting held in Honiara, Solomon Islands. On behalf of the Government and people of the Solomon Islands and of the family of the late Mr. Francis Bugotu, I wish to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General, the spokesmen of the regional groups and members of the respective Governments, for the messages of sympathy and condolences that we have received. Your valuable support and words of encouragement have been valued very much by our Government and people.
< HuJitLialili.
IbUobdaJiIuiIi)
Solomon Islands has lost a vary valuable nan, a sun who really served his country and his people In the South Pacific region and In the world body today, nevertheless, stay I assure you all that SoIoann Islands will continue to attach groat importance to this world body, and sy Government Is now in the process of identifying a suitable replacsssnt for the late Mr. Francis Bugotu here at the United Nations.
Before concluding, I should like, on behalf of the Government and people of Solomon Islands, to pay tribute to the late President of Algeria following the tragic news of his death. I wish also to convey my Government's sincere condolences to the Algerian Mission to the United Nations. To all of our colleagues here at the United Nations, I will surely pass on your messages of sympathy to my Government and people and to the family of the late Mr. Francis Bugotu.
The.PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I thank the representative of Solomon Islands for his kind words, and may I repeat my condolences.
The following representatives have requested to speak on a point of order: the United States, the United Kingdom, Iceland, Austria, Australia, Slovenia, Croatia and Yugoslavia. I now call on the representative of the United States of America.
Mr. HICKS (United States of America): In a letter dated 5 May 1992 from the Deputy Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations, addressed to the President of the Security Council, the United States stated that serious questions had arisen regarding whether Serbia-Montenegro was the continuation of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
( Mr^AlGki^ÄlnlndS tat«» ) stated further that until auch time at theae questions were reaolved. the participation of the representatives of Serbia-Montenegro in the activities of the Security Council or the General Assembly should bo viewed as without prejudice to the disposition of those queatlona.
Since our communication of 5 May, the Security Council, In resolution 757 (1992) of 30 Hay, noted that
"the claim by the Federal Republic of Yugoalavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to continue automatically the memberahip of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia In the United Nations has not been generally accepted" (Security Council resolution 7S7 (1992), t^nth preambular Paragraph) *
We strongly believe that the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no longer exists, that Serbia-Montenegro is not the continuation of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and that therefore Serbia-Montenegro is not entitled to assume th# seat of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations.
As in other membership questions, we believe this issue needs to be settled by actions of the General Assembly upon recommendations of the Security Council. We believe such actions should be taken as soon as possible. Until that time, however, the participation of Serbia-Montenegro in the activities of the United Nations should continue to be viewed as without prejudice to this question.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the representative of the United Kingdom.
Mr. WOOD (United Kingdom)t I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Community and Its member States. The European Community and its member States have recalled on numerous occasions that they have not accepted the automatic continuity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in international organisations, including the United Nations. They reiterated thia position in their declaration of 20 July, in which they noted that the new federation formed by Serbia and Montenegro cannot be accepted as the sole successor to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Questions relating to Yugoslavia's membership remain under consideration in international organisations, Including the United Nations. The presence of representatives of Serbia and Montenegro at United Nations meetings is accordingly without prejudice to the position of the E ropean Community and its Member States and to further action they may take to oppose the participation of Yugoslavia in the United Nations.
The P~ESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the representative of Iceland.
Mr, SIGURDSSON (Iceland): I have asked to speak in order to address an important point of procedure on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Iceland. The Nordic countries wish to associate themselves with the statement just made by the representative of the United Kingdom, speaking on behalf of the member States of the European Community, on the same point of procedure.
In the view of the Nordic Governments, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a new entity made up of only two former Yugoslav Republics, is not to be automatically regarded as the successor State of Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia. The issue should be solved through appropriate admission procedures in the relevant internationl institutions.
Th« PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Arabic)i I now call on the representative of Austria.
Mr, HAJNOCZI (Austria): In a statement we circulated aa a document of the General Assembly and the Security Council dated 5 May 1992 and on many other occasions since then, the position of the Austrian Government has been clearly defined: There is no legal basis for an automatic continuation of the legal existence of the former, now defunct. Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the new federation of Serbia and Montenegro, which therefore cannot be considered to continue the Yugoslav Membership in the United Nations. For an eventual international recognition of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the criteria contained in the guidelines on the recognition of new States adopted by the Council of the European Community on 16 December 1991 should be applied. In this respect, Austria draws special attention to the requirements for the protection of human rights and the rights of ethnic groups.
The presence of representatives of Serbia and Montenegro at United Nations meetings has to be viewed as without prejudice to the disposition of this question. However, we are firmly convinced that this issue should be settled on an urgent basis.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the representative of Australia.
Ms. BIRD (Australia): My delegation wishes to place on record that Australia has not accepted the claim of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to be the continuing State of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Australia therefore reserves its position on the status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and on issues dealing with its representation in international organizations.
VM/W.I7
25
Th* MMIDMÎ (interpretation from Arabic) i I now call on the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. 1HIÎ1M (Slovenia)i The delegation of Slovenia would like to associate Itself with the views just expressed by the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, Iceland, Austria and Australia concerning the status and participation of Yugoslavia in the work of international organisations. Including the United Mations.
V<#/W.|7 2«
(Mr. Kerstein. Slovenia)
We should like to reiterate the position expressed on several occasions by the Government of Slovenia that the Socialist Federal Bepubllc of Yugoslavia has ceased to exist, and that the Federal Bepubllc of Yugoslavia cannot be an automatic successor to the seat of the Socialist Federal Bepubllc of Yugoslavia in the international bodies, including the United Nations.
Therefore, the participation of the delegation of Yugoslavia at this meeting, as well as other meetings of the United Nations, does in no way prejudice the final solution of this problem.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic)« I now call on the representative of Croatia.
Mr. NOBILO (Croatia)« The Republic of Croatia also supports the growing number of Member States that are challenging the membership of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations, which is now claimed by the new, internationally unrecognised federation formed between Serbia and Montenegro. Atrocities committed by Serbia and Montenegro against the civilians of the Republic of Croatia and the Bepubllc of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the "ethnic cleansing" are a clear violation of the United Nations Charter and of international law. This justifies seeking an urgent consensus in the Security Council and the General Assembly on this issue.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the representative of Yugoslavia.
Mr, DJQKIC (Yugoslavia): The delegation of Yugoslavia has asked for the floor, regrettably, in connection with the statements just delivered by certain representatives regarding the continuity and membership of Yugoslavia in the United Nations. I do not wish to reply to the allegations that have just been expressed by the representative of Croatia, as I feel that the
KP/S	A/46/FV.S7
27
< Mt eJ2J»Alt«_lugcalaYJ a) rostrum of ths General Assembly should not be used for recrimination and confrontation.
Consequently, permit me, Mr. President, to draw the attention of the members of the General Assembly to the following. On 27 April 1992, the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia delivered an official note to the Secretary-General of the United Rations Informing him that the Assembly of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, at its session held on 27 April 1992, promulgated the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Under the Constitution, strictly respecting the continuity of the international personality of Yugoslavia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia shall continue to fulfil all the rights conferred to and obligations assumed by the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in International relations, including its membership in all international organisations and participation in international treaties ratified or acceded to by Yugoslavia.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a Founding Member of the United Rations, acknowledges its full commitment to the world Organisation, the United Nations Charter, and the Conference on Security and Cooperation (CSC) in Europe as its founding participating State and to all CSC documents, in particular the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia does not claim to be the sole successor of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but does strongly believe that the continuity of Yugoslavia as a State and its legal personality are in accordance with established practice in international relations in all such situations as well as with standard international behavior in similar circumstances, particularly in the United Nations.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is not a new State, but is rather the
(Mr,PjoKlé, Jtuaealavla) restructuring and continuation of the earlier Yugoslavia, this time within a reduced Territory. Therefore, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia shall continue to pursue Yugoslavia's foreign policy of the broadest possible equitable cooperation with all international factors.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I should like to inform representatives that all the observations thus made will appear in the verbatim records of this meeting.
AGENDA ITEM 114 (continued)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (ARTICLE 19 OF THE CHARTER) (A/46/868/ADD.2)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to document A/46/868/Add.2, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General informing me that, since the issuance of his communications dated 4 February and 13 April 1992, Nicaragua has made the necessary payments to reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK: REPORT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE
(a)	REQUEST FOR THE REOPENING OF AGENDA ITEM 116 SUBMITTED BY THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (A/46/952)
(b)	NOTE BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL REQUESTING REOPENING OF THE CONSIDERATION OF AGENDA ITEM 120 (A/46/934 AND ADD.1)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): We turn now to the letter from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America
A/M/W.B7
29-30
(IlJLElUlilMt)
addressed to the Secretary-General (A/46/952) by which the United States of America, and on behalf of Australia, Austria, Canada, Csechoslovakla, Germany, Japan, the Philippines, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, requests that agenda item 116, "United Nations common system", be reopened as soon as possible during the forty-sixth session of the Assembly in order to enable the Assembly to consider the impact on the United Nations common system of the decision of the Administrative Council of the International Telecommunication Union, at its last session, regarding the payment of special post allowances.
In light of this request, may I take it that the Assembly has no objection to reopening consideration of agenda item 116?
It wag ac_de£ldtd.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): Members will recall that, at its third plenary meeting, on 20 September 1991, the Assembly allocated this item to the Fifth Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly again wishes to allocate this item to the Fifth Committee?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic); Next, we turn to the request contained in the note by the Secretary-General circulated in document A/46/934. In connection with this request, a report by the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission has been
issued as document A/46/934/Add.1.
(OiJiiilfliat)
In his note, the Secretary-General Informa the General Assembly that in his report to the Security Council (8/23671 and Add.l) he recommended, inter alia, that the mandate, strength and composition of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) be enlarged to include nn Office of the Special Representative for Angola to coordinate all United Nations activities related to the Angolan peace process, and an Electoral Division for the purpose of observing and verifying the Angolan electoral process until its completion.
He further Informs the Assembly that the Security Council, by its resolution 747 (1992) of 24 March 1992, inter alia, approved his report and decided to enlarge the mandate of UNAVEM II for the remainder of its existing mandate period.
In order to enable the Assembly to consider the financing proposals of the Secretary-General that would permit UNAVEM II to undertake these added responsibilities, it will be necessary to reopen consideration of agenda item 120, entitled "Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission".
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to reopen consideration of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): At its 3rd plenary meeting, the Assembly allocated agenda item 120 to the Fifth Committee. May I take it that the Assembly again wishes to allocate agenda item 120 to the Fifth Committee?
Ik .22 -de.cid.ed-
KMS/9	V46/W.I7
32 Th» PRESIDENT (interpretation fro* Arabic)> The Chairman of the
Fifth Committee will be informed of the decision# just taken. PROGRAMME OF WORK
The PRESIDE*! (interpretation from Arabic)i I should like to Inform members that the nest plenary meeting of the Assembly will bo hold on Friday, 31 July, at 10 a.m., to consider the admission of the Republic of Georgia to membership of the United Nations, and the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda items 116 and 120.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.
JNITED
mations
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/47/PV.33 22 October 1992
ENGLISH
Forty-seventh session GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 33rd MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 12 October 1992, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. GANEV	(Bulgaria)
(President)
later:	Mr. NANDOE	(Suriname)
(Vice-President)
later:	Mr. GANEV	(Bulgaria)
(President)
Social development: (a) Questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family [93]
Conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons:
(i) Report of the Secretary-General (ii) Draft resolution
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-61406 1781V (E)
The meeting vas called to order at 10.20 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 93
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT! (a) QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE WORLD SOCIAL SITUATION AND TO YOUTH, AGEING, DISABLED PERSONS AND THE FAMILY
CONCLUSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS DECADE OF DISABLED PERSONS:
(i)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/47/415)
(ii)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/47/L.4)
The PRESIDENT: This morning the General Assembly, in accordance with the decision taken at its 3rd plenary meeting, is holding the first of the plenary meetings to mark the conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 93.
In this connection the Assembly has before it the report (A/47/415) of the Secretary-General on the Implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons.
The Assembly also has before it a draft resolution in document A/47/L.4, which was circulated this morning.
The debate that begins today, at the end of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, attests to the recognition of the importance of disability as a social development and human rights issue.
Although disability issues have always been included in the wider agenda of the United Nations, the Decade of Disabled Persons has provided an opportunity to focus special attention on them and for setting targets for world-wide efforts to deal with such issues.
Those of us gathered in this Hall today represent all sectors of society: Governments, which bear the ultimate responsibility for addressing disability issues at the national level; organizations and agencies of the United Nations, with their vast and rich experience in standard-setting and action; and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, particularly organizations of disabled people, which carry with them unique experience, expertise and wisdom.
Today we shall reflect on the achievements of the Decade, and learn from our successes, as well as from our shortcomings. This will help us to identify major trends that are emerging in disability policy and to use what the international community has accomplished over the Decade as a springboard for the development of coherent and effective strategies for the years to come.
This is a unique opportunity to exchange ideas, to share information and experiences and to forge a path for the future. It is my sincere hope that these meetings will be a landmark in the process of refining the international community’s response to the challenge of disability.
I am confident that we shall emerge stronger from these meetings of the General Assembly. We shall strengthen our commitment to the objectives of the World Programme of Action by building a three-way partnership of those
gathered here today/ namely# Governments# United Nations organizations and non-governmental organizations. We shall all benefit from the experience accumulated in the promotion of the rights of disabled persons throughout the world and from the creation of a new society free from discrimination and segregation indeed# truly a society in which all people# including those with disabilities# will live a dignified life.
I look forward to our deliberations and trust that we have the resolve to meet the challenges we have set before us and those that lie ahead.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations# Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Disability issues have been a concern of the United Nations since the early days of the Organization. And that concern is rooted in the deeply humanitarian outlook of the Charter. Today the disability programme touches the lives of millions of disabled people - and indirectly affects the lives of everyone. Today the Assembly starts a series of special meetings to mark the conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons.
I welcome the ministers and high-ranking officials responsible for disability issues who have come for these important debates. I salute our special guests the eminent persons. Each of them has made an outstanding contribution to the United Nations programme on disability in the last 10 years. And I extend greetings and heartfelt appreciation to the representatives' of non-governmental organizations involved with the disabled.
The Charter makes no distinction between able and disabled citizens. But the words "faith in fundamental human rights in the dignity and worth of the
human person" have a special meaning for disabled persons. The determination "to promote social progress and better standards of life" applies equally to all people.
War is a major cause of disablement. Mines are a particular danger.
So the United Nations has to work both to prevent the situations which cause war, which cause injuries and which cause disablement and to assist the victims of war and the disabled generally to play their full part in society.
The record speaks for itself. The Declaration on the Rights of the Mentally Retarded was adopted in 1971. The Declaration on the Rights of Disabled Persons was approved in 1975. The need to raise awareness of disability at all levels led the United Nations to proclaim the International Year of Disabled Persons in 1981.
This resulted in the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons. This is the cornerstone of the United Nations disability programme. But its objectives of full participation and equality will not be reached without broad action at the national level, supported by international cooperation. To accelerate this process the Decade of Disabled Persons was proclaimed for the period 1983-1992. We now mark the end of the Decade, but the work has just begun.
In the course of the Decade, disability issues have gone beyond the category of humanitarian concerns. They are now recognized in the dimension of human rights and development. Disability policy has moved from charity to integrated social development planning. Definitions have changed. Understanding of disability has improved. We now recognize that a disability need not be a handicap if the work place, the school, transportation and the media are accessible to disabled persons.
	
Cooperation among organizations concerned with disability is improving.
Disabled persons' own organizations have grown strong in advocacy. Throughout the United Nations, agencies, bodies and programmes have set guidelines on disability policy.

We have tried, in this house, to implement our own policies. We have made every effort, for example, to make these meetings accessible to persons with disabilities. I am grateful for the contributions that some Member States, particularly Canada, have made to facilitate the active involvement of all participants.
The United Nations has just completed an audit of the public areas and the employment process. We intend to comply with the most advanced legislation on disability.
Early in the Decade, programmes aimed at prevention of diaability were established: immunization, nutrition, health education, vocational safety and emergency relief. By mid-Decade, the emphasis shifted to rehabilitation. With this came the "integration principle". It is within the community that people learn best to adapt to society. And the integrated approach is financially cost-effective. It is better to build structures for many than to build many structures for a few.
The last few years of the Decade brought standards for national and international conduct, along with the concept of equality. Disabled persons have the right to live in their communities the same as others live. While equal rights are the basis for equality, disabled persons must have the means of exercising those rights. This means equalization of opportunity for disabled persons, so that they may contribute fully to society.
Standard rules for the equalization of opportunity for disabled persons will be finalized in 1993. If adopted, the standard rules will serve as a measure by which States can gauge their progress in achieving equality. The future of the disability programme lies in the concept of a "society for all". The year 1992 marks a transition point. The Decade was a period of philosophical evolution. Now is the time for action.

The action taken in the last 10 years has been decisive. There has been increasing awareness of the rights of disabled persons, for whose benefit vast programmes of medical research, public health and social integration have been implemented, and we must not overlook their significance. The economic crisis that has hit a large part of the world has hindered some of our efforts. Often, because we do not have sufficient means, it has not been possible to achieve what was desirable.
The disabled represent a significant part of the population of our planet. Their number has been estimated at 500 million throughout the world. In the rich countries of the North they represent 12 to 14 per cent of the population; in the poor countries of the South the proportion may be as high as 20 per cent. The magnitude of these figures indicates the importance of the issue that has brought us here today.
It must be emphasized that behind these figures there are human realities; that beyond these abstract statistics, there are human realities specific realities that are manifested daily: suffering and the struggle against sickness, poverty and marginalization. We can turn a blind eye on these realities, but our most basic duty forbids us to do so - the duty to stand in solidarity with others, but also the responsibility we owe to ourselves. There are lessons in these realities, and we should be well advised to think about those lessons.
In the courage of the disabled there are rich examples of dignity from which we can all learn. Any society that ignores the suffering of its people is condemned to fail to reach its full potential.
In the modern world, requirements of productivity, profitability and economic maximization at any cost are too often at the forefront. Too often
these imperatives take precedence over the search for the harmonious	
development of societies for balanced development in which there is concern for each human being. To plead the cause of the disabled is to plead also the cause of a more humane world a world intent on seeing that everyone finds his place because each person's place is useful to all. It is in this spirit that one must understand the United Nations programme for the disabled.
Similarly just as in the case of our efforts for peace between nations, our actions to improve the living conditions of the poor, the sick and the disabled are of crucial importance but the effectiveness of our actions does not depend just on the United Nations. The definition of priorities and the establishment of programmes presuppose coordination with action in the field by the non-governmental organizations and with the Governments of the countries involved.
In this area as in many others the United Nations cannot do everything by itself. It provides support and encouragement. That is why it is important that Governments themselves make the question of the disabled one of their priorities. Since this is an issue that addresses the handicapped those who suffer and those who are alone, it will undoubtedly lead the leaders of each country to take on the most noble part of collective action.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate be closed at 6.00 p.m. today. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names to the list of speakers as soon as possible.
(The President) I now call on the representative of Mauritania, Mr. Mohamedou Quid Mohamed Mahmoud, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. PULP MOHAMED MAHMOUD (Mauritania) (interpretation from French): I should like first to express to you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly, the heartiest congratulations of the delegations of African States. Those delegations, on whose behalf I have the honour to address this important meeting devoted to the celebration at the world level of the conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, are convinced that thanks to your political experience and other qualities today's work and the work of the forty-seventh session as a whole will lead to satisfactory results.
To your predecessor, our brother, Ambassador Samir Shihabi of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, our delegations wish to express our heartiest congratulations on the effective and able manner in which he conducted the work of the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
Ten years ago the General Assembly, in resolution 3752 of 3 December 1982, adopted the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, and in its resolution 3753 of the same date proclaimed the period 1983-1992 as the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons. At the end of this period, which has been difficult, the time has now come to assess the action that has been taken, and to determine what progress has been achieved and what obstacles have been encountered.
The Decade’s most tangible result has been a growing awareness of the problems and needs of disabled persons. Special attention is currently being given to them at all levels, and many old prejudices have now disappeared.
A47PV.33 17 (Mr, Quid Mohamed Mahmoud, Mauritania)
Organizations of disabled persons, whose number has increased during the Decade, have played an important role in these developments.*
The work of the bodies and organizations of the United Nations system has also been decisive. The Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons deserves special attention, as it has given strong support to numerous projects for those persons. However, both the Fund and other United Nations bodies have been limited by the modest means made available to the Decade. That is why the objectives identified have not been achieved, with the result that the number of disabled persons is now greater than it was 10 years ago.
The worsening of the economic and social situation in the developing countries and the crises and wars that have erupted during the same period are major reasons for this state of affairs. The African countries that have implemented structural adjustment policies and the regions that have suffered great tension are familiar with the effect of such policies and tensions on vulnerable groups in society, and disabled persons in particular. The drought and the conflicts that prevail in our continent particularly affect disabled persons, while, of course, appreciably increasing their numbers.
Consequently, the conclusion of the Decade is not, and cannot mean, the end of action for disabled persons. On the contrary, the achievements of this period must form the basis of more vigorous action, and the obstacles to our efforts must also be overcome more effectively.
* Mr. Nandoe (Suriname), Vice-President, took the Chair.
While the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons has led to a growing awareness of the situation of this vulnerable sector of the population, we must now move on to the stage of implementing practical measures that will have a real impact on their lives. The implementation of paragraphs 11 to 16 of the report of the Secretary-General (A47415) will certainly contribute to this immense undertaking.
There is a close link between, on the one hand, disability and infirmity, and, on the other, the level of economic and social development. Therefore, international cooperation to achieve the objectives of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons is very important. Only effective international solidarity will make the necessary resources available to that end.
This conviction led the Organization of African Unity to set up the African Rehabilitation Institute to channel the efforts of African countries to this portion of their population.
However, both regional and international efforts must be buttressed by adequate national programmes.
Like all human beings, the disabled are entitled to protection and full respect for their dignity. They must receive any form of assistance that will enable them to play a full part in social life and to enjoy the same rights as all other human beings.
Their special position commands the attention of us all. Let us act in such a way that their appeal is heeded everywhere, and that this day devoted to them is followed by practical, generous action committing all those concerned with the rights of disabled persons to act with greater solidarity»
No effort should be spared to ensure that disabled people no longer feel marginalized by their societies. At all levels national regional and international we must work for this humane objective to ensure that the rights to which I have referred are enjoyed in practice.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Turkey, Mr. Mustafa Ak^in, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. AK^IN (Turkey): I have the honour address the Assembly on behalf of the Asian Group on the occasion of the special plenary meeting marking the conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons and the tenth anniversary of the World Programme of Action.
The most notable achievement of the Decade has been to make the world community more sensitive to disability issues. Efforts to increase awareness of the needs of disabled persons and of the many problems they encounter have been fairly successful. However the potential contribution of the disabled to society has not yet been fully recognized.
Many Governments in the Asian region have enacted legislation to provide services, programmes and special integration measures for disabled persons. It is important, however, to ensure that the needs and problems of the disabled are systematically taken into account in all areas, such as health, social affairs, education, employment, transportation and access to the physical environment. This is how to achieve the goal that the General Assembly has set for disabled persons - a society for all by the year 2010.
(Mr, Aksin. Turkey)
Equal opportunity for all requires equal access to education, which will not be possible if disabled students do not have the appropriate facilities, particularly adaptive devices. This also applies to employment.
Consequently, we should give serious consideration to the practical aspects of the integration of disabled persons. We welcome the elaboration of standard
rules on the equalization of opportunities for the disabled.
(Mr, Aksin, Turkey)
We are all aware of the relationship between disability and socio-economic problems. It is not realistic to expect the removal of all the obstacles in a relatively short time. On the other hand we cannot afford to overlook the human resources represented by 500 million people with disabilities. For this we need effective international co-operation.
In this context we took note with appreciation of the report of our Secretary-General on the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons contained in document A47415. We welcome its recommendations.
This occasion provides us with an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to make societies fully accessible to disabled persons and to speed up the integration process. Much remains to be done to improve the situation of the disabled and the goal of full and equal participation is far from being reached. The Asian countries are ready to contribute to international co-operation as well as the work of the United Nations in this field and to turn growing awareness into effective action.
We would like to pay tribute to the work of national and international disabled persons' organizations for the role they play in furthering our objectives.
In conclusion I would like to thank the Canadian Government for hosting the International Meeting of Ministers Responsible for the Status of Persons with Disabilities in Montreal on 8 and 9 October 1992. This timely initiative should provide a very useful input to our deliberations here in the General Assembly.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Mr. Alexander Arzoumanian of Armenia who will speak on behalf of the Eastern European States.
Mr, ARZOUMANIAN (Armenia): As we close the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, it is clear that much has been accomplished yet much remains to be done. I am pleased to be speaking on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States today. We applaud the United Nations work during the Decade, and we want to emphasize that the United Nations should continue its efforts so that one day all disabled persons all over the world will be integrated, without a shred of discrimination, into society.
Our region, especially, needs to improve the ways we address the challenges posed by disabled persons. This need to improve is substantial because in addition to persons born with disabilities many of us have been hit with tragic calamities, natural and man-made, which have created massive new disabled populations. These calamities have long lasting physical, psychological, societal and economic effects, and we readily acknowledge that as individual countries we cannot address all these challenges.
In addition, the ongoing transformation of our social, economic and political systems has exacerbated the problems we face in integrating the disabled. We must develop capable structures to meet our obligations a task that is difficult in the midst of so much change in virtually every sphere of our lives.
Therefore we enthusiastically support proposals and recommendations reported by the Secretary-General. We want to draw particular attention to our support of the continuation of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons as the United Nations Fund on Disability.
As the Secretary-General has reported, ’’national capacity building and institutional development were the main focus of Fund-assisted activities”. This is exactly the type of assistance countries in our region need.
The raising of public awareness to continue improving the situation of disabled persons is critical. Therefore we are also pleased to enthusiasically support the Russian Federation’s initiative and the President’s proposal to designate 3 December as the International Day of Disabled Persons.
We would like to note how encouraged we are by ongoing technological advances that help the disabled. Technology has made the twentieth century unlike any other in history; achievements unthinkable in the past, such as space travel, are now taken for granted. In the coming years we should dedicate ourselves to seeing similar advantages in technology change the lives of the disabled. Already the International Labour Organization has reported that we have the technology practically to give vision to the blind and hearing to the deaf. In the work place, we know that the technology exists for the disabled to do work that no one could have believed the disabled could perform. Many view such advances as miracles, and indeed they are miracles. But we cannot be satisfied with those miracles alone. We must make sure that technological advances continue, and, perhaps more importantly, we must find ways economically to extend the benefits of technological advances beyond a few cases, to all disabled persons all over the world.
Finally, we want to emphasize the enormous value of non-governmental organizations in meeting the needs of disabled persons. Many of our countries know from experience that non-governmental organizations that deal with disabilities and society cannot be replaced. We would like publicly to thank those organizations, many of which are here in the United Nations today; to encourage them to continue and expand their activities; and to support close co-operation among these organizations, the United Nations and our countries.
The PRESIDENT; I call on Mr. Ramiro Piriz-Ballon of Uruguay, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr, PIRIZ-BALLON (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, it is my honour to address this Assembly on this most important issue.
Ten years ago we celebrated the adoption of the World Programme of Action for Disabled Persons, thereby initiating the United Nations Decade for Disabled Persons.
Much progress has been made in this period. In keeping with the Programme of Action, Governments began formulating policies to achieve the full participation of the disabled in society. In many countries national committees were formed, public information campaigns were launched, and laws were adopted to help eliminate discrimination against disabled persons. Finally, the subject was defined as a social issue within the context of respect for human rights.
On the basis of this approach, as we explore the issue of the disabled, we must eschew sentimental or a false charitable tone. Prejudices are the main obstacle confronted by the disabled on a daily basis. The use of derogatory terms to describe them, difficult access to buildings such as schools and work places and means of transportation, and labour discrimination constitute factors that foster segregation and lead to the isolation of the disabled and impede their full enjoyment of human rights.
It is necessary to give the disabled the means to exercise their rights and freedoms. Laws aimed at preventing discrimination are of little use if we do not also eliminate the obstacles to their full integration into society.
(Mr. Piriz-Ballon. Uruguay)
We believe that one aspect that deserves special attention is what causes disabilities, since many of them could be prevented if the necessary measures were taken. Science is still unable to prevent certain disabilities, such as those caused by Down’s syndrome or dwarfism. However, great scientific advances have made it possible easily to prevent such diseases as poliomyelitis or measles, which can cause irreversible physical damage in children. It is alarming that in the developing world we are still witnessing the ravages caused by these diseases.
Ironically, technological progress has brought with it other causes of disabilities, through pollution, damage to the environment, the use of toxic products and so on.
What is even more serious, the developing countries are also suffering from the consequences of starvation and malnutrition, which have disabled thousands of children; lack of iodine, vitamin A and iron has irreversibly affected physical and mental growth.
These are some of the causes of disabilities in the developing countries, which could be easily eradicated if the international will existed.
There are significant numbers of disabled persons in Latin America and the Caribbean, many of whom are disabled due to the causes I have mentioned earlier, others as the tragic result of armed conflicts or natural disasters. Furthermore, the foreseeable ageing of the population will in the near future lead to an increase in the number of disabled persons owing to the high incidence of disabilities in old age. At the present time, the majority of disabilities are found among children and adolescents, particularly in poor areas.
Our region is facing a period of economic hardship, and this has led to a decrease in social spending. However, according to the information provided
(Mr, Piriz—Bailón^ Uruguay) us by the Pan-American Health Organization the number of countries involved in rehabilitation work has increased. This represents a significant improvement, since in the past countries' rehabilitation programmes were subject to foreign financing and dealt almost exclusively with physical disabilities. At the present time, however, efforts are being made to adopt national methods of treatment that can easily be integrated into general programmes intended to cover all disabilities, including, in their planning and implementation, the disabled themselves and also the members of the communities to which they belong.
Latin American and Caribbean countries are using a community-based method of rehabilitation, which allows them to better utilize existing means and budgets and also contribute to the standard of living of the whole community.
We believe that the key to achieving our goal of equal opportunity is a joint strategy involving Governments, all United Nations agencies and, most importantly, non-governmental organizations.
International meetings, such as the meeting of experts held in Vancouver in April this year and the ministerial meeting held in Montreal these past few days, are effective contributions on the road towards full integration of disabled persons.
The conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons in no way implies that our efforts in this area are decreasing. On the contrary, in the time since the adoption of the Programme of Action, we have learned much about achievements and obstacles as we pursue our objectives.
Hence we look to the future with the hope that progress will be made both
(Mr. Piriz-Balldn. Uruguay) nationally and internationally towards "A Society for All" by the year 2010. This must be a society where the human rights of disabled persons are fully respected. This is as just as it is necessary.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Denmark, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. HAAKONSEN (Denmark): I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States on the occasion of the conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons and the tenth anniversary of the World Programme.
Ten years ago, the General Assembly adopted the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons. The Programme, which was a major outcome of the International Year of Disabled Persons, outlined a global, long-term strategy to prevent disability, enhance rehabilitation and provide for full participation of persons with disabilities in social life and development.
In adopting the resolution, the General Assembly reaffirmed the rights of all human beings to eguality of opportunities and living conditions.
As we commemorate the conclusion of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, we need to assess what we have accomplished. Although there has been considerable progress in prevention and rehabilitation, the number of disabled persons has not decreased - rather the opposite. Wars, famine, malnutrition and the destruction of the balance of nature continually disable more people. The Decade and the World Programme of Action have increased the awareness and the understanding of the international community of the situation of persons with disabilities.
Disability is no longer seen merely as an individual characteristic or defect, but as a condition arising from the interaction of an individual and
(Mr, Haakonsen, Denmark) his or her environment. A disabled person is no longer seen primarily as a patient but as a functioning citizen whose input into society and its development is important. As stated by the Secretary-General and as noted in his report, important progress has been made during the Decade. However, the essential goal remains yet to be achieved before the world we live in can become “A Society for All" a society in which persons with disabilities are an integral part. Now is the time to put into effect the benefits of raised awareness of disability issues and to move forward to better the lives of an estimated 500 million disabled persons world wide.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of the United States of America, Mrs. Sandra Swift Parrino, Chairperson for the National Council on Disability, and representative of the host country.
Mrs, PARRINO (United States of America): On behalf of the United States, the host country for the United Nations I am pleased to welcome my colleagues from around the world to this important event.
Today we celebrate the end of the Decade of Disabled Persons. This has been a decade of great accomplishment for people with disabilities in America. This has been a decade of liberation a decade of empowerment. This decade will go down in the history of our nation as the period of time when people with disabilities claimed their rightful place in American society.
The enactment of the Americans with Disabilities Act is America's single greatest accomplishment for people with disabilities in the decade and perhaps in the century. It is a triumph for people with disabilities both in America and around the world for it rings the bell of freedom for America's 43 million citizens with disabilities and it beckons to the world's half billion people with disabilities. It is a proclamation of participation and inclusion that celebrates the full citizenship of all of us with disabilities. We are joyous and proud as we relish this victory.
It is our hope that the Americans with Disabilities Act will serve as a rallying cry for people with disabilities throughout the world in every nation. The message this law sends to people with disabilities is powerful. It says: you are first-class citizens with the right to fully participate in every aspect of society. It says: you are part of our society not separate from our society. It says in short: you are like everyone else.
The United States National Council on Disability developed the Americans with Disabilities Act as a response to the exclusion and discrimination faced by Americans with disabilities. We knew from our personal expriences that the existing system was not working. It was not a person's particular impairment
that was causing problems for people with disabilities whether it was
(Mrs. Parrino, United States) blindness or deafness or mental retardation or physical disability it was attitudes. The biggest obstacle for people with disabilities was the negative attitudes they faced in society. These attitudes were translated into discriminatory behaviour. Architectural barriers kept disabled people out of buildings. Lack of interpreters kept them from participating in programmes. Inaccessible transportation kept them from getting jobs.
As people with disabilities family members and advocates we began to use our democratic process of decision-making to address these problems. In 1986 the National Council issued a report to our President and Congress entitled “Toward Independence”. In that report we called for the enactment of an equal opportunity statute and suggested as a name the “Americans with Disabilities Act of 1986“. We stated that unnecessary barriers and discrimination had to be eliminated if people with disabilities were to have equal opportunity.
As we crafted the law, we were clear that what was needed was not a proclamation of special treatment but rather, a proclamation of equal treatment. People with disabilites who are qualified for jobs should have an equal chance to get those jobs. Our law calls for equal access, not special access.
In 1988 we took our legislation to the Congress. With the help and support of thousands of people across our nation, we educated the public and our legislators about the pervasive discrimination encountered by people with disabilities. Our Congress considered this legislation in less than two years a remarkable achievement and delivered it to an eagerly awaiting President George Bush. President Bush had made it clear from the very
beginning that he wanted the legislation to become the law of the land. In a
(Mrs. Parrino, United States) historic signing ceremony on the White House lawn on 26 July 1990, in the midst of thousands of people with disabilities and their families, President Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act and proclaimed Independence Day for people with disabilities. The President said:
"... We rejoice ... proclaiming together we will not accept, we will not excuse, we will not tolerate discrimination in America .... Let the shameful wall of exclusion come tumbling down."
The Americans with Disabilities Act ensures what was ours all along, but was not recognized: the full citizenship of people with disabilities. This law recognizes that it is not the disability itself that erects the obstacles but, rather, society's closed doors. This law opens those doors and invites people with disabilities to pass through.
As we celebrate the end of the Decade of Disabled Persons, let us look to the next century, to the future, with hope and confidence. In the next decade we will focus our efforts on making the promises of the Americans with Disabilities Act become reality. As President Bush said recently, achieving the goal of equal opportunity requires the sustained cooperation of government, business and people with disabilities. By working together we will ensure that every member of our society is recognized as a full heir to the American dream.
We urge the United Nations also to think about the future. As we consider the estimated one-half billion people with disabilities on our planet, let us think of them as full-fledged citizens in each of our countries. As nations struggle with difficult political and economic problems, let them include people with disabilities in the struggle. As democratic government infrastructures are built in newly emerging nations, let
(Mrs. Parrino. United States) those institutions include and respect the interest of people with disabilities. Do not let them be an afterthought. Learn from America's experience.
Mr. Richard Thornburgh, Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations for Administration and Management, is a world-wide leader for disability rights. At an inernational disability conference in Prague in April of this year, Mr. Thornburgh noted that the way a society treats its citizens with disabilities is a valid measure of the quality of life in that society.
I urge all those here today to work diligently in the next decade for the improvement of the lives of people with disabilities and to establish equal rights for citizens with disabilities throughout the world. The United States extends a hand of partnership to every country in working towards these goals, which are outlined in the United Nations World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons. Developing and utilizing the potential of our fellow citizens will yield a richer life for all of us.
The United States National Council on Disability is planning a next step to move us closer to our global goals. In collaboration with the United Nations we will sponsor an international conference on disability, to be held in New York in October 1993, one year from now. This conference will examine the status of people with disabilities world-wide, with a particular focus on the prevention of disability, rehabilitation services and the equalization of opportunity in developing countries. The conference will lay the groundwork for the disability aspect of the United Nations world summit on social development, to be held in 1995.
I urge all of you here to join us as we work to secure equal rights for people with disabilites throughout the world. The vision of the new era that
(Mrs, Parrino, United States)
lies ahead of us is an exciting one. Let us accept the challenges with good will and meet the obstacles with determination. Together we can accomplish our goals and ensure a meaningful life for all our fellow men.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Canada, the Honourable Mr. Robert de Cotret, Secretary of State and Minister Responsible for the Status of Persons with Disabilities.
Mr. de COTRET (Canada) (interpretation from French): I am deeply honoured to have the opportunity to address the Assembly. As I look around this Hall, I see the faces of so many men and women who have worked tirelessly to improve the quality of life for the world’s more than 500 million disabled persons.
This is indeed an historic occasion not only because of the people gathered here today but also because of why we are gathered here. We are all here because we share a sense of the importance of the social and economic needs of disabled persons. We are here because we are all committed to changing matters and to moving forward with renewed determination. Our presence signals that the concerns of disabled persons have found their way on to the world agenda.
This same commitment and common resolve were felt just two days ago in Montreal. At the invitation of the Government of Canada, ministers and senior representatives responsible for the status of disabled persons from some 75 countries came together for the first time. This was the first conference of ministers from every region of the world to focus on the needs, aspirations and concerns of disabled people. The fact that so many political leaders would come together for this purpose clearly shows the importance we all attach to the issue.*
I had the privilege of chairing the Conference of Ministers in Montreal, with the invaluable assistance of two Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Michel Gillibert of France and Mr. Gabriel Maka of Zambia. Mr. Peter Lorn of Czechoslovia, Mrs. Corazon de Leon of the Philippines and Mrs. Rhona Ottolina of Venezuela were kind enough to serve as Friends of the Chairman and members of the Bureau
* The President returned to the Chair.
(Mr, de Cotret, Canada) of the Conference. I wish to express my personal thanks to all of them for their support and commitment. The success of our deliberations was due in no small measure to their enlightened leadership.
To all of the ministers and senior representatives who participated in the Montreal Conference, I offer my heartfelt appreciation. We had a common commitment and shared a common concern, (spoke in English)
The Conference of Ministers was not a forum to discuss the past, but an occasion to look to the future. I want to share with you a vision for the days and years to come that was expressed there. We all agree that the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, now coming to a close, has brought world attention to the concerns of disabled persons and their organizations. It has provided a practical framework for meaningful initiatives throughout the world. In fact, in many nations, the Decade has been the catalyst for tremendous progress. The progress that has been stimulated by the Decade should, we agree, be continued in order further to implement the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons.
There have been many exciting initiatives undertaken during the Decade. While progress is sometimes difficult to measure, it is clear that the Decade has set in motion a process of change in all regions of the world.
Most important of all, in every part of the world, people with disabilities have started to unite in organizations as advocates for their own rights and their own opportunities. The United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, the World Programme of Action and the Long-Term Strategy have encouraged self-determination for disabled people and have provided an opportunity to develop skills, share information and generate support.
We also recognize the importance of the continuing work on the Standard Rules. They will, when adopted, contribute significantly to the quality of life of disabled persons.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, is to be highly commended for his personal dedication to the cause of people with disabilities and for his outstanding leadership in promoting the Decade of Disabled Persons and the World Programme of Action.
While we have seen much progress, a great deal remains to be done. Persons with disabilities are still the victims of stereotypes of discriminatory attitudes that deny equality, erode independence, limit opportunity and force isolation. We must work together to change these limiting attitudes. We must foster a new awareness.
Ministers and senior representatives who met in Montreal share a common concern for increasing international awareness of the needs and the capabilities of persons with disabilities. We are committed to working with disabled persons and their organizations in order to heighten public understanding of the goals set by disabled persons themselves and the steps that must be taken to achieve them.
Together we recognize that in all that we might seek to do in support of and in collaboration with, persons with disabilities, disabled persons themselves must have power over the decisions that directly affect their lives. Ministers must work to make possible the independence of persons with disabilities and we will. We know that for some countries this may require new technology and resources.
But we cannot achieve this objective alone. We will work within the United Nations system. We will work with regional organizations; we will work
(Mr, de Cotret, Canada) with business and industry and we will work with trade unions. We will work with voluntary organizations. Most important, we will work with disabled persons themselves.
By developing working partnerships, we will seek to expand activities and programmes that increase the independence of persons with disabilities and enable them to take their rightful place as full participants in their communities and in their countries. We are united in our commitment to this.
But accommodating the full participation of persons with disabilities requires more than commitment. Developing countries are experiencing increased difficulties in mobilizing adequate resources for meeting the needs of persons with disabilities. For meaningful change to occur in some regions of the world, assistance must be provided by other Governments and other
11 agencies. Expertise in identifying practical programmes and projects must also be available, along with appropriate technology.
Persons with disabilities live in every region of the world. They are a part of every race; they are a part of every culture and every social and ! economic group. Disability is a global issue, and it requires a global response.
As ministers responsible for the status of persons with disabilities, we ^ know that our commitment to these objectives will be more effective through increased collaboration among us. By working together we can build on our ei!' individual accomplishments, while pursuing common goals. By working together, nap we can identify priorities, we can maximize resources and we can enhance Misting programmes.
As Ministers we have much to share and much to learn from one another, and we have much to share and learn from each of those present. Our dialogue must continue. We must join together to work towards this common objective.
That is why a working group of Ministers is being created, as a result of the Conference in Montreal, in order to define an ongoing mechanism that will facilitate our collaboration at the ministerial level in the months and years ahead. This mechanism, which could serve to facilitate the exchange of information among us and to make preparations for future meetings, might also play a role in encouraging financing and the transfer of technology. It is a mechanism that, again, would be well within the system of the United Nations.
This is a major step forward. For the first time Ministers from around the world who are committed to improving opportunities for persons with disabilities will have a ready means of working together. Disabled persons and their organizations will have a channel for input to decisions and input for actions at the political level. Regional organizations will have a means of sharing information with Ministers and parliamentarians working in support of persons with disabilities.
The mechanism will thus provide a framework for the development of meaningful strategies among Governments. Such strategies could support independent living, protect human rights, develop effective partnerships and promote public awareness and a commitment to change. Once created, the mechanism will promote a dialogue, not just among Ministers but also with other organizations. But such a mechanism for ministerial collaboration cannot be born overnight. It requires careful planning, practical design and suitable resources.
We certainly would welcome other Governments whose Ministers were not able to attend the Montreal Conference joining with us in a common effort. And our work will move forward. I am sure that Ministers will meet again to take stock of the progress we have made and to encourage further action. Our dialogue will not stop until persons with disabilities are full participants and are able to share equally in the opportunities and responsibilities of their communities.
Our goal is simple. It is to work towards the day when meetings such as the Conference of Ministers in Montreal, and the discussions here today, are no longer special andor historic occasions but are instead meetings that become part of our ongoing responsibilities as leaders and as members of the human family. It is to work towards the day when the issues of concern to people with disabilities are systematically included in all of our decisions and actions. It is to work towards the day when each nation will benefit from the full contribution of every person, including those with disabilities.
That is the vision for the future. I thank all those who helped to shape it. I welcome everyone's joining with us in moving this vision to reality.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A47PV.39 29 October 1992
ENGLISH
Forty-seventh session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 39th MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 15 October 1992, at 10 a.m.
President:	Mr. HAYES	(Ireland)
(Vice-President)
- Social Development: (a) Questions relating to the world social . situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family [93] (continued)
International Conference on Ageing and celebration of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing:
(i)	Reports of the Secretary-General
(ii)	Draft resolution
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-61478 1951V (E)
In the absence of the President, Mr.......Hayes (Ireland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 93 (continued)
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: (a) QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE WORLD SOCIAL SITUATION AND TO YOUTH, AGEING, DISABLED PERSONS AND THE FAMILY
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON AGEING AND CELEBRATION OF THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION ON AGEING:
(i)	REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A47339, A47369)
(ii)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A47L.5Rev.1)
The PRESIDENT: This morning, the General Assembly, in accordance with the decision taken at its 3rd plenary meeting and pursuant to resolution 4691, is holding the first of the plenary meetings devoted to an international conference on ageing and to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 93.
In this connection, the Assembly has before it two reports of the Secretary-General, one on global targets on ageing for the year 2001, contained in document A47339, and the other on the implementation of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, contained in document A47369. The Assembly also has before it a draft resolution, which has been issued as document A47L.5Rev.1.
Mr. Ganev regrets not being present at this meeting, owing to other pressing responsibilities, and he has asked me to deliver, on his behalf, the following statement on the occasion of the celebration of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing.
In the 10 years since the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, over 100 million persons of the world population have become older
persons, in the sense that they have reached the age of 60 years or over. Nearly 70 per cent of them live in developing countries. The increase in those aged 80 and above will be the most striking - from 1980 to 2001 the number is projected to increase by 54 per cent, although during this time the overall population is expected to increase by only 29 per cent. It is projected that by the middle of the second decade of the next century there will be over 1 billion persons aged 60 and above.
The present debate offers an opportunity to examine the impact of an ageing population on national life, infrastructure and resources. It also offers an opportunity for Member States to reaffirm their commitment to international and multisectoral collaboration on ageing in the decade ahead.
In the last 10 years the international community has witnessed the ageing of the world's population at a dramatic rate, which has a range of far-reaching social, economic and developmental consequences. In fact, it is potentially one of the most serious socio-economic issues of the next decade. It challenges both developed and developing countries. It concerns each stratum of society.
Ageing is often viewed as an economic burden. The question is, on the one hand, whether ageing is to become a problem, a burden upon the young, a nightmare of escalating costs to support an increasingly dependent population, or, on the other hand, whether ageing is to be considered a celebration of the twentieth century, a success story of reduced mortality rates and increased longevity. The kinds of public policies adopted will determine the way this issue will unfold.
The responsibility for meeting the challenges posed by the increasing rate of the ageing of the world's population is therefore not just for the old: it is a responsibility for us all.
While the International Plan of Action on Agein? provides a multidimensional framework for a global programme, its success depends on the actions taken by those responsible for its implementation: first and foremost. Member States, which have responsibility for legislating and implementing social programmes; and the non-governmental and other organizations both for and of the elderly.
Progress in the implementation of the Plan of Action has been uneven in different regions of the world and, on an international scale, unfortunately not very impressive. Attention has tended to focus on awareness-raising and advocacy, which in themselves are of cardinal importance. Yet this has not been sufficiently translated into actual programmes that have an impact on older persons.
The major task for the decade 1992 to 2001 therefore lies in making the implementation of the International Plan of Action on Ageing more effective in the context of national priorities and on the basis of available resources.
As the ageing issue is debated here today and tomorrow, special emphasis must be placed on the responsibility of the Member States, in partnership with international organizations and non-governmental organizations, to respond to the ageing of populations. While the ageing of populations can be predicted with relative certainty, timely adjustment of social and economic infrastructure is likely, regrettably, to lag behind - seriously in many places. Therein lies the challenge for individual countries and the international community.
The 1982 World Assembly on Ageing was one of the first occasions when the ageing issue and its global impact and importance was addressed by the international community. The consensus at that meeting was that something had
(The President) to be done before it was too late. Let me conclude by saying that policies and partnerships, ideas and initiative are imperative to set the future tone on this issue as we enter into the next decade.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.	-
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It gives me great pleasure to open this special plenary meeting of the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly. This is the first time the Assembly has addressed, in plenary, the question of population ageing. It is therefore an important occasion. I welcome participating delegations, and particularly the representatives of organizations of the elderly.
Between 1950 and the year 2025 the world population is projected to increase by a factor of three; those aged 60 and above, by a factor of six; and those aged 80 and above by a factor of 10. While the changes occurred first in developed countries, they are now beginning to be felt in developing countries as well.
Population ageing is indeed an unprecedented demographic phenomenon. It has far-reaching ramifications. Work patterns, employment practices, health services, education and family policies are affected.

Population ageing is therefore a challenge to world society as much as to national societies. It is a highly appropriate issue for this Organization to tackle.
Ten years ago, over a thousand delegates from 124 Member States gathered at the World Assembly on Ageing, in Vienna. The World Assembly adopted the International Plan of Action on Ageing subsequently endorsed by the General Assembly.
The United Nations has promoted the Plan and monitored its implementation. The Secretariat formulated an Action Programme on Aging for 1992. In adopting it, the General Assembly called for a practical strategy on ageing for the next decade. I commend to you the document "Global targets on ageing for the year 2001".
The global targets seek to make effective use of existing infrastructures, programmes and scheduled events for promoting implementation of the Plan of Action in the years ahead. They identify opportunities for integrating ageing into the mainstream of development. They aim to expand the range of the United Nations Programme on Ageing without incurring major financial obligations. They are an attempt at divising a long-term practical global strategy for ageing. We must test this strategy in the coming years.
It is a pleasant duty on the occasion of the tenth anniversary to thank all those who have contributed to the United Nations Programme on Ageing. Member States and their institutions and committees concerned with ageing have been partners in a collective effort. I pay tribute to the many non-governmental organizations, associations of older persons, and research and training institutions which have been so generous in their efforts. I acknowledge with satisfaction the increasing efforts of the specialized
agencies and bodies of the United Nations system to serve the needs of Member States as effectively as possible.
The decade ahead will need all our energies, expertise and good will as we help each other adjust our thinking, planning, resource allocation and practical actions for what is often called "the age of ageing".
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary it is also a particular pleasure to greet the eminent personalities whom I have invited as my special guests to observe the work of the plenary meetings. Some of them participated in drafting the International Plan of Action on Ageing and in preparing the draft Global Targets on ageing for the year 2001. All have made a valuable contribution to the United Nations Programme on Ageing at national or international levels.

The last decade has posed the whole question of ageing in new terms. In the past a shadow of commiseration had long veiled developed societies’ view of the elderly. One example of this, among a thousand others, is Victor Hugo's phrase "to grow old is see the fading of the light". On the other hand, more traditional societies in the third world consider age more favourably. The demographic evolution to which I referred a few moments ago will undoubtedly once again, everywhere in the world, bring into prominence this positive attitude towards age. Perhaps one of the main objectives of our programme for the coming decade is to share this conception of ageing, which thus could well become universal.
The cult of youth, this obsession that has so rightly been described by the word "youthism" has its inherent dangers. It has of course made a certain contribution to the dynamism of modern societies, but it has also essentially relegated to the background everything that is not young or can no longer
pretend to be. There is no doubt that we have over-exulted a society in which things do not take sufficient time to grow old, in which people can no longer afford to own up to the fact that they are growing old. In the passage of time, in age, in personal acceptance of age, we have something full of promise - promise for everyone: the benefit of experience, of maturity and of knowledge and wisdom.
What is more, this is full of promise for society at large, because it is to be hoped that if more prominence is given to the elderly it will help us to re-establish a balance in our own rhythms. In particular, during the Rio Conference it was quite clear that an excessive spirit of conquest might drag the world to its perdition.
What we have here is a minor psychological revolution: to give time time for itself. This means we must have a new approach to ourselves, a better understanding of all ages of life, striking a balance between the spirit of conquest and the spirit of maturity. Let us take the time to live. Let us take the time to grow old.
The twentieth century has its shadows; it also has its light. Because of the progress made in science and technology, it has succeeded in extending the duration of life. This is a victory. But it will remain an imperfect victory if at the same time we do not have a positive attitude towards aging.
These extra years we have won for ourselves should be full years - that is, they should should be Useful to others, they should be creative. They should create the future. Only then will this victory be complete. We have to work at this maturing process in the next 10 years.
I believe the main effort required is psychological. I say "believe" because I have no hard and fast ideas on this subject. I hope I will in a few
years time, particularly after your debates. May your work therefore be both lively and fruitful. Good luck!
The PRESIDENT: Before I call on the first speaker for this morning I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate be closed today at 6 p.m. If I hear no objection to this proposal, it will be so decided.
it was so decided»	'
SS-EBESIBEEs X therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in this debate to inscribe themselves on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
I call first on the representative of the United States of America, Mr. Louis W. Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr* SULLIVAN (United States of America): It is my honour to speak as the representative of the host country. As always, the United States regards it a privilege to host the many representatives from all parts of the world to the United Nations General Assembly.
As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of the United Nations World Assembly on Ageing and the ai ^tion of the Vienna International Plan of Action on Ageing, let us remind ourselves that our efforts on behalf of our older citizens have special meaning beyond the economic and social concerns related to our rapidly increasing ageing populations, as important as these considerations are.
Indeed, our efforts reflect our heartfelt appreciation and dedication to the dignity and well-being of those whose contributions and sacrifices have inspired us and have enabled us to reach the levels of progress in the human condition we know today.
Our older citizens represent not only a link to the past but a vital bridge to the future - in the depth of their experiences and in their longstanding adherence to the values representing the best traditions of our nations and peoples.
At the time of the World Assembly on Ageing 10 years ago, it was believed that population ageing was primarily a phenomenon of the industrialized nations of Europe, Asia, and North America. In at least 30 such countries,
O
(Mr, Sullivan, United States) 5 per cent or more of the entire population is aged 60 or over, and the past decade has witnessed intense public debate over issues directly related to ageing populations, such as.income security and health care.
We now realize that population ageing is a global phenomenon. Mortality rates in most developing nations declined faster than expected over the past decade, with the result that many such nations now have life expectancies approaching - or even exceeding - those of developed nations. With continuing declines in fertility added to the equation, we have reached the point where the older populations of developing nations are now growing much more rapidly than those of the developed nations.
Of all the statistics I have seen relating to the growth of our older populations, the one that amazes me most is this: two-thirds of all the men and women who have lived beyond age 65 in the whole of human history are alive today!
The rapidly increasing numbers of older citizens present our nations and Governments with enormous new social and economic challenges. Each nation has its own unique problems and will require policies and programmes tailored to its own needs.
What clearly is in tne best interest of all nations, however, is to establish as a major goal and priority the maintenance and restoration of the maximum degree of independence and self-sufficiency for each older citizen.
At the same time, we face the reality that public resources in most nations are already strained and will likely be more so in the foreseeable future. The only viable course of action under these circumstances is to broaden the base of support and to augment public resources from other sources - to develop mutually beneficial partnerships with private-sector
(Mg. Sullivan, United states) businesses, foundations, civic and professional associations, and others - and to energize and empower local communities. .
This is precisely the focus of a comprehensive new initiative launched last year by my Governments the National Eldercare Campaign. I will give you a brief synopsis of this programme because I believe its principles may be applied in many nations.
The first component of our National Eldercare Campaign is public awareness - the process of making Americans aware of the changing demographics and their implications.	.
Secondly, in recognition of the fact that our traditional system of social services cannot do the job alone, we are reaching out to mobilize organizations that traditionally have not had ageing agendas, such as business, labor, religious, educational and civic organizations.
The third component is Project CARE, the focus of which is to promote the formation of local community coalitions to develop and implement action plans to address the unmet needs of older persons in the community who are at risk of losing their independence.
And, fourthly, we are encouraging Americans - especially the majority of our older citizens who remain healthy and vigorous - to enroll as members of our Eldercare Volunteer Corps, created last year to serve at-risk older citizens.
In proclaiming Older Americans Month earlier this year, President Bush said:
"The heart of a nation may well be judged by the amount of respect xt has for its elders. Together, they have helped to preserve the rich legacy of freedom we enjoy today. Through their creativity and hard work, they developed technology that enabled us to cross new frontiers in
.	(Mr, Sullivan, united States)
space and science. What better way to thank our senior citizens than to ensure they have access to the opportunities, services and support they so richly deserve."
I offer my sincere appreciation to those responsible for the success of the World Assembly on Ageing and the implementation of the Vienna International Plan of Action on Ageing. On behalf of the people of the United States, I offer our most cordial good wishes to you all.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Mauritania, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr, PULP MOHAMED MAHMOUD (Mauritania) (interpretation from French): I have already had the opportunity to express to Mr. Ganev and his predecessor, Ambassador Samir Shihabi, the congratulations and good wishes of the Group of African States, on whose behalf I am honoured to take part in the discussion on the celebration of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing.
The African delegations were distressed to learn of the earthquake that struck the sister republic of Egypt, killing several hundred people and leaving several thousand others wounded or homeless. We would like to convey our condolences and our heartfelt sympathy to the families of the victims, to the fraternal Egyptian people, to Ambassador Nabil Elaraby and to all the other members of the Egyptian delegation.
The question of the ageing of the world population was addressed by the Assembly for the first time in 1948; but it is only since 1969 that it has been regularly considered in the framework of the agenda of our annual sessions.
(Mr, Quid Mohamed Mahmoud,
Mauritania)
The adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly marked a high point in this ongoing process. In the 10 years since then there have been more and more consciousness-raising initiatives and activities, but we must asiknowledge that the Plan's major objectives have not been attained.
However, the ageing of the population is now an established fact in most industrial societies and is increasingly evident in the developing countries. Statistics show that a million people reach the landmark age of 60 every month, and it is projected that by the year 2025 the elderly will represent 14 per cent of the total world population. Medical advances and the improvement of overall living conditions are responsible for this demographic revolution.
Ageing is extending more and more to the developing countries. In Africa and everywhere else it will accelerate in the coming years. This demographic change represents significant progress for mankind and a source of happiness for millions of human beings. It also provides a tremendous opportunity for the younger generations to benefit directly from the experience and knowledge of their elders, who can thus enlighten and enrich society and ensure a link between two eras, with no break between the past and the present.
At the same time, elderly people have particular needs, and legitimately expect them to be met. They have as much need for integration into social life as they do for nutrition and health care, housing and recreation. Even in the affluent countries, where social assistance is highly developed, those needs are not always met, and many elderly people are completely abandoned.
In the developing countries social relationships play a significant role, but the precarious economic and social situation affects all vulnerable
(Mr, Quid Mohamed Mahmoud,
groups, and particularly the elderly. This is true in Africa, where structural adjustment policies have weakened the infrastructures designed to serve the elderly population and reduced the capacity for assistance in all areas, including that of families caring for elderly people.
Such a situation is difficult to tolerate in view of the great esteem in which elderly people are held in Africa. They are a point of reference and a source of knowledge and wisdom. They are consulted on all the affairs of the community, and great importance is attached to their advice and counsel.
In a world beset with multiple crises, wars and increasing numbers of natural disasters, such as drought and earthquakes, solidarity is essential in all areas, and in particular vis-à-vis this population group, both out of sense of duty and because of the knowledge, wisdom and experience that the oldest among us possess. Such solidarity would serve to support the exercise of responsibility by those who are no longer young, and would sustain them through the ageing process.
The founding in 1989 of the African Society of Gerontology is a tribute to the role of the elderly and their exceptional place in African society. The danger now is that the economic depression is likely to test severely the traditional structures of solidarity.
In Africa, as in other regions of the world, ageing is a fact that must necessarily from now on be integrated into all development policies. As the General Assembly recommended in resolution 4694, national targets for the year 2001 should be set. Those targets should take into account the traditions and potential of each country, but they should also seek to meet the needs of elderly people in all the regions of the world. The role of the
(Mr, Quid Mohamed Mahmoud, Mauritania)
family, the nucleus of society, should be bolstered and its resources strengthened so that it may continue to care properly for the elderly.
National strategies benefiting elderly people will, however, remain limited unless they are supported by effective and active international solidarity. That international solidarity should include the exchange of experience and expertise, and above all reform of current economic relationships that are detrimental to the developing countries. The establishment of international cooperation would ease the situation of the neediest countries and permit the implementation of programmes benefiting elderly people. The scene would thus be set for fulfilling the principles of the United Nations as spelled out in resolution 4691.
In this framework and in this spirit, elderly people would be able to live better lives and young people could more happily look forward to the conditions awaiting them when they, too, have the opportunity to grow old.
£hg_PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Turkey, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr.,, AKSIN (Turkey): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Asian Group on the occasion of these international meetings marking the tenth anniversary of the World Assembly on Ageing and the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing.
The decline of mortality and improvements in medical care, coupled with declining fertility, have dramatically changed the demographic structure of societies. The ageing of populations is now a world-wide phenomenon.
As surveys indicate, in the 75 years from 1950 to 2025 the world's elderly population will have increased from 200 million to 1.2 billion - that is, from 8 per cent to 14 per cent of the total population of the Earth.
(Mr» Aksin, Turkey) One million persons cross the threshold of age 60 every month, 80 per cent of them in developing countries. This revolutionary trend affects the social and economic structure of societies and requires new national and international responses.
The tenth anniversary of the World Assembly on Ageing and the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing are a good occasion to review the progress made. We are all aware that, despite its usefulness and the efforts made at national and international levels, the Plan has not been adequately implemented, mainly due to economic and social problems affecting all countries.
The International Day for the Elderly, 1 October, was celebrated for the first time last year. It has become a major event in honour of the world's generation of wisdom, and has greatly contributed to an increased awareness of ageing issues.
The International Plan of Action has a new companion document: the United Nations Principles for Older Persons. Adopted last year by the General Assembly, those principles of independence, participation, care, self-fulfilment and dignity for the elderly aim
"TO ADD LIFE TO THE YEARS THAT HAVE BEEN ADDED TO LIFE" (resolution 4691, annex)
Their implementation will ensure that ageing is productive for the elderly and for societies.
The tenth anniversary of the World Assembly on Ageing and of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing also offers an appropriate occasion for setting global targets on ageing for the year 2001. Such targets can provide a pragmatic focus for the broad goals of the International Plan
(Mr..............................................................Aksin, Turkey) and help in accelerating its implementation. The draft global targets are now before us. The Asian Group welcomes these targets and supports their adoption.
Respect for the elderly is a common feature of the culture of all the Asian countries. In Asian culture the elderly maintain their positions of high esteem within the family and contribute to the family's welfare. By remaining a part of the family, the elderly have an opportunity to live their lives in dignity and fulfilment. Any action by the United Nations to enhance the position of the elderly in society will be given enthusiastic support by the Asian Group.
Before concluding, I should like to thank the national and international organizations which contributed to the process of developing both the International Plan of Action on Ageing and the United Nations Principles for Older Persons.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Armenia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr, ARZOUMANIAN (Armenia): It is a privilege to speak today on behalf of the Eastern European States on this tenth anniversary of the United Nations International Plan of Action on Ageing. In the ten years since the adoption of the Plan, we have witnessed an increase in worldwide awareness that ageing is an issue that needs to be a part of the policy agendas of member States.
Changing demographics have added an element of urgency to the programmes which need to be adopted internationally. In 1950, there were 200 million people aged 60 and over; today there are approximately 500 million, and in the year 2025 that number will have increased to 1.2 billion. This dramatic change in demographics requires serious attention and the implementation of proposals that benefit the elderly.
Concretely, the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report "Global targets on ageing for the year 2001: a practical strategy" (A47339) that progress needs to be made in the areas of national infrastructure reform, health, housing, family, education, social welfare and income security. We support the recommendations outlined in this report. We would also like to express our support today for the draft resolution "Proclamation on Ageing", expressing hope in humanity’s coming of age. We agree wholeheartedly with the ideas expressed in the resolution.
Reform of national infrastructures to develop and promote strategies on ageing is particularly significant for the members of the Eastern European Group. We have embarked upon on a major programme of structural reforms, including privatization, fiscal and monetary restructuring and price and trade liberalization. The benefits of these reforms will begin to improve living conditions significantly only after a difficult period, which may last several
(Mr, Arzoumanian, Armenia) years. Of course the most vulnerable groups of society are the most severely affected during these difficult times. For us, the elderly and the disabled are the groups of people who need the most attention and for whom we are working to create an effective social safety net.
We need to replace the pension and income-security plans established under the formerly centrally planned economies, which as a result of the staggering inflation rate in our region do not provide sufficient income levels.	’
As these new social, economic and political systems are being created and the laws of each country are being redrafted, it is important that policies and programmes for the elderly and the disabled be integrated into the new political and legal structures as they are developed and that they be embraced by the newly created social safety net.
Statistics show that life expectancy amongst the Eastern European countries lags behind that in other countries in the industrial world. To confront this challenge, we must upgrade our health care systems. Cardiovascular disease has been one of the most common health problems in the countries of Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States. Much has been learned about heart disease, and we must find ways to incorporate these advances into treatment in our health care systems.
As we look to the future, we have reason to be optimistic about the progress that can be made in promoting strategies and policies to improve the quality of life for the elderly. In the last few years, several developments have contributed to increased international awareness and have paved the way for progress. In 1990, the United Nations General Assembly designated 1 October as the International Day for the Elderly. This annual acknowledgement will bring greater visibility to the agenda of the ageing.
In addition, as a result of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, several institutions and funds have been established which have already yielded positive results and will no doubt continue to do so. In 1988, the International Institute on Ageing, based in Malta, was founded. It has played a major role in providing direction for global training initiatives on ageing. The African Society of Gerontology, established in 1989, has a role to play in the development and implementation of a regional programme on ageing. A World Fund for Ageing, created by the Banyan Fund Association in 1991, will focus on promoting activities enabling the elderly to remain independent and contribute to society. These are important new developments.
There is also the United Nations Trust Fund for the Ageing, which has distributed over $1 million in seed money to approximately 50 projects involving training, needs assessment programmes and policy formation. The projects initially funded by the Trust Fund have attracted additional resources from Governments, non-governmental organizations and foundations. We would like to express our support not only for the United Nations Trust Fund but also for all the non-governmental organizations that have contributed time and money to programmes directed at the elderly. The importance of the role of non-governmental organizations cannot be underestimated, as their support is often instrumental in the success of maay programmes.
Finally, tribute should be paid to the United Nations Centre on Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, which has been the focal point and coordinator of all international activity concerning the International Plan of Action on Ageing. We commend the work of the Centre.
In conclusion, we are encouraged by the progress that has been made in the last ten years. It may not be as great as we would like, but that is because the goals and ideals of the United Nations remain high. I am certain
(Mr, Arzoumanian, Armenia) that at the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing we will be celebrating even greater progress and concrete achievements.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Uruguay, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr.» PIRIZ BALLQN (Uruguay); The Latin American and Caribbean Group feels honoured to participate in the celebration of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, an issue to which we attach great importance:- Our commitment is evidenced by the fact that it was a country of our region - Argentina - that, with remarkable foresight, called attention to this issue by introducing a draft Declaration of the Rights of the Elderly as long ago as 1948.
From that time, a slow journey began in search of approaches to the issue of ageing in its diverse dimensions. The World Assembly on Ageing held in 1982, resulting in the adoption of the International Plan of Action, constitutes without doubt a milestone on this road.
That event, which we are celebrating today, redefined the importance of the xssue of ageing, encouraging Governments to take measures to attain the objectives established in the Plan, thus leading to the establishment of national mechanisms aimed at setting policies on this matter.
In spite of these positive aspects, we should not forget that one of the major concerns of the Plan of Action - that is, to ensure attention to the elderly in the areas of income, nutrition, housing and health - is still far from being adequately addressed in developing countries. In this respect, we can say that the Plan suffered from a lack of realism.
Owing to the economic crisis of the 1980s - which still continues - in most countries of Latin America and the Caribbean public expenditure was reduced in the social sector, hindering the implementation of measures to improve the situation of the elderly, since that situation cannot be isolated from the economic environment.
On 1 October last year we celebrated for the first time the International Day for the Elderly. We see this as an encouraging sign, in view of the need to draw the public's attention to the increase in the elderly population and the economic and social consequences this may entail if we do not once and for all understand that the elderly are not passive beings, but that they should be considered as agents of development, with great productive potential and a store of experience that should be used for the benefit of society.
Consequently, we regard it as necessary to give priority to public information campaigns aimed at banishing once and for all the negative stereotypes associated with the figure of the elderly person.
In this context, we wish to express our support for the recently created Banyan Fund, which has among its objectives the promotion of activities to enable the elderly to maintain their independence and contribute to society within the context of the International Plan of Action on Ageing, using private resources for this purpose. When we speak of this Fund, we must mention the important part played in creating it by an eminent representative of our region, Ambassador Julia Alvarez of the Dominican Republic.
The demographic data available to us speak for themselves. It is estimated that in the year 2000 there will be 614 million aged people in the world, of which 60 per cent will live in developing countries.
(Mr. Píriz Ballon, Uruguay)
In 1980 there were more than 23 million elderly people in Latin America and the Caribbean, while the forecast is a total of 4C million for the year 2000 and 93 million for the year 2025. At the same time, in Latin America, life expectancy at birth will increase to 71.8 years in the period 2020 to 2025 by contrast with 51.2 years in the period 1950 to 1955.
These data show that Latin America has ceased to be a "young region", as it was traditionally described, since it is undergoing an accelerated demographic transition towards lower birth and mortality rates.
Many countries of our region will be facing rapid growth in their ageing populations without being properly prepared for this in terms of health care and social services. The growth of their elderly populations will then require more human and material resources, as well as a better use of those already existing.
Our countries will have to make a great effort to convert into something positive what in different circumstances could be seen as a negative factor in the process of development. In order to attain this, greater international assistance will be required, such as is offered by the United Nations Trust Fund for Ageing.
At the same time, we should point out that the regional programme of the Pan-American Health Organization, though only recently created and with limited resources, is playing an important role in assisting the countries of the region to develop coherent programmes in which general health services are incorporated, along with all social programmes focused on the welfare of this sector of the population.
We also believe that it would be very important to create an institution for ageing in Latin America and the Caribbean, similar to the one in Malta, in order to meet the needs of the region.
An .' .portant aspect that should be mentioned is the situation of the elderly woman. It is estimated that in the year 2025 there will be 604 million women over the age of 60 in the world, and that in the less developed countries 70 per cent of women will be living in poverty. For this reason, we agree with the Pan-American Health Organization regarding the need to promote research into the living conditions of elderly women and their health and social service needs.
In previous sessions of the General Assembly we approved the principles of the United Nations for the ageing. The five basic norms underpinning those principles are: independence, participation, care, self- fulfillment and dignity, and these are the central core of what we might describe as the human rights of the ageing.
In order for them to have some practical force, we must create the necessary conditions to enable them to be exercised effectively. It is for this reason that we support the targets on ageing for the year 2001 that have been proposed.
The ageing of the population is an inevitable fact from which we must try to draw the most positive aspects. Hence, the need to redefine the position of the elderly in our societies, fully involving them in the development process.
This should be our commitment in order to ensure for all the productive and dignified old age that we all deserve.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Denmark, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
M£x_SAA}QN£gN (Denmark) s I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States in commemorating the tenth anniversary of the World Assembly on Ageing and the adoption of the International Plan of Action on Ageing.
The International Plan of Action, adopted by the World Assembly on Ageing in Vienna in 1982 and endorsed by the General Assembly the same year, was the first policy instrument on ageing adopted at a global level. United Nations specialized agencies and bodies, governments, experts on the elderly and non-governmental organizations participated in drafting the Plan in which principles and recommendations on meeting the needs of the elderly were set out. There can be no doubt that the World Assembly was instrumental in raising awareness worldwide of an issue of growing importance - the situation of the elderly.
The population of the world is ageing rapidly. In the 75 years from 1950 to 2025, the world's elderly population, defined as persons from 60 years and older, will have increased from 200 million to 1.2 billion, or from 8 to 14 per cent of the total global population. The total world population will have grown by a factor of little more than three and the elderly will have grown by a factor of six.
The dramatic change in the demographic structure of society will have significant consequences, which will have to be taken into account in the overall social and economic planning.
(Mr, Haakonsen, Denmark) Last year the General Assembly took another historic step in adopting the United Nations Principles for Older Persons, whose purpose is
"To add life to the years that k_ve been added to life", (resolution 4691, annex)
The Principles state that opportunities must be provided for elderly people to participate in and contribute to the ongoing activities of society and that the fullest possible assistance must be given to ensure that the needs of the aged are met. The Assembly also called for a pragmatic focus to be put on the broad and ideal goals of the Plan of Action, in the form of global targets on ageing for the year 2001. These draft targets are currently before the Assembly. When adopted, they will support national responses to the ageing of populations and give further impetus to the implementation of the International Plan of Action on Ageing and the United Nations Principles for Older Persons.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of the Dominican Republic, who will introduce the draft resolution contained in document A47L.5Rev.l.
Mrs. TAVARES de ALVAREZ (Dominican Republic) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the delegations of Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Mali, Malta, Morocco, Mongolia, Paraguay, Senegal, Suriname, Turkey, Uruguay and my own country, as well as the delegations that have joined the list - those of Cameroon, Chile, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, India and Togo - I have the honour of introducing, for the consideration of the General Assembly, the United Nations Proclamtion on Ageing, which expresses hope in this new era in which mankind is achieving
maturity. The sponsors of the Proclamation sincerely hope that it will be adopted unanimously.
We should like to offer the reasons underlying the appropriateness of and the necessity for this Proclamation.
We are meeting when times are promising, but there is a limit to the amount of time we have to fulfil the promise. One could sum up our situation in a few words and a few numbers. The words offer promise, but the numbers speak of limits.
Today, in discussing older people, we use vivid words such as "out of the mainstream", "productive", "wisdom", "experienced" and "intergenerational". These terms are replacing our old, worn-out, antique, old-fashioned way of speaking about the elderly. The new words represent the dawning of a new consciousness about ageing and its implications for everyone, regardless of age.
This has happened not a moment too soon, because the numbers suggest that if we persist in our out-of-date frame of mind we shall not get the full picture until it is too late. There is an "agequake" almost upon us, and we had better see it for what it.
There is no lack of numbers to measure the extent of the ageing of populations. By the year 2001 more than 10 per cent of the world's population will be ov^r 60. That figure will top 25 per cent in some places. Between 1950 and 2025, the world's population will have increased by a factor of three, the number of those 60 and above by a factor of six, and the number of those over 80 - the very elderly - by a factor of 10. Of those turning 60 every month, 80 per cent live in our third world.
One could cite numbers indefinitely, but after a while they become mind-numbing. There is something that is more important: to what do these numbers add up? The answer is: a basic change in the nature of the population of the world. In no more than a few decades - whether in cities, towns or villages - the range of people that one is likely to encounter will look very different. In fact, the population mix will look as it has never looked before.
For better or for worse, this change will affect the pool of human resources available to do the work of society, and it will alter the mixture of social needs that we shall have to meet. In other words, our institutions are now organized to deal with a world that will soon pass.
The question then arises: what have we done, what are we doing and what shall we do in the future to deal with this new world of ageing? One option we do not have is to do little or nothing just because there is still time. This is no more sensible than ignoring threats to the environment just because they will not have destroyed all life on this planet by this time next year.
Ten years ago we began to take these numbers seriously. In 1982 the United Nations convened a World Assembly on Ageing. One hundred and twenty-four nations met in Vienna at the first major conference on the ageing of populations. That Assembly fulfilled its most basic task: to shine an intense spotlight on a quiet, and so far relatively unnoticed, social transformation.
The Assembly was especially impressive because in our developing countries more immediate and pressing needs, such as the need to maintain a
basic standard of living for all segments of the population, often overshadowed the first rumblings of an impending world "ageguake".
The Assembly also sought to mobilize the world community to begin to move from awareness to active commitment to the social requirements of a new age. It produced an International Plan of Action on Aging, which we are justifiably celebrating today.
Our celebration relates not so much to the specifics of the Plan of Action, but rather to its visionary spirit. This was, after all, something of an initial foray into the new world of ageing, a first attempt to do what we needed to do. We were carefully feeling our way, willing to make some mistakes, eager to learn.
We have learned a great deal. Permit me to suggest that one of the most important things we have discovered is that drawing the world’s attention to the issues of ageing is not the same thing as creating the political will to deal with them. For example, many of the Plan's prescriptions were expensive: we asked national Governments to give money. Predictably, not nearly enough funds were forthcoming. Governments do not generally allocate money to build reservoirs when they have all they can do to stem the flood-waters that are currently all around them. Fending off hunger took precedence over supporting old age.
In our first large-scale attempt to deal with population ageing, we did not sufficiently distinguish between the awareness we had of the problem and full consciousness of its implications. Awareness is to consciousness as political interest is to political action. Knowing what results are needed is not the same thing as being creatively stirred to the point of doing what is necessary to achieve these ends.	•
As we shall be discussing at greater length this afternoon, our arsenal of responses to the potential social disruption posed by global ageing has been considerably enlarged and diversified over the past decade. The new notion of productive ageing, the discovery, that is, that older people are an excellent resource that may be employed on their own behalf and to the benefit of the whole of society, and the realization that Governments need to
cooperate with non-governmental organizations and with the private sector offer us a multitude of alternatives to the simple spending of more tax money to achieve the same result.
But even these new and exciting possibilities will require that we mobilize all of society's resources in a coordinated effort to deal constructively with issues raised by global ageing.. Ageing in itself is not a problem; it should be seen as a challenge. The real problem is creating and creatively directing the necessary political will to take up this challenge and meet it successfully. Ageing must be seen as an important, and urgent matter deserving of attention. We need first to set in place the moral, psychological and intellectual infrastructure that is essential before we dare hope that any initiatives will have a broad and lasting effect.
Summoning the necessary political will to cope with global ageing in the coming decades will require a revolution in both thinking and feeling. There must be a change not only in what everyone perceives to be the place of the elderly in the social fabric but also in what everyone believes that place should be. Without such a change, we shall never be able to effect the specific changes needed to adapt successfully to a new era of ageing.
In this respect the adoption of the United Nations Principles for Older Persons last year (resolution 4691) may have been the single most important thing that we have done till now to put a human face on ageing. Basic changes in society must be certified by the social institutions that count the most. Social relationships will not change permanently unless those changes are deeply embedded and universally recognized in the social matrix. These United Nations Principles represent an essential step in that direction. They begin
to provide the moral and social underpinnings for our struggle, affirming and authenticating our goals.
In this spirit, we suggest that the International Day for the Elderly has been such a success that the next and inevitable step is to declare a year for the elderly. Since the true era of ageing will dawn along with the beginning of the new century, we propose that we declare the year 1999 as the international year of the elderly.
We must continue to take with utmost seriousness issues raised by the ageing of populations. Let us not lull ourselves into thinking we are dealing with something of secondary importance because no one is firing bullets. Anything that destabilizes society can eventually lead to armed conflict, even if indirectly. If we do not pay enough attention to the distant rumblings of this "agequake", more ominous forces could ultimately shake the Earth. We can face the future confidently and reasonably, trying to foresee problems and prevent them before they occur. Alternatively, we can ignore them, fail to prevent them and try to solve them by force of arms.
The Proclamation we have introduced confirms the seriousness of our intent. The prestige of this great body further authenticates our aims. The Proclamation offers something tangible as the fruit of our labours at this plenary meeting; it emphasizes the importance of older people in all societies and underscores the global targets that we have set. We urge its unanimous adoption by the Assembly.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A47PV.52 11 November 1992
ENGLISH
Forty-seventh session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 52nd MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 2 November 1992, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. GANEV	(Bulgaria)
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development [79]
(a)	Report of the Conference
(b)	Report of the Secretary-General
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-61712 2509V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.tn.
AGENDA ITEM 79
REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
(a)	REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE (ACONF.15126, vols.I-IV and vol.IlCorr.1)
(b)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A47598 and Add.l);
The PRESIDENT! As members will recall, at its 3rd plenary meeting, the General Assembly decided that the debate on agenda item 79 would be held directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that action on the item would be taken in the Second Committee.
The report of the Secretary-General on the institutional arrangements to follow-up on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development has been circulated in document A47598 and Add.l. The report of the Conference has been issued as document ACONF.15126, volumes I to IV.
I should like to inform the Assembly that I have received a letter dated 30 October 1992 from the Permanent Representative of Denmark on behalf of the Western European and other States requesting that the Assembly hear in plenary meeting statements by the Observers of the Holy See and Switzerland during the debate on agenda item 79.
Members will recall that, in accordance with the established practice of the General Assembly, observer non-Member States may normally make statements only in the Main Committees. However, following consultations, and taking into account the importance attached to the issue under discussion, it is proposed that the General Assembly take a decision to hear the Observers of the Holy See and Switzerland in the course of the debate in plenary meeting on this agenda item. I take it that there is no objection to this proposal.
The PRESIDENT; I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed this afternoon at 5 p.m. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided. It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names as soon as possible.
I call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I have looked forward to the opening of this debate. It is an occasion to share with you my thinking on the United Nations as an agent of development. The report of the Conference on Environment and Development (ACONF.15126, Vol.I-IV), ranging so widely over economic and social questions, gives me my platform. I shall also touch upon matters relating directly to the follow-up of that Conference, which is now in your hands.
In my first year of office, I have had the privilege of participating in three important United Nations events dealing with global development: first, the Cartagena Conference on Trade and Development; secondly, the Rio Conference on Environment and Development; and, thirdly, the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). I have also taken part in the work of regional commissions in Asia and in Europe.
My evaluation of these events - recently summed up in my annual report on the work of the Organization (A471) has reinforced my conviction of the potential of this instutition. The Rio Earth Summit was an example of the capacity of the United Nations to mobilize political, public and instutitional energies around key issues of global development. Only the United Nations could have achieved it; its potential is unique.

The challenge after Rio is to maintain the momentum of commitment to sustainable development, to transform it into policies and practice, and to give it effective and coordinated institutional support.
My conviction is sustained by my sense of the opportunity for constructive action created by the end of the cold war. We can now work for an era of North-South cooperation that is not distorted by ideological and political East-West tensions. Peace and prosperity are indivisible, but they are threatened by gross inequalities within and between nations. Balanced planetary development is not only an enlightened aim; it is a foundation for the enduring progress of all societies. Development cooperation must be carried forward on this basis, in parallel with technical and financial support to help the former planned economies in their transition.
This new era brings new intellectual and political challenges. While the command economy is discredited, the market economy has yet to achieve its potential. The market is an instrument of efficiency and of material growth. But development is more than growth; it is the improvement of human wellbeing. Economic growth is the mainspring of development, but its thrust must be guided by equity, justice and social and ecological responsibility if development is to endure. This, in my view, is the meaning behind sustainable development.
This is the ground for the new contest of ideas. Many questions are open in democratic political discourse. Even in richer market economies, social tensions and environmental degradation pose serious problems of governance. In countries everywhere, the policies to deal simultaneously with unemployment, inflation, debt and trade imbalances have proved elusive.

In the years of bipolar confrontation, it was easy to fall back on stereotypes. These are now irrelevant. Democracy and the market economy must not become mere slogans. The new convergence on these forms brings with it an obligation to engage in a sober analysis of successes and failures in orienting market forces in different national conditions towards democratically determined goals. It requires a renewed commitment to support developing countries in their efforts to build democratic, market-oriented societies. It requires a fresh look at the international environment in which such societies can flourish.
This debate on the content of democratic governance and development, national and international, sets the context for a redefinition of the role of the United Nations in these spheres. This Organization must be a major source of ideas in this debate. It must be faithful to its mission while adapting to evolving needs. Its perspective must be global, seeking out the common interests of the world community. It must be centred on people, their rights and their talents. It must highlight the unspoken concerns of the poor and the needs of future generations.
From such a perspective, the United Nations must bring the major issues to the Member States' attention. In its areas of competence, it must help them to come to grips with the problems of these times. Member States, for their part, must work to keep alive the consensus that is unfolding from the special session of the General Assembly, through Cartagena and Rio, to the Economic and Social Council. This consensus is a source of guidance and commitment to policy creation and institutional renewal.
I am convinced that this Organization can meet the twin challenges of substance and structure. The intellectual and managerial task is vast. But
we are guided by the genius of the Charter, so rich, so flexible, and yet so straightforward in its provisions for international economic and social cooperation.
This Organization must put its development objectives on a par with its political and security commitments. Intergovernmental bodies must promote policy coherence and programme coordination. And different types of programme activities, particularly analytical and operational activities, must support and reinforce each other.
Intergovernmental reform and Secretariat reform are two sides of the same coin. Member States have their share of responsibility in this joint venture. It is for them to adopt consistent positions and take decisions on the reform of intergovernmental structures, and for me only to urge expeditious action and to advise on its content.
I set great store on the continuing reform of the Economic and Social Council. I want to see it live up to its central responsibilities under the Charter. The Council, functioning intersessionally as needed, should address development issues that affect international security and bring them to the attention of the Security Council. Integrated oversight is needed, through the Economic and Social Council, of the governance and priorities of all funding programmes for development operations, including the amount and predictability of their financing. The Commission on Sustainable Development should bolster the Council's efforts to promote coherence and coordination.
While the Council must respond to a diversity of interests among Member States, the logic of priority-setting must lead to thinning the undergrowth of subsidiary bodies. There are now some 40 bodies reporting directly to the Economic and Social Council. Many have their own subsidiaries, bringing the
total number of expert and intergovernmental committees in the economic and social field close to 200. While there were, I am sure, valid technical, substantive reasons for their creation, how many Governments can truly cope with such an extensive machinery? What is the limit beyond which such a machinery becomes a burden, rather than a source of useful inputs for national Governments and international policy-making? I trust that, in the context of the current debate on the reform of the intergovernmental machinery, there will be the necessary political will to address these questions squarely.

These are matters for decision by Member States. But a contribution can be made by improvements in the functioning of the Secretariat. A more effective Secretariat can provide better service to Member States and to the intergovernmental machinery. It can also stimulate and facilitate the reform of that machinery. The process of streamlining intergovernmental structures should not hold up Secretariat reform. A revamped Secretariat can better serve the existing machinery while awaiting the new.
The Secretariat should not be subdivided by its legislative history or by the geography of the intergovernmental bodies it serves. All staff, whether in a department, a programme or a fund, must be unified under the authority of the Secretary-General. We must motivate, mobilize and integrate all analytical and operational capacities of the Secretariat at Headquarters and in the field. Such steps will enable the Secretariat to exercise clearer leadership in the United Nations system and provide stronger support for the needs of Member States.
In reviewing options for further reform of the Secretariat in the economic, social and environmental areas, I have personally sought advice from a panel of independent advisers. The stature of the panelists leaves me in no doubt as to the value of their advice, which I have been taking into account as their work proceeds. I look forward to the results of their further work in the coming weeks.
The thoughts on further restructuring that I share with the Assembly today are advanced on my own responsibility. Restructuring and streamlining the Secretariat were among my main preoccupations on taking office. They will
remain one of my main commitments throughout my tenure as Secretary-General. While reform has no natural stopping point, it should be concerted and systematic.
One of my key objectives is to build a unity of purpose for the economic, social and environmental sectors of the Organization. These have grown increasingly fragmented and compartmentalized. I will also take steps to strengthen linkages between those sectors and the political and humanitarian sectors of the Organization. The complex field operations in which the United Nations is increasingly engaged should practice an integrated approach to peace and development.
In earlier restructuring efforts, as in the current one, a central concern has been to ensure adequate support for the Secretary-General's managerial and coordination responsibilities in the development sphere. Different models have been advanced, each with strengths and weaknesses. My intention is to address the issue from its roots.
A prerequisite is that the Secretary-General devote the necessary time and personal attention to these responsibilities. I am committed to doing so and to obtaining the support I need in this task from all quarters of the Secretariat.
My managerial strategy will be to define clearly those tasks for development and cooperation that should be carried out by the Organization itself within the system of the specialized agencies and institutions. In the first instance I am moving to determine those functions that should be carried out here at Headquarters. I shall then proceed to decisions on a more
rational distribution of responsibilities between Headquarters and United Nations centres in Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna. The relocation of activities should provide a clearer purpose for each of the United Nations programmes, as well as sharpening the substantive focus of each of the centres.
Clear lines of responsibility in a simpler structure, together with steps to eliminate duplication and overlapping, can go a long way towards solving the problem of coordination. This can be my main contribution.
Bearing in mind these considerations and the experience gained from the first phase of restructuring, I see three clusters of economic, social and environmental functions for Headquarters in New York. While there are different options for translating these sets of functions into institutional structures, this clustering necessarily entails a significant decentralization of activities away from Headquarters. At the same time, there may be a need for some redeployment to Headquarters.
The first cluster includes coordination and substantive support for the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Sustainable Development. The rationale for linking these two responsibilities derives from the broad coverage of Agenda 21 and the Commission's terms of reference. Support for the Economic and Social Council will relate to its functions of policy coordination and governance of operational activities. Support for the Commission and the follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development would be distinctly organized within this cluster.
The second cluster comprises data collection, methodology, policy analysis and the articulation of development perspectives. The Secretariat must be recognized as a centre of excellence for the analysis of development trends in all parts of the world, and of their international interactions. The proper elaboration of statistics and data the essential foundation for economic and social analysis - is one of the riches of the United Nations. This collective asset must be preserved, strengthened and adapted to new needs. We must ensure wide access and dissemination, especially to countries with insufficient national capacities.
The third cluster involves technical cooperation. This should be carried out from Headquarters only where there is a clear comparative advantage in relation to the rest of the United Nations and the system as a whole. It should focus on programmes that cut across regions and sectors, and on the least developed countries and those requiring special assistance programmes.

The central structures should also include a capacity to stimulate exchanges with sources of ideas and action proposals outside the United Nations and the governmental sphere. Intellectual communities, citizens' associations and the corporate sector all have valuable contributions to make. This was demonstrated by UNCED. The United Nations must be open to the democratic forces of civil society, without losing its intergovernmental character.
Striking the right balance between Headquarters and other centres, on the one hand, and regional structures, on the other, is a key question. I believe that the balance has shifted too much to the centre. It is time to breathe new life into the regional commissions. They must become truly representative of the Organization, while moving more clearly into the range of central oversight.
The strength of the regional commissions lies in their multidisciplinary reach and in their ability to mediate between global and national activities. They too must operate within a coherent institutional strategy. They too need restructuring and streamlining to fit into this strategy and to respond to the changing needs of their regions.
We need a fresh look at the distribution of analytical and operational capacities between global and regional structures. Some redeployment to the latter is likely. For example, most technical advisory services could be more effectively delivered from the regions. Such decentralization would imply greater delegation of authority, as well as measures to ensure accountability.
Turning to the national level, I am determined to improve United Nations performance in the field. Teamwork is the key. We must move quickly to a single United Nations presence that would encompass programmes under my direct
authority, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) and the World Food Programme (WFP). This combined operation would carry out an integrated strategy in each country where the Organization operates. It would be headed by a United Nations Representative, appointed by the Secretary-General, who would also be the Resident Coordinator for the United Nations system. This would strengthen the function of the Resident Coordinator, in line with the expressed request of Member States.
We have made a start with unified representation in six countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the former members of the Soviet Union. We have made progress with our colleagues in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination (ACC) in an approach to common country strategies. These measures of integration need to be tested in practice and adapted in the light of experience. It is my hope that their success will make the case for the whole system to speak with one voice in the capitals of Member States.
These ideas on the clustering of Headquarters functions, decentralization and the organization of operational and field activities will need to be refined and translated into specific institutional arrangements. The further advice of the panel of experts on these questions will be of great value to my decisions.
Greater clarity and coherence will enhance the capacity of the Organization to promote coordination within the United Nations system. I stress again the importance I attach to the ACC and to my relationship, as its Chairman, with the executive heads of all of the specialized agencies and institutions of the system. I shall continue to give that role the time and attention it deserves.

The Committee has initiated a comprehensive analysis of its role and functioning, as well as a radical streamlining of its subsidiary machinery. This should enable the Committee to meet with new effectiveness the challenge of the times. Harnessing the capacity of the system to advance Agenda 21 is such a challenge.
The concept of sustainable development, consecrated in Rio, can become an instrument of integration, giving coherence to diverse programme activities. Agenda 21 itself offers a framework for coordinating the development activities of the whole United Nations system and for mobilizing organizations outside it.
Let me now turn to my report on the follow-up to UNCED. It contains recommendations on the functioning of the Commission on Sustainable Development and on the High-Level Advisory Body on Sustainable Development, as well as on related arrangements for inter-agency coordination and secretariat support.
In preparing this report, I followed closely the relevant recommendations in Agenda 21 and sought to remain faithful to the spirit of the agreement reached in Rio. I have already referred to the secretariat support arrangements. I shall direct my remarks now to other aspects of my report.
It seems clear that the Governments assembled at Rio intended to place the Commission at the heart of arrangements to achieve sustainable development and keep alive the spirit of the Earth Summit. The mobilization of political will, intellectual leadership and partnerships for sustainable development will provide the necessary momentum. Let me address these three elements briefly.
In mobilizing political will, the Commission starts with a significant advantage. The results of UNCED have received the explicit endorsement of
political leaders from all parts of the world. The Conference has produced internationally accepted guidelines for the economic, social and ecological future of our planet. This is a good beginning; we must ensure continuing political involvement in its follow-up. The Commission must be organized so that ministers will want to participate in it. One of their continuing tasks will be to define and refine the strategies and policies needed to foster sustainable development. They will also monitor and promote the financial flows, both bilateral and multilateral, needed to implement Agenda 21 and to assist developing countries in their pursuit of sustainable development. High-level participation in the Commission is vital for success.
(The Secretary-Gene_raD
In exercising intellectual leadership, the Commission will build upon the conceptual breakthroughs embodied in Agenda 21. The transition to sustainability involves core issues of consumption patterns, poverty and demographic pressures. The Commission’s analysis should focus on these three elements as a basis for organizing the assessment of the future evolution of Agenda 21.
Support for the intellectual leadership of the Commission will come from the eminent persons participating in the High-level Advisory Board on sustainable development. Their number must be kept relatively small 15 or so, in my view to maximize opportunities for effective interaction and dialogue. They will bring wisdom and insights from the sciences, business and other non-governmental sectors. I propose to concentrate available expertise in a single advisory body on environment and development, bearing in mind that the present membership of the Committee for Development Planning expires at the end of this year.
UNCED generated unprecedented public interest in many countries. This led to increased public awareness of the issues at stake. It stimulated a myriad of activities within countries and communities, notably by advocacy groups and educators. The UNCED process also stimulated important scientific and technical work by research institutions and professional organizations, and it engaged the involvement of representatives of the business community. All these non-governmental networks fed back into the Conference and enhanced its political and intellectual impact.
The work of the Commission must continue to attract the partnership of these non-governmental constituencies. This, in turn, will serve to propagate
the results of the Commission's work in the public dialogue on sustainable development.
UNCED involved a high degree of cooperation between all agencies and programmes of the United Nations system. A high-level, policy-oriented Commission on Sustainable Development will provide similar incentives for system-wide cooperation, especially if funding aspects are dealt with effectively.
The Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) established last week an Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development. Its membership for an initial two-year period will include the core group of the preceding ACC task force: the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Bank, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). To these I have added, with the agreement of the ACC, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The Committee will be open to other members of the ACC interested in specific issues on its agenda.
This Committee will be the principal source of assistance for the ACC in discharging its new responsibilities in the follow-up to Rio. Under my chairmanship, this will be a standing item on the ACC agenda.
I assure members that my ACC colleagues are as committed as I am to meeting fully the responsibilities that UNCED has placed upon us.
Allow me to summarize the principal items in this ambitious reform, which is vital for the Organization.

The United Nations, as I have said, has a unique role to play, if it is able to meet the challenge of change on the dual level of ideas and institutions, and if Member States agree to accept their responsibilities, because the reform of the Secretariat and of the intergovernmental bodies depends on the agreement of Member States. Here I attribute tremendous importance to the reform of the Economic and Social Council and the rationalization of its many subsidiary bodies. The Secretary-General must therefore devote more time and personal attention to the economic and social sectors. I promise to do so and, secondly, to simplify, eliminate overlapping of duties and rationalize the distribution of responsibilities.
I recommend that the Commission on Sustainable Development have a limited number of members, if it is to function properly. We need a kind of Security Council on development issues.
The future Inter-Agency Committee and the Commission on Sustainable Development need to cooperate closely, and they must have the same secretariat. The High-level Advisory Board on sustainable development must be extremely restricted in size; its members should come from Member States, representing not only Governments, but also scientific institutions and non-governmental organizations, and, finally, the business world, which will have to deal with environmental issues.
I wish to conclude by repeating that all people - men, women and society as a whole - aspire to development and peace and to the enjoyment of fundamental rights and democracy. These fundamental values appear in the various cultural visions of human well-being: indeed, they make up the four
pillars of the Charter of the United Nations. They are closely interdependent, and progress in one promotes progress in the others. Unfortunately, in many cases these values regress to the point where human dignity and even human life are threatened. As Secretary-General of the United Nations, I firmly intend to defend these values on all fronts and to make the Secretariat an effective instrument serving not only the purposes and principles of our Organization, but also the people that make up the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the Rapporteur-General of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
Mr. BRAHIMI (Algeria), Rapporteur-General of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) (interpretation from Arabic): The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), which was held in Rio from 3 to 14 June, may be considered, as described by its Secretary-General, Mr. Maurice Strong, at the very beginning of the preparatory process, as the Conference of the century.
This is due, first of all, to the record participation in the Conference and the high level of representation that was unprecedented in the history of multilateral diplomacy.
It is also due to the issues discussed and the nature of the areas of investigation, which sought to reconcile Man with his environment and to meet the present and future reguirements of development.
It is due also to the scope of the Conference and to its impact, which is likely to affect the trends of multilateral cooperation in the twenty-first century. As a matter of fact, there has never been an intergovernmental meeting that matched the success of the Rio Conference in mobilizing so much energy, attracting so much interest and raising so many hopes.
This must have been due to the unprecedented gravity of the threats arising from the many and varied breaches committed against the fundamental ecological balances.
Conseguently, there has never been such a clear manifestation of the international will of all rations, rich and poor, large and small, to work together in facing up to and dealing with all the phenomena that lead to the deterioration of the environment.
The United Nations has never been in a better position to discharge the tasks entrusted to it by the founding fathers, pursuant to the pertinent provisions of its constituent Charter.
A great deal of the credit for the success of this undertaking lies with the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who, with his vision and political courage, did inject decisive momentum into the work of the Conference itself and into the Preparatory Committee. This has been clearly evidenced once again by his highly enlightening and instructive introductory statement here today as we begin our discussion. He has shown us the path we should take toward the completion of the enterprise started at Rio de Janeiro. Our warmest thanks go to him.
The other indefatigable architect of the successful Earth Summit meeting is unguestionably its Secretary-General, Mr. Maurice Strong. We wish to pay him a warm and well-deserved tribute, and to extend to him, once again, our gratitude.
The success of the Rio Conference would not have been possible without the outstanding contribution made by the Chairman of the Main Committee, Ambassador Tommy Koh. Thanks to his own brilliance and his unstinting and unremitting efforts over a cwo-year period, together with the Chairmen of the three Working Groups and the various coordinators, he ensured the successful completion of the Preparatory Committee's work.
Likewise, the excellent facilities provided by the authorities of the Federal Republic of Brazil, as well as the highly professional services of Mr. Miles Stoby and his excellent team, greatly contributed to the success of the Rio de Janeiro Conference.
The same must be said of the contribution particularly significant because of the unprecedented level of participation in the Conference - of all the unofficial sectors, especially the community of non-governmental organizations (NGOs). That contribution paved the way for an expansion of mutually advantageous cooperation, whose outlines are in the documents that embodied the results of the Conference.
In concluding its work, the Earth Summit meeting adopted, first, the Rio de Janeiro Declaration on Environment and Development, the premises of a real Earth Charter; secondly, an ambitious programme of action, entitled Agenda 21, covering no fewer than 115 areas of activity; and thirdly, a statement of non-legally binding, but authoritative principles, on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests.
The Earth Summit meeting also offered the opportunity, in parallel with its regular work, for the holding of signing ceremonies for the Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity. Each of them has been signed, to date, by 153 countries.
The Rio de Janeiro Declaration, which articulated the relationship between the environment and development, served in a timely fashion to complement and build upon the principles contained in the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment and to prepare the ground for what the Secretary-General of the United Nations and Mr. Maurice Strong have both described as an Earth Charter, which might be adopted on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The programme of action, entitled Agenda 21, sets out to provide the basis for a new global partnership for sustainable development in an increasingly interdependent world.
Having been established on a solid foundation of common interests, mutual needs and the shared but differentiated responsibilities of States, that programme embodies a new concept of North-South cooperation, capable, we believe, of giving birth to the sort of global partnership to which we all aspire after.
However, if such a global partnership is to materialize, the Agenda 21 programmes of action must be translated into practical measures on the ground with the aim of promoting intersectoral cooperation amongst all the key actor societies and governments. This is where Agenda 21 is unique. Its uniqueness stems from the fact that it parts company with traditional patterns of multilateral cooperation, in so far as it is aimed at governments, agencies, organizations, programmes of the United Nations system, other governmental and non-governmental organizations, groups, associations and to public opinion at large, all of which are called upon to participate fully and effectively, at all levels, in its implementation. The programmes in Agenda 21 are all centred on a set of issues within a coordinated strategy aimed at bringing about a global transition towards sustainable development.
In adopting Agenda 21, the governments of the industrialized countries have reaffirmed, among other things, their commitment to achieving the target of 0.7 per cent of their gross national products allocated to official development assistance. Furthermore, they stressed the need to find lasting solutions to the debt problem, especially in the case of low- and middle-income countries. In adopting Agenda 21, the Rio Conference also recommended that the structure and the procedures of the Global Environment Fund should be modified so as to expand its scope and so as to give developing countries a more important role in the decision-making process.
At Rio, it was also decided that governments should promote and fund access for developing countries to environmentally sound technologies, including on a concessionary and preferential basis.
In the domain of desertification, a very important decision was taken whereby the present session of the General Assembly would be asked to set up an intergovernmental negotiating committee to draft an international convention to combat desertification, particularly in Africa.
Furthermore, the Rio Conference recommended the convening of some important international conferences, particularly a conference on sustainable development for small, island developing States, a conference on the integrated development of coastal regions and a conference on marine resources.
Chapter 38 of Agenda 21 calls for the setting up of a high-level commission for sustainable development, to be responsible for follow-up and coordination of the decisions of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. Moreover, the statement of non-legally-binding but authoritative principles for a world consensus on the management, conservation
(Mr, Brahimi, Rapporteur-General, UNCED) and environmentally sound development of all types of forest is the first global consensus achieved in this field.
The Rio Conference represented, for humankind, an important step forward on the path towards sustainable development. However, history will remember not so much what happened at Rio as how much was or was not achieved in implementing the decisions taken there; in effect, future generations will be entitled to judge us not on the quality of the texts adopted at Rio de Janeiro, but rather on whatever we do or fail to do to flesh out the commitments that were undertaken there.
This means that we have yet to face up to the responsibilities that constitute the real challenge of Rio. It certainly has put major and very special responsibilities on this session of the General Assembly. The General Assembly, having made its contribution to the Rio process, is now called upon to finish the job the Rio Conference began. Accordingly, the Assembly is called upon to follow up the many recommendations referred to it by the Conference and to set up the institutional follow-up machinery envisaged therein. Given this background, priority will have to be given to mobilizing the new and additional financial resources needed to implement the undertakings made in the interest of the developing countries. In this respect, the proposal that a pledging conference - to ensure that the activities planned under Agenda 21 can be carried out should be called before the end of this year, is one that should be taken up.
The same is true for the proposal put forward by the tenth summit meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the Non-aligned Countries, which took place in Jakarta in September, to convene, at a time to be agreed, a summit
(Mr. Brahimi. Rapporteur-General. UNCED) meeting to review and follow up the implementation of the decisions of the Rio Conference.
The road to Rio was particularly complex and arduous, but the road that we still must travel before we can rise to the level of the ideals proclaimed there will be at least as rugged or perhaps even more so, since the road onwards from Rio will be more important that the road that led us there. Therefore, as I offer for your consideration the report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, which appears as document ACONF.15126, Volumes 1 to 5, with a view to your taking the necessary decisions, I express the hope that your discussions here will make it possible to keep alive the flame of hope kindled at the Earth Summit so that the Rio spirit can continue to inspire our actions and guide our steps in our journey of solidarity towards our common future.
Mr. CARDOSO (Brazil): I have come to this session to signify the importance Brazil attaches to the implementation of the decisions taken last June at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). The peoples of the world were genuinely and deeply interested in what was discussed in Rio de Janeiro. At stake was the future of our planet.
But the Rio Conference did not end in Rio. The spirit that marked its deliberations - which has been termed "the spirit of Rio" by Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali should project itself far beyond 1992.
As a Senator, I had the opportunity of drawing public attention to the Conference, and I took part in the creation of a Parliamentary Committee that followed and supported the preparatory work. Next month Brazil will host the environment and development Conference of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Now,
A47PV.52 34-35 (Mr, Cardoso, Brazil) as Foreign Minister, I regard it as a great honour to ensure our participation in the common endeavour of implementing the results of the Rio Conference and of responding to the challenges we now have to face.
As the host country to UNCED, Brazil takes particular pride in an unprecedented United Nations event that can be identified as a major success. What emerged from Rio was a consensus on a broad array of subjects related to environment and development. The main virtue of this consensus lies in the vigorous contribution to the promotion of a major shift in international relations, particularly in the way in which the North and the South interrelate.
(Mr. Cardoso. Brazil)
All countries are now partners in » common enterprise. The simple categories of donor and recipient countries no longer apply. This new partnership expresses a logic of cooperation that rules out both confrontation and patronizing attitudes, a trend in which global negotiations are relegitimized as a process for the fostering of world-wide understanding. Multilateralism has been strengthened by the realization that solutions to universal problems reguire universal and equitable participation.
The current process of redefining the directions and working methods of the United Nations cannot but be enriched by that diplomatic turning-point, a milestone among the Rio achievements. International cooperation for development was rescued from the condition of stalemate and stagnation in which it had been languishing for so long. Lifestyles based on waste and squandering are now called into question, while the perpetuation of poverty has finally been recognized as unacceptable. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) has thus become a referent, a point of departure for the establishment of new patterns for international cooperation, guided by the imperative need to address, jointly, the issues of environment and development. The link now firmly established between overdevelopment and underdevelopment reinforces the certainty that environment and development cannot be dealt with separately, since the effective protection of the former depends on the advancement of the latter.
It must be highlighted that UNCED sought neither a partial reorientation of economic activity nor the adoption of palliative, transitory measures. Simply stated, its objective was to redefine development and to carry this
concept to new levels of rationality and solidarity under the assumption,
(Mr. Cardoso. Brazil) accepted by all, that this is the only way to guarantee sustainability and decent living conditions for mankind as a whole.
Rio provided fertile ground for deliberations on universal problems with the open and egalitarian participation of all States, big and small. This was a true lesson of democracy in international relations. Consequently, a new standard of interests and responsibilities emerged from these negotiations.
Rio also revealed a trend that has been created by the increasing participation of different sectors of society in discussions and activities related to environmental and developmental issues. In this connection the role to be played by non-governamental organizations, as well as by the scientific and business sectors, promises great prospects for international cooperation in this post-UNCED period.
At UNCED, a new paradigm emerged around the concept of sustainable development. It seeks to assure, for the benefit of present and future generations, a rational balance between the legitimate aspirations of well-being and development, on the one hand, and the maintenance of a healthy planet, on the other. Sustainable development is the contemporary expression of progress.
With Agenda 21 and the other instruments agreed upon at Rio, developed and developing countries have recognized that they must undertake commitments in a spirit of mutuality, based on the principle of equal but differentiated responsibilities.
In relation to the issue of forests, the international community was, for the first time, able to take a stand, by consensus, on the conservation, management and sustainable development of all types of forest through the
(Mr. Cardoso, Brazil) adoption of a political declaration and an action plan. It is important that these arrangements be given sufficient time to work.
The two legal instruments opened for signature at the Rio Conference the Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity signify the determination of the international community to take appropriate steps for the protection of particularly vulnerable areas of the environment. They represent a highly relevant contribution to the development of international law in the field of sustainable development.
Inspired by the Rio Declaration, we must proceed. The Declaration is a product of this historical moment, pointing to the future without underestimating or eluding contemporary problems, among which are those related to the disadvantageous positions of developing countries on the international scene. It is of special significance that a core element in the Rio Declaration is the recognition that the right to development must be fulfilled so as equitably to meet the developmental and environmental needs of present and future generations.
Bearing in mind the decisions and recommendations of the Conference, the Latin American and Caribbean countries set up a group that considered basic elements related to the establishment of the Commission on Sustainable Development. Its conclusions were presented as a contribution to the activities of the Group of 77. As a result, a position paper was agreed upon that we regard as a sound basis for the deliberations of the General Assembly on the matter.
Agenda 21, whose implementation is to be followed by the Commission, is a bold programme of work, the largest ever adopted by the international community. To meet the legitimate expectations it generated, it has to be put
(Mr, Cardoso. Brazil) into effect in its entirety at the local, national, regional and universal levels. Partial or misguided appraisals are pitfalls which must be avoided.
To that end, and in order to achieve the goal of sustainable development as defined in Agenda 21, it is imperative that the specific commitments encompassed in chapter 33 of the Agenda relative to new and additional financial resources be met through a flexible, transparent, democratic and universal approach to the financial mechanisms.
By the same token, the provisions related to transfer of technology are crucial for the inception of the follow-up process and must be translated into tangible measures in the short term. Brazil hopes that at the forty-seventh of the General Assembly concrete pledges and commitments will be announced. It is disquieting to note that during the five months since the Rio Conference no significant movement in terms of financial resources has been perceived that could be identified with the commitments upon which the new world-wide partnership is to be constructed.
It is a matter of increasing concern that in the short but significant post-UNCED period the issue of the environment has become somewhat less evident in the agenda of meetings of developed countries. It now seems to receive less attention than it deserves at meetings of important pohcy-making bodies.
Brazil is determined to fulfil its responsibilities. President Itamar Franco has decided to create a Ministry of the Environment, demonstrating the priority he attaches to matters related to sustainable development.
The spirit of Rio must prevail. That is our business here during this session of the General Assembly. Brazil attaches special importance to the
(Mr, Cardoso. Brazil) Commission on Sustainable Development. The effective implementation of the new framework for international cooperation will, to a large extent, depend on the work to be carried out by this new body.
It is essential that it be given the necessary support in effectively carrying out its functions, not the least among which is the unprecedented mandate to monitor matters related to chapter 33 on financial resources. Without the appropriate provision of such resources neither will implementation of Agenda 21 be possible nor the creation of the high-level Commission on Sustainable Development itself be justified.
For the Commission to be effective an appropriate degree of proportionality must be maintained. The implementation of the programme of work calls not only for a high-level commission but also for a high-level secretariat with a substantive capability and with adequate resources for the implementation of Agenda 21.
(Mr, Cardoso. Brazil)
As we see it, upon its establishment the Commission should have as one of its main aims the early promotion, publicizing and fulfilment of the principles embodied in the Rio Declaration.
As for Agenda 21, we must keep in mind that this blueprint for action is the fruit of a negotiating process of a political and diplomatic nature. Its follow-up shall therefore be entrusted to an intergovernmental body whose composition is to be essentially political.
Attention must be paid to the need for precise specification of the role and competence of those sectors assigned to bring their relevant input to the deliberations of governmental representatives. Otherwise the effectiveness of the Commission could be put in jeopardy.
The establishment of the Commission should not, using the argument of avoiding duplication of work within the system, lead to the elimination of other bodies which have their own specific and often complementary mandates.
It would indeed be a contradiction to tear down some of the pillars of the system precisely at a time when so much effort is being directed to the strengthening of United Nations responsiveness and ability to cope with the ever growing multiplicity and complexity of economic, social and scientific and technological problems affecting the international community.
Brazil made the offer to host an international research centre on sustainable development. We hope that this initiative, which was welcomed positively in a resolution approved at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), will meet with the support of the international community.
The first measures for its implementation have already been taken. Its purpose will be to contribute to a better understanding of the concept of
(Mr. Cardoso. Brazil) sustainable development both in theory and in practice, thus becoming an international forum for the exchange of information, public education and research as regards the implementation of decisions taken in Rio.
I have invited eminent personalities and experts to cooperate with this project. Among them, I would mention Professor Celso Lafer, who as my predecessor headed the Brazilian delegation to the Rio Conference and acted as one of its Vice-Presidents. I am grateful for what he has accomplished in preparing for the setting-up of the Centre.
We believe that solid ground has been carefully prepared for a new, fruitful era of international cooperation based on democratically negotiated commitments and on the principles of international law.
One of the great accomplishments of UNCED was that of giving concrete shape to the notion that democratic participation cannot be disregarded, either domestically or internationally, if common goals are to be pursued. That concept was brought forth at Rio in an exceedingly clear fashion, within the context of a solid linkage between specific interests and universal concerns.
That was a remarkable example of democracy at work. Let us carry on along the same path.
Mr■ MACLEAN (United Kingdom): I have the honour of speaking today on behalf of the European Community and its member States.
The Earth Summit which took place in Rio de Janeiro in June has been rightly heralded as the most significant international meeting of its kind since the founding fathers of the United Nations met in San Francisco almost 50 years ago. We congratulate the Government and the generous people of Brazil for the hospitality and welcome they gave to us all at that momentous meeting.
As I think back to Rio and contemplate the work we have to do to fulfil the commitments we entered into there, I am reinforced in my view of how important an event it was. The present state of the world economy, and the difficulties facing many countries rich as well as poor, in the North as well as in the South brings home to all of us the importance of the development aspect of the work of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). It is legitimately the first objective of any Government to maintain the quality of life of its citizens.
Today, even in the most developed of the world's economies, living standards are coming under heavy pressure. We all face the urgent need to quicken economic activity, to provide a framework for sustainable growth. We need such growth if we are to be able to address satisfactorily the other, environment, aspect of UNCED. And of course we are all now much more aware that we face disaster unless we take account of the impact of our lifestyles on the environment.
UNCED was right: we cannot separate environment from development. Nor can we separate North from South. There can be no question of one country or group of countries pushing their point of view upon others. More than a century ago the great English writer John Ruskin wrote, "When we build let us think that we build forever".
In Rio we laid the foundations for a new approach to the problems of environment and development, which I believe in years to come will be seen as the Summit's greatest achievement. UNCED was all about global cooperation, cooperation rooted in vision. There has never been a time in human history when foresight was more necessary to our future well being. We cannot of course foresee all or even most of what is to come. But some of what is to come in the next decade is already painfully visible.
We know, with some certainty, that there will be a billion more people on the planet. We know that the protective ozone layer in the stratosphere will be further depleted. We know that the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will have further increased. We cannot predict the speed and the extent of the global warming which will result. But we are told that a warming effect of even point three of one degree centigrade per decade would greatly exceed the capacity of our natural habitat to cope.
We know that every year an area of forest equal to the whole surface of England and Wales is destroyed forest which performs the vital function of removing carbon dioxide from the air. We know too that if present trends continue some 240 billion tonnes more of top soil nearly 40 tonnes per person - will have been washed away or scattered to the winds by the end of the decade, a loss which is already affecting harvests in some of the world's major food producing regions.
But we bring to these problems new knowledge and new capabilities, the product of the extraordinary technological and other progress that has taken place since the end of the Second World War. No generation in history has had so many opportunities to improve the conditions of life. In today's world more people are healthier and live longer than ever before. And yet more people than ever before - one billion of them live in abject poverty. As we look into the future it is clear that the gains that some of us have made and our prospects for helping those less fortunate will be jeopardized unless we are able to first halt, and then reverse, the depletion of the earth's natural capital and the degradation of our environment.
The profound achievement of UNCED was to map out a strategy for dealing with these vast and daunting problems. Its success was to turn the world's attention to solutions as well as problems.
(Mr, MacLean. United Kingdom) We are all familiar with the highlights of what was achieved in Rio: the two conventions on climate change and biodiversity the Rio Declaration the first global consensus on forests and the adoption of Agenda 21. These were historic agreements. But unless we proceed rapidly to the implementation of the measures we agreed to in Rio, the political commitments of so many national leaders and the tens of thousands of hours of analysis, discussion and negotiation will all have been for nought.
The European Community and its member States take the implementation of our Rio commitments very seriously. That is why, within days of the Rio Summit, we committed ourselves at the European Council in Lisbon to an eight-point plan which envisages a vigorous programme of work to maintain momentum on the road from Rio. The European Community as a whole has already undertaken to stabilize its carbon-dioxide emissions at the 1990 level by the year 2000. We have begun work nationally and as a Community on developing strategies showing how we intend to meet our commitments under the Framework Convention on Climate Change, which we signed in Rio. These strategies are a precursor to fulfilling our pledge to ratify the Convention, if possible, before the end of 1993. Ratification will only be a beginning; in time we will need to consider what other undertakings will be required to fill out the framework.
May I take this opportunity to congratulate those countries that have already completed their ratification processes and to urge all other countries to ratify the Convention as soon as possible. There is considerable work to be done before the Convention enters into force and the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties takes place. We therefore hope that this Assembly
(Mr, MacLean, United Kingdom) will give the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee an appropriate mandate and support to continue its activities until then.
We are also working within the Community to establish a basis for the early ratification of the Convention on Biological Diversity, which the Community and its member States signed in Rio. We look forward to a resumption of the work of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee as soon as possible next year. In the meantime work on the preparation of national biodiversity strategies has begun. This work will be much assisted by the requirements of the Community’s Habitats Directive, which offers protection to large numbers of scarce plants and animals in Europe. The Directive was adopted in May of this year and will come into force in 1995.
The European Community and its member States attach high importance to the declaration on forest principles. It is a useful benchmark for future national and international measures and instruments, including a possible forestry convention, and we have undertaken to publish national plans for implementing these principles as well as a Community strategy. We are also committed to the establishment of an international review process for the principles. We propose that this task be undertaken by the high level Commission on Sustainable Development and believe this could lead to strengthening international cooperation in this important area.
The need to address the issue of desertification was clearly recognized in Rio. The Lisbon Council endorsed our commitment to establishing an international process to begin preparing a convention on combating desertification in those countries, particularly in Africa, experiencing drought or desertification. The Community and its member States believe that this session of the General Assembly should agree on the framework for such
A47PV.52 48 (Mr. MacLean, United Kingdom) negotiations, including the establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating committee along similar lines to that which successfully prepared the climate Convention.
Agenda 21 is a far-reaching process. It is a framework for action on sustainable development; but it is a framework whose credibility depends on the willingness of all of us to put our own houses in order. That is why the European Community and its member States set such store by the preparation of national and Community strategies for sustainable development which will entail integrating environmental policy with policy in other areas. This work is already well advanced. The Fifth Action Programme on the Environment, which I hope to see adopted before the end of this year, is the point of departure within the Community for the implementation of Agenda 21. It provides a comprehensive framework for integrating all kinds of human activities that affect the environment in order to move towards sustainability.
The Rio Summit has generated many national initiatives. My own Government will convene next year a global forum of non-governmental organizations to examine and clarify their roles in the practical implementation of Agenda 21. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) stressed the importance of access to environmentally sound technology, and I should like to welcome here the initiative of the Government of Greece to organize the first international exhibition and conference on environmental technology for the Mediterranean region (HELECO), which will be held in Athens next April. We also look forward to the meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Montreal Protocol in Copenhagen later this month.
At the heart of the UNCED follow-up will be the high level Commission on Sustainable Development, which we propose should meet in Geneva. The
(Mr. MacLean. United Kingdom) Secretary-General's helpful report on institutional arrangements to follow up UNCED makes clear that the creation of such a Commission involves many issues, of which I would like to highlight three.
First, to be effective the Commission must have a highly qualified and competent secretariat, led by a high-ranking official, both to service the Commission and to act as an inter-agency focal point for coordination in the field of sustainable development.
Second, we need a Commission that is open to new ideas and which provides for the effective and enhanced participation of non-governmental and other relevant organizations, including international financial institutions and regional development banks. This Commission should focus on urgent policy issues which could be reviewed each year at a one- or two-day meeting of Ministers. It should provide, as UNCED did, for the European Community to participate fully.
Third, the Commission's work must be organized so as to avoid the sterile and repetitive debates that have too frequently characterized the work of subsidiary bodies established under the Economic and Social Council. We are struck by the advantages of the segment-based approach of the Economic and Social Council, which seems to me to provide a more attractive model on which to base the new Commission. We also recommend that the High-level Advisory Board proposed at Rio, which will provide intellectual underpinning for the work of the Commission, be merged with the Committee for Development Planning, a body that has already acquired an enviable reputation in the United Nations system.
Of course, putting our own house in order and establishing the Commission on Sustainable Development are only part of what needs to be done to implement Agenda 21. We must also help others to play their part in our common cause.
(Mr. MacLean. United Kingdom) It was agreed in Rio that, in general, the financing for the
implementation of Agenda 21 would come from a country's own public and private sectors. For developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, official development assistance is a main source of external funding, and substantial new and additional funding for sustainable development and implementation of Agenda 21 will be required. In Rio we reaffirmed our commitments to reach the accepted United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance as soon as possible and to ensure prompt and effective implementation of Agenda 21.
The European Community and its member States are determined, in fulfilment of these commitments, to strengthen our assistance to developing countries in the field of sustainable development and to increase our funding for Agenda 21. Our commitment amounts to 3 billion European currency units, including significant new and additional resources for specific projects and programmes in key Agenda 21 sectors as an initial contribution to its early implementation. Within each of those sectors, poverty reduction, technology transfer and institutional capacity-building will be given very high priority. We are coordinating actively and urgently the development of this initiative. We will continue to report on its implementation in the institutional follow-up to the Conference.
We are also committed to the Global Environment Facility, which exists to provide additional grant and concessional funding to finance the agreed incremental costs of achieving agreed global environmental benefits. We envisage that the Facility will become the permanent financial mechanism for the Framework Conventions on the Conservation of Climate and of Biological
(Mr. MacLean, United Kingdom! Diversity and other relevant global environmental conventions. For this purpose the Global Environment Facility should be appropriately restructured in accordance with chapter 33 of Agenda 21. We are committed to its replenishment and to the provision of new and additional resources for this purpose. We also recognize the need to provide substantial financial resources to the International Development Association in order to promote sustainable development, and we will continue to give consideration to an Earth increment for environmental purposes.
There are many other important issues with which we will need to deal. I am conscious that the road from Rio will be more crowded than the road to Rio and that we will not succeed in making the life chances we have enjoyed available to future generations unless we resolve the problems posed by the expected doubling of the planet's population by the year 2050. We must make every effort to ensure that the 1994 Cairo Conference on Population and Development strengthens global cooperation on these interrelated issues.
I am conscious that all the plans and strategies in the world will make little difference to the well-being of those without guaranteed access to human rights and democratic freedoms. Achieving sustainable development is above all a participative endeavour. It is difficult for those without freedom to participate.
The road from Rio will be long and arduous, but the unprecedented gathering in Rio has set us off to a good start on this long march. It is our duty now not to falter at the first milestone.
Mr. ZAKI (Pakistan): It is a great honour for me to participate, on behalf of Pakistan and the Group of 77, in the General Assembly's consideration of the report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (ACONF.15126, vols. I-IV).
(Mr, Zaki, Pakistan)
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General and the Rapporteur-General, the distinguished Foreign Minister of Algeria, for their reports on the Rio Conference. I should also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General of the Conference, Mr. Maurice Strong, and to the staff of its secretariat, who worked hard to produce the final documents now before us. Our special thanks are also due to Brazil for making excellent arrangements in hosting the Earth Summit.
We have listened with great interest to the statement of the Secretary-General of the United Nations regarding his plans for the restructuring of the United Nations and its Secretariat. These original and far-reaching proposals will be studied with the greatest interest by the member States of the Group of 77, who are at present engaged in considering the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations under item 47 of our agenda.
Through the golden ages of past civilizations, the harmony between nature and man remained basically undisturbed. The industrial revolution produced the first signs of man's capacity to harness the forces of nature and to change the balance between himself and his environment. This capacity has led to phenomenal growth in economic prosperity and technological advancement, telescoping the pace of centuries into decades, years, months and days.
We, the men and women of this century, cannot but wonder at the achievements of our ingenuity and endeavour. Yet we must also frankly admit that we have failed in at least two important respects.
First, we have allowed economic and technological progress to be uneven, unequal and even exploitative. There is now greater disparity between the rich and the poor and between the advanced and the oppressed peoples of the
(Mr. Zaki, Pakistan) world. The challenge of development today is not only to achieve growth, but to realize growth with equity and justice. This is a challenge among nations as well as within nations. Without introducing greater equity, the world will not be able to sustain the political, social and technological structures which have provided the foundation for the dynamic acceleration of growth, innovation and investment in the developed and many developing countries.
A47PV.52 56 (Mr. Zaki, Pakistan)
Our second failure is that our strategies and patterns of growth have virtually disregarded the impact of progress on our planet and on the delicate balance between man and nature. Growth has been based largely on the consumption of fossil fuels. Industrial processes have ignored the grave impact on our rivers, lakes and ecological systems. Some schemes for rapid development have brutally devastated vast regions of the world. And poverty, made worse by inequality and inequity, has obliged destitute peoples to degrade their forests and lands in the race to keep up with the growing price of subsistence. Meanwhile, the inexorable growth in population is eating away their economic growth and threatens their environment and their social and political systems.
The Rio Conference was unique in the breadth of its concerns: the future well-being of the human race and of our planet. With 120 Heads of State or Government in Rio, the high level of its participants was historic. Its decisions the Rio Declaration, the programme of action called Agenda 21, and the launching of the Conventions on biodiversity and climate change will continue to have vital importance for all our nations in the coming century.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, participated in the Conference to underline his firm commitment to the promotion of environmentally sound development. A national conservation strategy has been elaborated and adopted in Pakistan. This will be used by the Government of Pakistan as a guide to ensure that all its future development plans are in consonance with the objective of arresting environmental deterioration.
This General Assembly is called upon to adopt the results of the Rio Conference and to initiate the process of follow-up action, in particular the
(Mr, Zaki, Pakistan) implementation of Agenda 21. The documents approved at Rio constitute an important advance towards global recognition of the twin imperatives of development with equity and development without damage to the environment. Both these goals are not only essential but also mutually compatible and mutually reinforcing.
The intellectual and scientific debates relating to the Rio Conference have led to a sharper political awareness in the industrial countries of the intimate relationship between the environment and development and the interdependent nature of the world economy. They have also promoted a greater consciousness in the developing countries that environmentally sound growth is the most sustainable and desirable form of development.
The Rio Summit represents a new approach to development, a new concept of a mutually dependent partnership for growth and survival, thus integrating the aspirations of the developing countries and the concerns of the developed. This new political compact provides the paradigm for action towards genuine progress and global prosperity in the twenty-first century.
Allow me to state, on behalf of the developing countries, and particularly the members of the Group of 77, that we have accepted the commitments flowing from the Rio Summit out of a sense of responsibility to our own peoples and to the future well-being of our planet. The commitments undertaken by the developing countries at the Rio Summit represent a historic leap in their political readiness to respond to the challenging requirements of environmentally sound development.
We must frankly express our sense of regret that the commitment to these global goals of the developed countries has not been at a similar level. They
(Mr, Zaki» Pakistan) remain preoccupied with their immediate economic political and social problems. The solidarity demanded by the new paradigm of environmentally sound development is limited if not absent in their policies relating to development assistance trade liberalization and technological cooperation.
The Group of 77 is firmly of the view that the provision of adequate new and additional financing is an essential condition, a sine qua non» for the effective implementation of Agenda 21. It is obvious that the financing requirements for Agenda 21 far exceed the resources which can be mobilized by the developing countries. Additional external financing is required at the bilateral level and through multilateral channels to implement the projects and programmes for sustainable development in developing countries. The Group of 77 therefore calls for the full implementation of the commitments made in chapter 33 of Agenda 21 on financial resources and mechanisms.
Sustainable development should be promoted through the establishment of a Commission, as envisaged in Agenda 21. The Group of 77 has circulated a document setting out its views on the functions and structure of the Commission on Sustainable Development. The tasks of this Commission will be both conceptual and practical. It must enhance the international cooperation required to integrate development and environmental issues.
The Commission on Sustainable Development should regularly review and monitor the activities of various financing sources and mechanisms related to Agenda 21 in order to fulfil the objectives of chapter 33. It should also ensure an effective link between the availability and maximization of new and additional financial resources.
We believe that all sources and mechanisms, including the global environment facility, must regularly report to the Commission on Sustainable
(Mr. Zaki. Pakistan) Development on the level of financing so that the Commission is able to monitor effectively the availability of funds. The Global Environment Facility is only one of the mechanisms for the financing of Agenda 21, and the Group of 77 attaches great importance to its restructuring in accordance with Agenda 21, especially to the principles of democratic governance and transparency in decision-making and operations. This restructuring must be undertaken as soon as possible and should be reported and reviewed by the Commission on Sustainable Development at its first meeting early next year.
Access to technology too is a vital prerequisite for the success of the goals of the Rio summit. We attach fundamental importance to the transfer of technology to the developing countries on preferential and concessionary terms. A conscious endeavour is required to promote the knowledge and expertise required to implement environmentally sound development policies in the developing counties. Without such capabilities the achievement of sustainable development in those countries will remain a mirage.
Two other issues require special action: desertification and the problems of small island developing countries. We look forward to the establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating committee to formulate a convention to combat desertification. The Group of 77 further proposes that a global conference on the sustainable development of small island developing States should be held in June 1993 to consider means to overcome the disadvantages of those States.
Further action is also required to build on the two Conventions on biological diversity and on climate change, respectively - which were opened for signature at Rio. The financing mechanisms and sources, of which the Global Environment Facility is one, should report to the conferences of the parties to those Conventions.
Much of the world's finite resources is being depleted or degraded owing to unsustainable patterns of consumption and production in the developed countries. It is well recognized that the present environmental crisis is due mainly to unrestrained and unsustainable consumption patterns and lifestyles in the developed countries. Unfortunately, Agenda 21 does not contain specific commitments by the developed countries to address these issues.
The experience of inequality in the evolution of international economic relations must not be repeated in the promotion of the new partnership which was forged at the Rio summit to promote sustainable development. The developing countries should not be asked to bear the brunt of sacrifices to preserve the world's environment and ecological system. They must not be asked to forgo development while the industrialized countries persist in their present pattern of unrestrained consumption.
An important step that must now be taken is to determine specific policies to create the external economic conditions that will enable the developing countries to reach the goals of sustainable development. The most important of these conditions is access for the exports of developing countries to the markets of the advanced nations, which continue to shutter their economies behind tariffs and non-tariff barriers.
The World Bank estimates that trade barriers cost the developing countries about $100 billion in lost annual income in 1990 alone, an amount that is twice the annual development assistance from the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and, even more significant, is twice the annual interest paid by the developing countries on their public external debt.
The developed countries must overcome their squabbles over agriculture and speedily conclude the Uruguay Round. They must respond with courage and conviction to resist and reverse the forces of protectionism. They must resolve their differences on the fiscal and monetary policies which, together with their protectionist tendencies, are worsening the impact of the current global recession.
The momentum generated by the Rio Conference must not be allowed to dissipate. The spirit of cooperation displayed at Rio must guide us in the implementation of Agenda 21. The post-Rio process must consolidate the gains and build on the agreements of Rio. There is an inescapable necessity for the international community to act in concert, to ensure for succeeding generations a pattern of sustainable growth.
We inherited this beautiful planet from our ancestors. It was full of the bounties of nature, including fresh air and clean water. We have an obligation to pass this legacy to our children and grandchildren, free of pollution and able to sustain and nurture life. We must therefore make sincere endeavours to realize the historic consensus that was forged at the Rio Conference.
Mr. REILLY (United States of America): This week, as those who were in New York yesterday no doubt discovered, is Marathon Week in New York City. As members may know, the object of some runners in a marathon is to win. But for most participants it is simply to finish, ideally in a good time. For most participants the race, then, is against the clock, that is against oneself. That, it seems to me, is not a bad metaphor for our own work at Rio and now here this week. We are engaged in a kind of marathon: a race against the clock; a race against ourselves; a race for the planet; a race against the exhaustion of its natural systems and the destruction of its stability.
For almost half a century this body has been the repository of many of the world's hopes for the future. The United Nations has fed the world's hungry, healed the sick and protected the oppressed. Through nearly 50 years
(Mr. Reilly, United States) of political change, war and peace, economic growth and recession, this institution has helped bind the nations of the world together in a common humanitarian cause.
Today we live in a world where change is more dramatic, more accelerated, more far-reaching than ever. As political alliances shift, as fledgling democracies emerge from collapsed dictatorships, as national economies adjust to a growing interdependence in the global marketplace, we face staggering challenges.
Nowhere is this change more evident, nowhere are the challenges more compelling than in the global need for economic development that does not make you sick, shorten your life or diminish your dignity: development, in sum, that is environmentally sustainable. Nowhere do we see more clearly the importance, the value of the United Nations. The people of the world must work together to protect the global environment, and coordinated, cooperative action is the hallmark of the United Nations.
Last June, in Rio, over 170 countries met at one of the most important multinational conferences in history. At Rio we recognized the danger to human survival and the impediment to economic development from the poisoning of our Earth, from the disruption of the planet's atmospheric equilibrium, from the degradation of human and ecological health, and from the depletion of our natural resources. After two years of preparatory negotiations, the Earth Summit had before it a number of significant, new international agreements and statements: the Rio Declaration; the climate change Convention, which the United States has ratified; the Declaration of Forest Principles; Agenda 21; and the Convention on biodiversity. At Rio we also agreed to create a new body within the United Nations, a Commission on Sustainable Development, to help implement Agenda 21 and help national economies grow in ways that protect their environmental support systems.
The forty-seventh session of the General Assembly of the United Nations is the first major test of the obligations we agreed in Rio. Here we must move beyond the rhetoric of Rio. Here we must translate our Rio pledges into strong, cooperative action.
During this session, the United States looks forward to substantial progress in several areas. We want to establish a strong basis for negotiation of an international convention to combat desertification. We want to initiate serious discussions related to high seas fisheries, especially highly migratory species and straddling stocks. We anticipate discussing ways to foster sustainable development in small island States.
But no issue in Agenda 21 is more important to us today than the creation of the Commission on Sustainable Development. My delegation believes that we can and must put that machinery in place as soon as possible, so we can begin
(Mr. Reilly. United States) our substantive work as early as possible in the new year. While pressing forward on the goals of Agenda 21, this new Commission must be part of the ongoing revitalization of the United Nations economic and social functions: efficient, innovative and built upon the resources available within the United Nations.
This Commission must be a focus of international support for sustainable, environmentally sound development for generations to come. It must be carefully, thoughtfully structured to help the emerging global market-place remain vigorous, while the natural systems and resources on which all human activity depends remain healthy and productive.
There are several competing visions for this Commission. We believe that the disparate and far-reaching commitments made in Rio need to be monitored, measured and publicized. The most comprehensive and ambitious of the Rio documents is Agenda 21. As a voluntary, non-binding statement of intentions it has no home or parent, no protector or patron. The Commission on Sustainable Development should undertake this role.
I foresee » Commission charged with the responsibility to chart the progress and chronicle the digressions along the road from Rio. I envisage a Commission which, while not exercising coercive power, uses the moral authority of this body to remind the world and specific countries as appropriate of practical opportunities to further sustainable development, and of shortcomings and failures, the strengths and also the weaknesses of policies, priorities and projects.
There is no other appropriate institution to perform this essential function. To do so effectively the Commission will need a strong and respected voice, leadership of stature, and international support. It will
(Mr. Reilly, United States) need professional staff and the capacity to draw on the technical resources of other United Nations institutions.
To ensure that the Commission fulfils the vision proposed for it at Rio it should review and report on the progress of nations in implementing Agenda 21; it should draw on the work of United Nations agencies to follow the critical issues raised in Agenda 21 deforestation, the relationship between poverty and environmental degradation, the human misery caused by polluted drinking water and lack of sanitation, desertification, and others; it should encourage review of subsidies for unsustainable development and promote consideration of measures aimed at ending them; and it should promote review of the environmental effects and sustainability of major development projects, especially those of the World Bank and of regional development banks. Its rules of procedure must be flexible so that those with genuine expertise in sustainable development can contribute to its work, and it must ensure that non-governmental organizations are significantly involved in its work in an appropriate way as valued partners.
The Commission on Sustainable Development will address a key question facing nations today: how do we expand our economies to meet the aspirations of our people, while still protecting human health and the natural resources on which lasting economic growth depends? How we answer this question will define our quality of life in the twenty-first century. Thus the United States supports the idea of the Commission and the goals of the Commission, and we shall support the Commission in its operations as well.
In 1993, United States total overseas development assistance will grow to more than $11 billion, a nearly 4 per cent increase over 1992. Some of the increase will come from additional contributions to multilateral programmes
(Mr. Reilly, United States) and funds. Our contribution to the United Nations Development Programme will grow by 9 per cent, to $125 million; United States funding for the United Nations Environment Programme will rise by 21 per cent, to $22 million. For the Montreal Protocol, we intend to provide $28 million in 1993, compared to just over $18 million in 1992.
Next month the parties to the Montreal Protocol will meet in Copenhagen to consider bringing forward the date at which nations phase out manufacture of ozone-depleting substances. The United States Government will phase out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by the end of 1995. We strongly believe that all developed countries should agree to do the same. We also strongly believe that developing countries should consider following the example of Mexico and Thailand and agree to cease production of CFCs by the year 2000. But we recognize that they will need financial help to make the transition to less harmful substitutes. Therefore we are committed to continuing the Montreal Protocol Fund and replenishing it at an appropriate level to meet identified needs. This, it seems clear to me, is the bargain reached with the developing nations when the London Agreements were consummated in the summer of 1990, and we strongly encourage other developed nations to join us in making this new financial commitment to maintaining a healthy, independent Montreal Protocol Fund.
Total United States contributions to multilateral development banks in 1993 will be nearly $1.6 billion, including a new contribution of $90 million for the Multilateral Investment Fund of the Inter-American Development Bank. Now, as these figures show, the United States commitment to the United Nations and to the international community is stronger than ever.
At the same time, it is important to remember that there is more the United States can and will do. there is more all nations can and must - do. to support sustainable development world-wide. Economic and environmental history suggests that poverty and environmental degradation go hand in hand. The poorest people suffer from the most polluted drinking water, lack of sewage treatment and improper disposal of wastes. Only economic growth can bring the financial and technical resources necessary to protect human health and natural systems. In fact, economic growth itself is one of our most powerful tools for protecting the environment.
To stimulate economic growth and support sustainable development we must ensure that the fundamental pillars of a strong market economy are built in every nation. This requires debt reform, open investment policies and trade liberalization. The United States has advanced these principles with our "Enterprise for the Americas" initiative. We will continue to push for growth-stimulating reform through the North American Free Trade Agreement, debt-for-nature swaps, expanded environmental efforts in the multilateral development banks, and expanded technical cooperation with nations around the world. All this, I am convinced, will lead to increased global investments in environmental protection.
I can think of no better example of the environmental opportunities offered by economic reform than that of our good neighbour Mexico. Over the past several years, Mexico's economy has grown at a record-setting pace. Because of Mexico's move toward open investment, debt reform, free trade and privatization, more than $25 billion in foreign investment has flowed into that country. During the same period, Mexico's investment in environmental protection has grown to the point where it is now 1 per cent of gross national product.
The lesson here is clear: even as we build new international institutions, even as we broaden intergovernmental cooperation, we must strengthen our national economies by tearing down the barriers to free trade. The economic benefits of free trade will do more to protect the global environment thah we could ever expect from foreign aid alone.
We in the United States cherish our political and economic freedom. We believe it is no coincidence that the American Declaration of Independence and Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations were both written in the same year. In our
(Mr, Reilly, United States) country, free markets and individual liberty are mutually supporting and bound together.
Environmental policy may well be the single most successful of all United States domestic policies of the past 20 years. The United States was the first country to enact comprehensive national environmental laws, and environmental conditions today are far better than they were 20 years ago, in urban air and water quality, in nature protection, in park and wilderness protection and in the revival of endangered wildlife. Most important, we made this environmental progress while our economy continued to grow. Economic growth financed our environmental investments. Economic growth and environmental protection can go hand-in-hand.
The American people support the goals of Agenda 21. We support a Commission on Sustainable Development with a strong voice and a significant role. We believe in sustainable development because it is increasingly a valued and successful part of our own national experience. Let us then create the Commission on Sustainable Development now, so that we can get on with the race on the road from Rio in the spirit of long-distance runners, with our eye on the clock.
Mr. TOPFER (Germany): At the start of today's debate, the representative of the United Kingdom, my colleague David MacLean, outlined the position of the European Community and its member States on the report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. The Federal Republic of Germany supports this view. In the light of the special political significance my Government attaches to the follow-up of the Earth Summit in Rio, I should like to add the following.
We have concluded a final act of Rio. Each of its elements	the Rio
Declaration, Agenda 21 and the statement on forest principles is important in itself, as are the Conventions signed in Rio on climate change and biodiversity. All the results are geared towards an honest, committed follow-up process in a global partnership of environment and development. The global Rio process for economic, social and environmental development and cooperation must become as successful as the Helsinki process is for security and cooperation in Europe.
The crucial challenge facing us as industrialized countries is laid down in the Rio Declaration, namely the special responsibility we bear in view of the pressures we have placed on the global environment and of the technologies and financial resources we command.
The "spirit of Rio", which we were happily able to help engender, must now prove its worth in practice, in particular in an era where the global economic framework is making this more rather than less difficult.
The United Nations has contributed substantially to the end of the East-West conflict and has emerged from it in a strengthened position. It has a central role to play in securing and maintaining peace. This is to a large extent thanks to the resolve and vigour demonstrated by the Secretary-General. We must use the capacities thus released to avoid a new conflict between rich and poor, between north, east and south.
The United Nations is also essential to solving global environment and development problems. The preservation of creation, the overcoming of underdevelopment and the halting of the destruction of the environment are
(Mr, Töpfer, Germany) integral elements of a sustainable new world order geared towards securing peace. We need a foreign policy on economic development and cooperation and on the environment, both by States and by the United Nations.
We need a strengthened, internationally coordinated environmental and development competence: we must gear the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to the new challenges we face. They must be put in a position where they are able to fulfil the tasks set down in Agenda 21, the manual of environment and development cooperation.
The innovative approach taken in Rio, however, lies in integrating environment and development two sides of the same coin. This is the major task of the new high-level United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development. It must act as a coordinating link not only between UNEP and UNDP, but also among all the Members of the United Nations family, national Governments and representatives of the non-governmental sector. A comprehensive catalogue of measures will make it a significant force in the follow-up to Rio.
Given the significance of the questions at hand, in particular the need to keep the public at large focused on them, we, together with our partners in the European Community, are striving to ensure that this Commission also comes together at the ministerial level during its yearly meetings. Negotiations that took place during the concluding days of the Earth Summit in Rio also showed that important, controversial problems can often be solved only at this
level.
We must use this unique and historic chance for an integrative interlocking of all institutions of the United Nations system. We must concentrate all energies on perceiving early and meeting constructively the huge challenges facing us in the economic, social and environmental fields.
We welcome the proposals of the Secretary-General to link closely the institutional follow-up to Rio with the restructuring measures he so vigorously initiated in the economic and social sector.
(Mr, Töpfer, Germany) We encourage the Secretary-General to proceed purposefully with this reform task. The United Nations must become an institution that pursues its goals in the economic, social and environmental field as responsibly and as urgently as it fulfils its obligations in the area of peace and security. At the same time, we underline the necessity of regionalization or, as we call it in the European Communities, of subsidiarity.
We need to translate the Rio results promptly into practical action. Our priorities are the following.
Our first priority is immediate ratification and prompt implementation of the Conventions. They must prove to be dynamic instruments to further worldwide cooperation in combating the serious global problems.
This week, my Government will pass the Act ratifying the Climate Convention and forward it to parliament immediately. By the end of the year, we will submit to the secretariat of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee in Geneva our first national report on the steps we have taken to implement the Convention. It is our national target to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 25 per cent to 30 per cent by the year 2005 on the basis of 1987 levels. A whole range of measures to achieve this target have already been introduced; more are being prepared.
In Rio, the European Communities and their member States once again affirmed their target of stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions throughout the Communities by the year 2000. Germany is pressing for the introduction of a carbon dioxide energy tax as an important instrument in the Communities' strategy.
In Rio de Janeiro the Federal Chancellor of Germany, Mr. Helmut Kohl, offered to host the first Conference of the Contracting Parties to the Climate Convention in Germany. We would be very happy if the General Assembly would support our invitation. The Conference is designed to bring about progress in implementing the Convention, developing it further and making its provisions more stringent.
Prompt implementation should also be a priority for the Convention on Biological Diversity at the next meeting of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). We welcome and support the steps that have been taken in this regard by the Executive Director of UNEP, Mr. Tolba, and the support by the Global Environment Facility (GEF).
We shall strengthen our cooperation with developing countries, as well as with the countries of Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to help them also to promptly implement these Conventions. To this end, we will allocate a total of DM 10 million in additional funds in 1993 for short-term programmes for the rapid implementation of both Conventions, in cooperation with developing countries.
In order to achieve the global convention on desertification by 1994, we shall support the establishment by the General Assembly of an intergovernmental negotiating committee. The same priority must be attached to the protection of water, especially of drinking water.
Our second priority is implementation and further development of the forest principles. The forest principles agreed on in Rio form a good basis for effective measures to manage, conserve and sustainably develop forests throughout the world. We must now implement these at the national level and gear our international cooperation towards them. I am convinced that on this
A47PV.52 78 (Mr. Töpfer, Germany) basis it will be possible for us to have a constructive dialogue on the implementation, review and further development of these principles in the Commission for Sustainable Development with a view to drafting further international agreements.
Our third priority is new forms of international economic relations. In order to improve living conditions for their people, developing countries need to strengthen and make full use of their own capacities rather than to be the recipient of external support. Therefore, we must break down trade barriers and open up our markets to give weaker economies better opportunities to proceed with sustainable development under their own steam. We all agree on the tremendous importance of a successful conclusion to the Uruguay Round.
With regard to the guestion of trade and the environment, we believe that particular priority must be given in future to international cooperation, especially in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). This means not only avoiding the creation by environmental regulations of unjustified trade barriers. If we are serious about the principle enshrined in the Rio Declaration on internalizing external costs and about the provisions of Agenda 21, we must also commit trade policy to sound environmental practice and the preservation of resources in other words, to sustainable development.
Our fourth priority is new economic behaviour and new living patterns. An essential element of sustainable economic behaviour and sustainable living patterns lies primarily in changes to our own behaviour as producers and consumers. We in the industrialized countries have a particular responsibility in this regard, given the major part we play in global
(Mr, Töpfer, Germany) environmental damage. Only by gearing in particular economic, energy, transport and agricultural policy towards the principles of sound environmental practice will it be possible to achieve sustainable development.
It will not be possible to achieve sustainable development without consistently implementing a life cycle concept that evaluates the environmental soundness of a product from manufacture to disposal, from cradle to grave. In Germany we are paying particular attention to waste policy in order to move away from the "throw away" society towards environmentally sound products and production techniques.
The prices of our products and services must also reflect the costs they entail for the environment. We must continue to promote the use of economic instruments and market incentives. This is the best way to engender environmentally sound technological progress, which should also be transferred within the framework of technological cooperation. Instruments such as these can, moreover, be innovative sources of finance for measures to promote sustainable development.
An important prerequisite for a change in the behaviour of all our citizens towards more environmental compatibility is education and training, instruction and information. These elements must promote and strengthen awareness of the fact that each individual has to play his or her part in ensuring sustainable development in order to guarantee our joint survival on this planet. Given the limited resources at our disposal and the poverty gulf between North and South, East and West, the thinking in terms of entitlement and possession is also coming under scrutiny.
Our fifth priority is combating poverty. In order to remove the causes of poverty, structural reforms are essential. This means the creation of an
(Mr, Töpfer. Germany) economic, political and social framework at the national and international level to reduce poverty. Participation by the people, as well as close integration with environmental protection and sustainable management of resources are new elements of our joint strategy to combat poverty, as developed in Agenda 21.
German development cooperation views efforts to combat poverty as a priority task, and is involved in a great many projects in all areas receiving assistance.
Our sixth priority is population policy. Sustainable development cannot be achieved without a responsible population policy. We all know that measures for the advancement of women and for family planning are particularly effective or even effective only if they are combined into integrated programmes alongside measures to combat the underlying causes of rapid population growth, poverty and underdevelopment. That is the only way to escape from this vicious circle. An improvement in the social and economic position of women in developing countries is essential. People must be given the right to determine the size of their families as their own responsibility.
Our seventh priority is technological cooperation, the spreading of knowledge and capacity building. Modern, environmentally sound technologies must increasingly be used throughout the world, in particular in the fields of energy and transport and industrial and agricultural production. Enlarging institutional and technical capacities - in particular in developing countries - for choosing and applying suitable and adapted technologies is already a major element in German bilateral cooperation in the field of environment and development. We give our wholehearted support to the Capacity 21 programme of the United Nations Development Programme and have already made budgetary provisions to support it.
We support the setting up of technology consultation centres, in particular in cooperation with industry. We have therefore set up such a centre in South-East Asia, in cooperation with Singapore, and are seeking similar cooperation in Eastern Europe and in the Commonwealth of Independent States. Within the European Community, we are currently working on the establishment of such a centre in Africa.
Our eighth priority is financial questions. In Rio the Federal Chancellor» Mr. Kohl» made clear our determination to live up to our responsibility vis-a-vis the developing countries. In spite of the exceptional situation in the wake of German unification and our tremendous contribution to the process of reconstruction in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and of the Commonwealth of Independent States» we shall make every effort to do justice to the financial commitment made in Rio.
We continue to support the tripling of the size of the Global Environment Facility combined with a fair burden-sharing. The ongoing restructuring of the Global Environment Facility should be concluded promptly» including» in particular» adequate participation by developing countries in decision-making» in accordance with Agenda 21.
We consider it vital that the tenth replenishment of the International Development Association should maintain its value in real terms and that an Earth increment should be decided on. We are also prepared for the provision of further relief within the framework of the debt-servicing agreements of the Paris Club if the resources thus released are made available for measures to protect and maintain the environment.
Our ninth priority is that the aid we give can only help towards selfhelp. The developing countries and the countries of Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States must use their own resources for sustainable development by taking action under their own steam» by creating suitable economic conditions and by ensuring democratic development and effective government. There are many hopeful beginnings. The decisions taken by the Conference of non-aligned States in Jakarta show encouraging progress»
too.
Our tenth priority is that environmental destruction is a threat to peace and a threat to mankind. The large-scale, serious destruction of the environment is a topic that is of basic concern to us with a view to possible future conflicts, both in times of war and in times of peace. We welcome the work being done by the International Law Commission on environmental crime. It must be possible to bring before an international criminal court crimes such as genocide, the gravest violations of human rights, and far-reaching, serious damage to the environment. The international community must be enabled to punish such massive violations of international law. Rio has not helped us make much progress in this regard. I therefore consider that relevant, more-far-reaching decisions by the General Assembly are necessary.
It seems to me to be equally urgent that the international community be better equipped for environmental accidents and disasters. We need "Green Helmets" as a quickly available task force of voluntary experts from various countries comparable to the "Blue Helmets" of the United Nations peace-keeping forces. These experts must be able to be summoned by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) on short notice for immediate deployment on site. The United Nations Centre for Urgent Environmental Assistance, decided on by the UNEP Governing Council in 1991 and now set up in Geneva, must be consistently promoted and expanded with this objective in mind.
All this shows us once again that securing and maintaining peace can be achieved permanently only if it also covers comprehensively the economic, social and environmental spheres; therefore, these are requirements for a kind of security council as well.
The Conference in Rio was an important milestone for us. However, we shall be able to consolidate the success of this event only if, by means of a continuing, dynamic process backed up by world-wide solidarity and joint action in global partnership, we secure the basic conditions for sustainable development and thus for the survival of humanity on this planet.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
JITED ITI0NS
UN UBHARY
JAN UQ I^J UNbM uULLci 1 -
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
À47PV.76 16 December 1992
ENGLISH
Forty-seventh session GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 76th MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 1 December 1992, at 3 p.m.
President?	Mr. GANEV	(Bulgaria)
later:	Mr. AL-HADDAD	(Yemen)
(Vice-President)
Report of the Economic and Social Council: report of the Second Committee (Part I) [12] (continued)
Question of Palestine [30] (continued)
(a)	Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(b)	Report of the Secretary-General
Financing of the United Nations operation in Somalia: report of the Fifth Committee [145]
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-62088 3321V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 12 (continued) REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL: REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART I) (A47717)
The PRESIDENT: This afternoon, the General Assembly will consider part I of the report of the Second Committee (A47717), concerning the prevention and control of AIDS. During this afternoon's meeting, the Assembly will also observe World AIDS Day.
Today marks the fifth World AIDS Day. It is therefore especially appropriate that, this afternoon, we are considering the report of the Second Committee dealing with the prevention and control of AIDS. The global threat posed by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) pandemic requires a truly global response by the family of nations. The challenges of this evolving pandemic involve a wide range of health and socio-economic issues, including the prevention of the transmission of the HIV infection, the demographic impact of the disease, the effect on vulnerable populations and the negative effects on women and their children.
The United Nations system has responded to these challenges by undertaking prevention and control activities and by putting in place programmes aimed at the mitigation of negative social and economic effects. In 1988, the family of nations declared 1 December to be World AIDS Day, an annual day of observance designed to expand and strengthen world-wide efforts to stop AIDS. ’ Its goal is to open channels of communication, promote the exchange of information and experience, and forge a spirit of social tolerance. World AIDS Day provides an opportunity for talking about HIV infection and AIDS, caring for people with the HIV infection and AIDS, and learning about AIDS. The only international day of coordinated action against
AIDS, it is now a yearly event in most countries. By highlighting AIDS prevention and care activities already under way and stimulating new ones, World Aids Day helps build a lasting world-wide effort to stop AIDS.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: This is the fifth World AIDS Day. I pay a tribute to the work of the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO first alerted us in the mid-1980s to AIDS as an epidemic disease.
The theme of World AIDS Day 1992 is "A Community Commitment". It is a call to the world to mobilize to mobilize money, energy and community resources to fight against AIDS. HIV, which causes AIDS, is a virus. Its cure will come from medical science, but the social, psychological, economic and political costs of AIDS are unlimited. AIDS kills productive people. It destroys families. It undermines economies. It threatens communities. This is a crisis of vast extent. AIDS is as destructive as war. There is no vaccine for AIDS. We must mobilize against AIDS.
AIDS is a disease which touches two subjects death and sexuality. In many societies, sexual matters are discussed openly but death is not. In other societies, death is talked about but sex is not. In some societies, both are taboo. Thus, open discussion of AIDS is not always easy. No HIV-infected person should be stigmatized. All those affected need understanding and practical support. AIDS kills mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, children and babies. AIDS affects women and men, old and young in sum, human beings.
AIDS is world-wide. No country has brought it under control. No region or individual country, or ethnic or religious group, has avoided it. Within countries, AIDS is not confined to any single group or to those living any single lifestyle. AIDS is now spreading most rapidly among young
heterosexuals, particularly girls, in developing countries. Ninety per cent of all infected people are in the developing world. Not for the first time, there is a link between poverty and disease.
Poor developing countries will be badly hit. Some countries will be socially and economically destroyed. One of the great achievements of post-colonial Africa the great reduction in child mortality rates could be reversed. WHO estimates that HIV has infected some 11 to 12 million men, women and children. More than 2 million have developed AIDS. Most of them have died. WHO estimates that, on this day, a further 5000 citizens of the world will become infected with HIV. By the year 2000, the virus will have invaded the bodies of 30 to 40 million people.

The costs of nursing the dying and caring for the very young and the old who will be left behind will be enormous. Demands on budgets will increase. Production will decline. Teachers, soldiers, nurses and office workers will be affected. No group will escape.
Action at the planetary level is the only answer: to educate, understand, care and, above all, find a cure.
When a problem is global, United Nations coordination is essential. AIDS demands a multisectoral, integrated approach from the United Nations. In my report to the Economic and Social Council last June I said that the need for the United Nations to mount a comprehensive and coordinated response was clear. We must work, through the United Nations, to care for those who suffer, to assist those who suffer indirectly and to block the spread of AIDS.
There are now 135 national AIDS programmes in operation. They have been planned, set up and assisted through the collaboration of United Nations bodies and agencies, donor Governments and the private and voluntary sectors.
Within the United Nations system, I have created a single inter-agency advisory group with strengthened terms of reference. The group held its first meeting in November 1992 and will meet regularly. It is committed to creating a coordinated and effective response to the crisis.
The United Nations has adopted a compassionate, supportive and far-sighted personnel policy on AIDS. I regard this policy as a model for every organization the world over, and I am making it widely available. We regard our personnel as a family. We will support them in this crisis and do all we can to retain their skills and knowledge for as long as possible.
Hope lies in our ability to work together. The General Assembly, in adopting resolution 46203 a year ago, sent a clear message to the community
of nations. That message is a message of tolerance. AIDS is a threat to all men and women everywhere. This is a time for science and social justice to come together in a great cause: the cause of victory over AIDS.

A moment ago I mentioned the world-wide fight against AIDS. It is a new world war that we must carry on, the third one of this century. This one, however, does not divide people; on the contrary, it brings them together in an immense battle on a thousand fronts, which I shall group into three main fronts: first, the scientific and medical, then the political and social, and, finally, the psychological and human.
AIDS is not something that is destined to follow us from one century to the next. We have eradicated smallpox and syphilis, and we shall also conquer AIDS. We must vow to reach this goal before the year 2000. We shall not leave a legacy of AIDS to the people of the twenty-first century.
In order to conquer AIDS it may be necessary to go in a new direction: let us act as if this were an all-out war. This calls for two measures: first, financial investment commensurate with the threat, in all the countries of the world, beginning with the wealthiest; and, secondly, a broad effort to coordinate all of the world's medical knowledge.
Let us turn now to the political and social front. Here I wish to emphasize the responsibility of the United Nations system as a whole. When WHO first launched World AIDS Day, in 1988, it demonstrated that it intended, without wasting any time, to mobilize a truly world-wide campaign. We were the first to understand that in no country anywhere would AIDS be a foreign illness.
The purpose of the WHO world programme was to encourage and assist Governments to set up the necessary policies. That was no easy task, for
often there were many prejudices to be overcome. However, I believe we are in the process of winning this first battle. The United Nations, setting an example, is mobilizing all its forces. Besides WHO, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and others are devoting some of their programmes to the AIDS problem.
Just as the United Nations system has done vis-à-vis Governments, Governments in turn must play an energizing role among groups and communities, be they decentralized, regional, local, professional or associative. I should like to appeal here to the heads of organizations, business leaders and elected officials in regions, cities and villages to take the initiative in sensitizing public opinion and giving support to those who are ill.
I now turn, in conclusion, to the third front. This year's theme is community commitment. In this regard I should like to make a third appeal, one addressed to those who are ill. The disease that afflicts them must not be for any of them a reason for shame. No one is helped by hiding, keeping silent and lying. Let them speak out openly.
The fight against AIDS is, first and foremost, a cultural challenge, and the active participation of those who suffer from the disease is essential. Thanks to them and their frankness, those around them and their community leaders will take initiatives that will not only benefit those who are ill but will also be useful in terms of prevention. This undertaking will certainly require a great psychological effort; and this effort is essential because, in the final analysis, it all boils down to one single factor: the capacity of men and women to commit themselves openly to each other.

AIDS is a global problem, and therefore its solution must be global.
That is why the struggle must be genuinely universal; it must involve all countries without exception, all Powers, without exception; all communities, without exception. This war must be fought to the fullest, not only to save millions of lives but also so that our faith in progress and in science can be maintained.
The victory that we together can gain over AIDS must show that we are determined and able to win other battles against illnesses. The battle against AIDS, therefore, is a symbol in several ways. Let it be the symbol of what humankind is capable of doing when it gathers all of its forces in the service of life.
The PRESIDENT: As members are aware, on the occasion of the observance of World AIDS Day a special briefing on AIDS has been scheduled, featuring the Director-General of the World Health Organization, four speakers from around the world who are leaders in the battle against AIDS, and the Minister of Health of Jamaica.
I shall therefore suspend the meeting now, so that this special briefing
can take place.
The meeting was suspended at 3.45 p.m, and resumed at 4.40 p.m.
The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly will now continue its consideration of part I of the report (A47717) of the Second Committee on agenda item 12, which concerns the report of the Economic and Social Council.
I request the Rapporteur of the Second Committee to introduce the report of that Committee.
Mr. BALZAN (Malta), Rapporteur of the Second Committee: I have the honour to present the report of the Second Committee contained in document A47717, under item 12 of the agenda, "Report of the Economic and Social Council”. An addendum to this document will be issued subsequently, containing other draft proposals for action under the same agenda item.
In paragraph 8 of the report, the Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution entitled "Prevention and control of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)".
I should like to inform the Assembly that the square brackets which appear in operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution should be deleted.
This draft resolution was adopted by the Second Committee without a vote.
The PRESIDENT: If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Second Committee that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the recommendation of the Second Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
Before we begin to take action on the recommendation contained in the report of the Second Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we shall proceed to take a decision in the same manner as in the Second Committee.
The Assembly will now consider the draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 8 of its report (A47717).
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution, entitled "Prevention and control of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)", without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 4740).
The PRESIDENT: We have thus concluded our consideration of part I of the report of the Second Committee on agenda item 12.
AGENDA ITEM 30 (continued)
QUESTION OF PALESTINE
(a)	REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE EXERCISE OF THE INALIENABLE RIGHTS OF THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE (A4735)
(b)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A47716)
Mr. KOROMA (Sierra Leone): The General Assembly, as one of the organs charged with finding peaceful solutions to situations resulting from violations of the provisions of the Charter, is once again considering the question of Palestine, an issue that at once engages and challenges some of the fundamental principles and purposes set forth in the Charter, namely, the maintenance of international peace and security; the right of peoples to self-determination; the non-acquisition of territory by force; and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
(Mr. Koroma, Sierra Leone) Regrettably, since the Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II) some 45 years ago recommending the partition of Palestine into an Arab and a Jewish state, with a corpus separatum for Jerusalem, as a peaceful adjustment of the Palestinian conflict, the resolution has not been implemented in its entirety. While the State of Israel has been in existence for some 45 years now, the Palestinian nation, which the General Assembly acknowledged and which was to be established as an independent State, has to date been prevented from coming into existence. Meanwhile, Jerusalem itself has been annexed, and other Palestinian territories occupied since 1967.
Trite as this may sound, it is this refusal to implement General Assembly resolution 181 (II) that is at the root of the Palestinian problem today, and unless and until the Palestinian people are able and are allowed to exercise their option and right to self-determination and statehood, the problem of Palestine will continue to plague this body, and indeed the rest of the international community, including Israel, for a long, long time.
That this should be so is understandable, given the just and legitimate cause of the Palestinian people, whose national identity has remained intact and whose unity and determination to achieve self-determination and statehood have remained undiminished despite all vicissitudes.
Stating that fact should not be construed as adopting an anti-Israeli position. In the view of the Sierra Leonean delegation, it is equally in the interest of Israel and of the Israeli people as a whole that resolution 181 (II) should be implemented in its entirety and that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) should be observed and implemented, specifically by the withdrawal of Israel from the territories it has been
(Mr. Koroma, Sierra Leong) occupying since 1967. Observance by Israel of those historic resolutions would not only assuage and mitigate the historical injustice that has been done to the Palestinian people: we are convinced that it would also bring peace to Israel and to its neighbours in a region inhabited by people with a great civilization and culture who hold so much potential for human development but who have remained tormented and in turmoil for so long because of the Palestinian conflict.
It is therefore ironic that even though the international community has for a long time been familiar with the root cause of the malady that is, the Palestinian problem the remedy for the malady of Palestine, unlike the remedies for other maladies, is well known, but the will to find a solution to this long-drawn-out conflict has been lacking.
A47PV.76
21 (Mr. Koroma, Sierra Leone) Therefore, in the view of the Sierra Leone delegation, what is required to bring this conflict to an end is a great historic compromise on the part of all the parties involved, a historic compromise similar to that struck in Europe following the ravages of the Second World War, or that in Zimbabwe or Namibia, which brought independence to those two countries. Today we observe and even admire the fact that some European nations that once regarded each other as mortal enemies, having decided to bury the hatchet, to embark on a determined peace process, finally achieved a historic compromise and are today cooperating very closely in the political, economic, social and even defence spheres, to their mutual benefit.
South Africa's prolonged intransigence over granting independence to Namibia was based on grounds of national security. That reason has proved to be unfounded with Namibia's independence; South Africa's territorial integrity and security have in no way been compromised or threatened by it.
We are of course aware that no two situations are identical. However, we have observed how with good will, good faith, sincerity and a determination to find solutions - conflicts that once appeared difficult and intractable have been resolved, to the detriment of none and the advantage of all those concerned.
The Sierra Leone delegation therefore once again calls for a historic compromise by Israel, the Palestinians and other States in the Middle East similar to those which have served the international community well in other instances. The ongoing Middle East Peace Conference should be viewed as a renewed opportunity to find a solution to the problem of Palestine, an opportunity which should not be missed. The Conference should be guided by
(Mr. Koroma, Sierra Leong) good faith, sincerity and a determination to achieve a solid compromise. That historic compromise, to which I have already alluded, would involve, inter alia, the establishment of a Palestinian State, even if this should come about through interim self-government, as is now proposed, and Israel's withdrawal from all territories it has been occupying since 1967, including Jerusalem, which is of major importance to three of the world’s major religions and their followers.
Such a compromise by Israel should facilitate a similar historic compromise by the Palestinians and other Arab States, leading to a comprehensive peace agreement, which should in time develop into the same kind of regional cooperation as is seen today among once belligerent European nations. Such a comprehensive peace agreement would not only be equitable as between Israel and the Palestinians, but would also be durable as between Israel and the contiguous States.
The question of Palestine remains central to developments in the Middle East today, much as it has for decades. Over the years, as hope for a resolution ebbed and flowed, so attitudes became uncompromising, political positions hardened and the prospects for peace became a mirage. Repeated initiatives yielded little. As time marched on, resignation set in.
Today, as we look back, we see that the wisdom of what had been advocated remains valid. The Sierra Leone delegation firmly believes that the original solution proposed by the Assembly with respect to the question of Palestine remains valid and fundamental indeed, indispensable to resolving the conflict in an enduring manner. That is a two-State solution, the two States being Israel and Palestine.
Over the years the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has sustained and promoted the just and legitimate cause of the Palestinian people. We pay tribute to Ambassador Birane Cisse of Senegal for his indefatigable efforts in promoting the cause of the Palestinian people and in helping to find a peaceful solution to this long-drawn-out conflict.
Mr. KHAMSY (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (interpretation from French): The Palestinian people have the legitimate right to live in their own independent State in that land of Palestine which they inherited from their ancestors, just like all the other peoples who regained their freedom and national independence at the end of the colonial era; they have that right both historically and under international law. Therefore, the international community has committed itself to help this martyred, uprooted people, who find themselves permanently facing complete annihilation by Israel, the Power occupying their homeland.
In a world now free of ideological confrontation, we feel that it is in the interests of the two peoples, Palestinians and Israelis, to live on good terms, with peace restored, each in its own State with its own distinct national entity, once inalienable fundamental rights, including the right to self-determination and the right of return, have been restored to the Palestinian people.
The Middle East peace negotiations, which began on 30 October last year in Madrid, and which have been resumed several times, including meetings in Washington, have led us to believe that the negotiations between the parties
concerned, particularly between the Israelis and the Palestinians, although
they are long, arduous and complex, will not fail to lead one day to an overall settlement, just and honourable for all. We have all the more reason for this belief, since the peace process is jointly sponsored by the United States and the former Soviet Union and is based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The Labour Party's assumption of power in Israel will give a new impetus to these talks, as, it seems to us, the new Prime Minister of Israel has already shown in his various statements, as he has shown in his approaches to the problem of the Middle East as a whole, more flexibility and realism than his predecessor.
A glimmer of hope has certainly emerged from these two important events. My delegation also welcomes the fact that finally the United Nations has been invited to participate in the negotiating process at the multilateral level, and that to this end the Secretary-General has just appointed Ambassador Gharekhan of India as his Personal Representative, to be a fully fledged extraregional participant in the talks.
A47PV.76 26 (Mr, Khamsy, Lao People's Democratic Republic)
But will all these positive notes prove to be but an illusion in the light of Israel's intransigence and delaying tactics, particularly with respect to the question of Palestine? Indeed, on the ground, especially in the occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, developments continue to give rise to pessimism. The international community is particularly concerned at the deterioration of the situation in those territories caused by the repressive measures to which defenceless Palestinians fall victim daily, measures that run counter to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
All those repressive practices are governed by a strict military "iron fist" regime; for 25 years they have consisted of harsh and inhumane measures such as arbitrary arrest, detention without trial, deportation, sealing and demolishing of homes, confiscation of land and water resources, restrictions on freedom of movement, collective punishment and murder. These run completely counter to the spirit of the current peace negotiations and are applied with complete scorn for all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and General Assembly.
Along with these cruel discriminatory practices, the present Tel Aviv Government, although it promised to suspend new settlements, has not completely renounced the policy of the systematic settlement of the territories of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and even Jerusalem.
The international community must therefore take more effective measures, first, to put an end to that pernicious policy which aims at altering the demographic makeup of these territories, ultimately destroying their Palestinian identity and finally annexing them outright as a fait accompli -and, secondly, to demand Israel's total withdrawal from all the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
Faced by this serious threat to its very existence, the Palestinian people in the occupied territories has no alternative to uprisings and to accepting new sacrifices. In that connection, the intifadah, now in its fifth year, is a symbol of the courage and determination of this martyr people in its sacred struggle to regain its fundamental, inalienable rights.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic pays a tribute to those acts of courage and sacrifice. We shall join the international community', efforts to reaffirm its solidarity with and firm support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people, under the direction of the Palestine Liberation Organization the struggle of that oppressed people which has suffered for far too long.
Mr. ABDUL GHAFFAR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): The fundamental changes in international politics have created a climate that favoured a shift by the international community from confrontation to cooperation and promoted a tendency to search for solutions to chronic international disputes that spawned hotbeds of tension in various regions of the world. These profound political changes have left their imprint on the Arab and international outlook and, through the flux of grave international events, have had a major impact on the political thinking of the Palestinians,
(Mr. Abdul Ghaffar, Bahrain) who have not been isolated from the effects of such transformations in the Arab world and on the international level. Consequently, their thinking has responded positively and realistically to the international tendency to find solutions to serious regional disputes and problems that had seemed intractable in the days of the cold war.'
That realism in Palestinian political thinking, in the context of current international changes, does not mean acceptance of any de facto policies. It simply reflects the desire of the Palestinian people to achieve a just peace that would be founded on its exercise of its inalienable rights and, especially, the right to self-determination. It was on that basis that the Palestinians participated in the Madrid peace Conference held in October last year and in the subsequent multilateral and bilateral negotiations.
The trouble with strategic Zionist thinking is that it stems from the belief that peace in the Middle East could be imposed by force. Therefore, Israel, since it occupied the Arab territories in 1967, has tried to entrench a policy of fait accompli through all manner of repression and oppression, the building of settlements and the inflows of immigrants.
The imposition of an unjust solution on the Palestinians could lead only to a lifeless, cold, formal peace. Peace on a fait accompli basis as desired by Israel will only mean renewed oppression and the heaping of new injustices on the Palestinians, who had been driven away in 1948 from their homes and from their ancestral homeland.
' Mr. Al-Haddad (Yemen), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Abdul Ghaffar, Bahrain) It is abundantly clear that the huge injustice inflicted on the Palestinians through the imposition of the fait accompli policy involves the confiscation of their land to make place for more Jewish immigrants who are brought to the occupied Palestinian and the other occupied Arab territories. From 1967 through 1992, the Israeli authorities have confiscated 60 per cent of the land of the West Bank and Gaza and have permanently settled some 230,000 Jews in about 212 settlements throughout the occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
It is well known that Israel’s strategy since it came into being has been to deal summarily and violently with any Palestinian political institution, inside or outside the Palestinian territories, that advocated or worked for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State in accordance with General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947.
Any peaceful settlement in the Middle East must be built on the realization that the question of Palestine is the core issue of the Arab-Israeli conflict. If that is accepted, solutions to the question of Palestine and the question of the Middle East will emerge and lead the way to the achievement of a just and lasting peace between all the parties to the
conflict.
(Mr, Abdul Ghaffar, Bahrain)
In this connection, we should like to reaffirm the following principles: first, the need for Israel to withdraw from the territories it has occupied since 1967, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, and withdraw from all other occupied Arab territories; secondly, the need for security arrangements for all countries of the region within secure and internationally recognized borders; thirdly, the need for a solution to the problem of the Palestinian refugees in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, with special emphasis on operative paragraph 11 of that resolution; and, fourthly, the dismantling and elimination of the Israeli settlements in the territories occupied by Israel by military force in 1967.
Israel's attempts to marginalize the role of the United Nations in the Middle East peace process very clearly aim at avoiding the implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions and the application of rules of international law in dealing with all matters relating to the question of Palestine. Israel, as is well known, is the only country whose accession to the United Nations was dependent upon specific conditions that it has never met.
The State of Bahrain stresses the importance of the United Nations role in the Middle East peace negotiations. The United Nations was the Organization that adopted the historic resolutions that have affected the fate of Palestine, since before and after the end of the British Mandate, such as the resolution on the partition of Palestine.
In this connection, we call upon the Security Council, as the most important body of the United Nations, to shoulder its responsibilities for the protection of Palestinian refugees in the occupied Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, particularly since Israel, as the occupying
(Mr. Abdul Ghaffar, Bahrain) Power, does not comply with the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.
Mr. ELHOUDERI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): Once again, the General Assembly debates the question of Palestine which has been consistently inscribed on its agenda for longer than any other international problem. It is almost as old as the United Nations itself. Over the past 40 years, the General Assembly, the Security Council and other regional and international organizations have adopted numerous resolutions through which the international community defined its position on the question of Palestine and on the means of resolving it. That position of the international community underscored the right of the Palestinian people to return to their land, to exercise self-determination and to establish their independent State.
The changes witnessed by the world over the past few years have led to unprecedented and radical transformations. Notwithstanding the clear impact of those changes on international relations, and the fact that they have helped to settle and contain many disputes, the realities of the situation show that they have had no visible effect with regard to the resolution of the Palestinian question. In addition, the latest talks on the situation in the Middle East have not yielded any concrete results. Today, one year after the start of negotiations last October, current indications are that the situation remains at the starting point and that the promises made at the beginning of the negotiations have gone with the wind. Thus, the fact remains that the long drawn-out suffering of the Palestinian people that has gone on for almost half a century still continues. The children of that people are still being
(Mr, Elhouderi, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) subjected to all forms of injustice, such as the occuptation of their land, displacement, wanton imprisonment of tens of thousands, killing of the innocent and defenseless, demolition of houses, closure of schools and universities and assaults on refugees. This is a reality that is substantiated by evidence and by the findings in various reports including the report by the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People, document A47509. Paragraph 817 of that report states that:
"Settlers have raided villages and refugee camps, attacking the inhabitants and destroying their property."
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian land and the continued Israeli persecution of the Palestinian people have neither weakened that people’s resolve to resist occupation nor has it lessened its determination to defend its dignity, regain its rights and realize its aspirations. The intifadah is but one link in the chain of the Palestinian people'» struggle against the injustice it has suffered and an expression of its resolve to regain its basic rights to life, freedom and independence. The Palestinian intifadah has attracted world attention and has gained the sympathy of most sectors of world public opinion as the uprising of a people who refuses to submit to the will of others. It is only the occupying Power that has consistently tried to cover up the causes and motives behind the Palestinian intifadah and has depicted it as an illegal activity that must be stopped by any means at hand, including the most brutal and repressive of methods. Notwithstanding the General Assembly's condemnation of Israel's practices against the children of the intifadah. the occupying Power has persisted in its repressive measures,
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) as shown in the above-mentioned report by the Special Committee on Israeli Practices. That report, in its account of the situation of the Palestinians since the start of the intifadah, shows that many have been killed under mysterious circumstances and that acts of violence and indiscriminate persecution have been perpetrated against all, even children, women and the elderly. The report also shows that conditions of prisoners and the sort of treatment meted out to them continue to worsen. This treatment involves the continuous use of torture together with various forms of physical and psychological abuse, such as deprivation from food and from sleep.
The tragic situation of the Palestinian people and the dangers which threaten their very survival due to the occupation require the international community to work to put an end to the long suffering of that people whose children are increasingly targeted by dangerous acts of repression and by restrictions that affect every aspect of their lives. To take the necessary measures to guarantee their safety and protection is not a moral and human responsibility only but also a legal obligation that is clearly stipulated in
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
It is equally urgent for the international community, which has already shown interest in the tense situation in the Middle East and has pronounced its support for the Palestinian people through numerous United Nations resolutions, to translate these resolutions into practical steps by putting an immediate halt to the organized immigration of Jews to Palestine and the other occupied Arab territories and to the building of settlements, and by supporting the Palestinian people's right to return to its land, to exercise self-determination and to establish its own independent, sovereign State. It is the taking of such measures that would guarantee peace and justice in this part of the world.
The Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has always supported the steadfast stand of the Palestinian people in the face of injustice and has also supported that people's right to liberate their land and establish its independent State. My country’s delegation seizes this opportunity to reaffirm that position and to urge the international community to take the necessary and practical steps to implement the international resolutions calling for the protection of the Palestinian people, thereby enabling them to attain their inalienable and legitimate rights.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to express the appreciation of my delegation to the Special Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian people and other Arabs of the Occupied Territories in their efforts to provide us with the information contained in their reports to the General Assembly, and for all their work aimed at deepening international awareness of the facts surrounding the question of Palestine and the conditions of the Palestinian
(Mr. Elhouderi, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) people under occupation. Also, we should like to commend their efforts to bring about the implementation of General Assembly resolutions on the question of Palestine.
Mr. LI Daoyu (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Over the past year, we witnessed significant changes in the situation in the Middle East. The Middle East peace process initiated by the Madrid Peace Conference has brought a favourable turn in the quest for a peaceful solution to the Middle East question, which has plagued peoples in all countries of that region for more than 40 years. The Palestinians have participated directly for the first time in the negotiations with the Israelis. Rounds of bilateral negotiations have been conducted between the Arab States and Israel, and multilateral negotiations are also under way. Discussions on the relevant questions are beginning to enter a substantive stage. The parties concerned have all shown their willingness for a settlement. All this has helped create conditions for an early, fair and reasonable settlement of the Palestinian question. Nevertheless, if there is to be a final settlement of the question, further tireless efforts by all the relevant parties and the international community, including the United Nations, are still needed.
China has all along supported the just cause of the Palestinian and Arab peoples. China attaches great importance to the settlement of the Middle East question and welcomes all the new changes and developments that are contributing to the quest for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute. China supports all the proposals that will facilitate an early, fair and reasonable settlement of the Palestinian question. The Chinese Government is of the view that the Arab-Israel dispute should be settled in i fair and comprehensive manner through negotiations on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions. The occupied Arab territories should be returned, the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people should be restored and the sovereignty and security of all the Middle East States, including Israel, should be respected and protected. We hope that all parties concerned will make full use of the current opportunity, and will adopt a more practical and flexible attitude. We also hope that the Israeli side will face reality and conduct direct negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the legitimate representative recognized by all the Palestinian people, stop building settlements in the occupied territories and allow deported Palestinians to return to their homeland. We are convinced that as long as all parties concerned persist in seeking peace, no matter how Lortuous is the road of peaceful negotiations, swords will eventually be turned into ploughshares and the harmonious coexistence and common development of the Arab and Jewish nations will finally be achieved.
The United Nations is playing an increasingly important role in settling regional disputes and maintaining world peace. Over the years, the Organization has made steadfast and tremendous efforts to seek a fair and reasonable solution to the Palestinian question and the Middle East question as a whole. In our view, with the in-depth development of the Middle East peace process, the United Nations should continue to play its due role both in the process of political settlement of the Middle East question and in the follow-up actions after the conclusion of a peace agreement. We welcome the full participation of the United Nations in the multilateral negotiations of the Middle East peace talks. As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China will, as always, work with the international community to promote the Middle East peace process and make its due contribution to the final achievement of a fair and lasting settlement of the Middle East question, with the Palestinian question at its core.
Ms. KHARPADE (India): Peace and security in the Middle East is dependent on a just and overall settlement of the question of Palestine, which remains the core of the conflict in the region. For 45 years the international community, as represented by the General Assembly, has grappled with this question, but a settlement has remained elusive.
The political map of the world as we knew it 45 years ago has changed. With the new era of the improved political security climate generated by the end of the cold war, the world today bears little resemblance to the years of great-Power and ideological rivalry that characterized it in the past. This new spirit of cooperation, accord and understanding has helped in the recent resolution of conflicts that the cold war had formerly nurtured in many parts
of the world.
The Middle East is also changing. Yet, with its oft-demonstrated explosiveness, it is one region where a failure to realize peace could have the potential of undermining the shape of things to come. The need for evolving a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement in this region is, therefore, urgent and imperative.
It is in this spirit that my delegation welcomes the Middle East Peace Conference launched a year ago. A great deal of time and effort has been put in by its co-sponsors of the Conference, the United States of America and the Russian Federation. We applaud these efforts. It is important to note that negotiations under this Conference have continued throughout the past year. Even though the process may not yet have produced tangible results, it must be realized that, given the deep-rooted suspicions and mistrust, past setbacks and the history of repeated conflict, all the parties concerned have demonstrated unquestionable goodwill and political maturity in getting to the conference table. Caution, circumspection and even suspicion are but natural, and should not detract from our common cause of encouraging and supporting the parties concerned to move forward in the guest for lasting peace in the region, which, we are certain, they all desire. The process will be, as indeed has been demonstrated over the last year, arduous and strewn with what might seem insurmountable obstacles. Overcoming them will require unique political courage and statesmanship. Compromises and sacrifices will no doubt be necessary. But we should not lose sight of the fact that this rare opportunity for a peaceful settlement can be missed only at heavy cost for both the people of the region and the world as a whole.
The issues involved concern not only the question of political peace, territory and settlement but also the future of the Palestinian people, who have been condemned to a life of never-ending struggle as refugees. In the
(Ms. Kharpade, India) Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, of which my country is privileged to be a member, we have worked constantly to reaffirm the basic rights of the Palestinian people the right of return, the right to self-determination and the right to a homeland. The Palestinian people, undaunted by the adversity and suffering which history has heaped upon them, have continued to wage their campaign, through the intifadah, for their just rights. We do not believe that there can be lasting peace in the Middle East until these rights are guaranteed.
Side by side with the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people lies the right of all States in the region, including Israel, to live in peace within internationally recognized boundaries. The peace between Israel and Egypt recognized this principle, as did Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which were adopted unanimously and should be seen as political decisions applying to both the transitional and the final stages in the Middle East peace process. Land for peace is one of the bedrock principles enshrined in these resolutions and, hence, it is essential that Israel withdraw from all Arab territory occupied since 1967. In this context we are encouraged that the Peace Conference has recognized this principle, that the co-sponsors have endorsed it and that Israel itself has moved its political positions towards its acceptance.
The General Assembly has repeatedly called for the holding of an international peace conference on the Middle East, under United Nations auspices and with the participation of all parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, recognized as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. We believe that this proposed conference and the peace process launched by the Madrid Conference are not
mutually exclusive, but serve to complement each other. In any case, the United Nations has an indispensable role to play in efforts towards lasting peace in the Middle East. Consequently, we are encouraged that the United Nations has been included as a full, extra-regional participant in the multilateral talks associated with the Peace Conference. We are also encouraged that Palestinians from outside the occupied territories have begun to participate in the working group on refugees. We are certain that their participation and that of the United Nations will go a long way towards building that mutual confidence which alone can serve as the foundation for a future community of Member States living in peace and cooperation with each other in the region.
The bilateral negotiations are essentially political. The multilateral negotiations are essentially economic. Each supports the other, and progress in one should not be made dependent upon conclusion of negotiations in the other. My country has had the honour to participate in the meetings of all five working groups of the multilateral negotiations. Though this multilateral phase may not yet have a concrete dimension or direction, the process which has been initiated appears set to continue. We value our inclusion as one of the selected non-regional parties in these talks, and we intend, given our long-standing and close relationships with the countries of the region, to place our wealth of experience in handling similar issues at the disposal of the States directly involved for them to use as they see fit.
At the Non-Aligned Summit held in Jakarta, our Heads of State or Government agreed that, with the positive transformation of the global political landscape and the peaceful settlement of various disputes, the
(Ms, Kharpade, India) Middle East can no longer be a cauldron of violent upheaval, insecurity and instability. They called for a new regional order of justice, dignity and stability through mutual accommodation, based on the principle of peaceful coexistence and international legality. That has to come from the countries of the region. My delegation is certain that these countries will again show that statesmanship and wisdom alone can usher in a lasting period of peace and prosperity to this ancient land.
Mr. AWAD (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Throughout the last four decades, the United Nations has devoted its efforts to resolving the question of Palestine. As a matter of fact, few questions have been the focus of so much attention by the Organization. Nevertheless, the question of Palestine continues to figure as an item on the United Nations agenda as an unresolved problem, because Israel still persists in its denial of the Palestinian people's right to self-determination and independence.
The Arabs, for their part, have done their utmost to find a solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of the principles of international law as enshrined in the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The most recent of these efforts was the Arabs' participation in the Madrid Middle East Peace Conference, in which they took part in a spirit of responsibility with the goal of reaching a just, lasting and global settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict through the full implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) on the Palestinian, Syrian and Jordanian fronts, that is to say on the basis of the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by the use of force, the need for Israel to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories and to fully and unconditionally implement Security Council resolution 425 (1978). In all this, the Arabs have a well-defined position. They have supported the right to self-determination of Palestinians, and they have tried to draw a link between the transitional period and the final period of the Palestinian peace process in order to implement Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in regard to the occupied Palestinian territories. They have highlighted the illegal nature of Israeli settlements in any part of the occupied Arab territories, including Al-Quds and the Golan Heights; they have called for putting an end
(Mr. Awad, Syrian Arab Republic.) to Israel's practices of repression in the occupied Arab territories; and have taken the position that all parties have an equal fight to security and peace.
Regrettably, however, Israel continues to manoeuvre and procrastinate in an attempt to hold on to the occupied Arab territories. A whole year after the Madrid Conference and the beginning of bilateral negotiations, negotiation has not led to any tangible progress towards peace. To this date, the Israeli Government has not made any clear commitment to the elements and principles of the peace process. It has not declared that it is prepared to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. It has not recognized the Palestinian people's right to self-determination and has not committed itself to completely stopping its settlement activities in the occupied Arab territories or its intention to stop violating human rights.
The Palestinian masses, directly after the Madrid Conference, welcomed the Palestinian representatives who had participated in that Conference, with olive branches in their hands, as an expression of the hopes they attached to the peace process. A few days ago, one year after the talks between Arabs and Israelis began, these same masses have demonstrated and voiced their dismay at the failure to achieve any progress in the peace process, at the continuing building of settlements, at the continuing flagrant violations of human rights, at the shooting of innocent people, and at the brutal assassinations perpetrated by special clandestine Israeli units whose members are sometimes disguised in Palestinian garb.
The world is now well aware of the fact that the question of Palestine, which is the core issue of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is the question of a people who has been dispossessed from its land and deprived of its rights, and
(Mr, Awad, Syrian Arab Republic) that until a just solution has been found to this question on the basis of the United Nations resolutions, the Arab-Israeli conflict will continue.
The question of Palestine is not merely a question of the inalienable political rights of a people. At the humanitarian level, what is at stake is the issue of civil and human rights. The majority of the Palestinian people have become refugees over the past four decades, while the Israeli authorities have continued to settle Jewish immigrants in the occupied Arab territories in naked defiance of international public opinion and humanitarian values.
The international community has stressed that peace in the Middle East requires Israel's withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories and the guaranteeing of all the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people. Anyone in Israel who may believe that it would be possible to achieve genuine peace without Israel's complete withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories is badly mistaken. The way to a just and comprehensive peace is clear and well defined. Any partial withdrawals will not bring peace to the region or to Israel itself. The security that Israel wants cannot be achieved through its continued occupation of Arab land or through military superiority, the building of settlements and the pursuance of inhuman practices. There can be real peace only through complete withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories and genuine commitment to the fundamental elements of peace. The dictum of secure borders that cannot be crossed no longer exists. The theory of preventive security zones has collapsed. Real security can be achieved only in a context of peace and in the absence of injustice, repression and aggression.
Our understanding of what peace is, like all other peoples of the world, convinces us that peace is attainable only within a context of freedom and
(Mr, Awad, Syrian Arab Republic justice, those two prizes for which man has struggled for many centuries. Whatever anyone may say about the change in mood or policies in Israel, the fact remains that Israel’s leaders still hold on to the occupied Arab territories and continue to haggle with the international community, not over the return of those occupied territories, but only over the promise to soft-pedal their settler-colonialist activities somewhat in those territories. This, however, will not lead to the real peace we understand, the peace which we have been struggling to achieve.
(Mr, Awad, Syrian Arab Republic)
The road to peace is clear. It requires only that Israel implement international resolutions which reject occupation, annexation and threats. Israel's procrastination will only serve to delay the peace process. My country has repeatedly declared from this rostrum that it will not abandon any part of any territory nor will it renounce any national or Arab rights. We will accept only a just and honourable peace for all on all Arab fronts.
To cherish one’s rights is not to be intransigent or extremist. It is a right and an obligation recognized by international law.
Mr, JAYA (Brunei Darussalam): The question of Palestine is one of the long-standing and difficult international problems that continue to pose a threat to international peace and security. Members may recall that the issue has been addressed since the first special session of the General Assembly in April 1947. It was exacerbated as a result of the Arab-Israeli conflict when the world witnessed the beginning of a large-scale displacement of Palestinians.
The 1967 war brought further grievances and sufferings in particular to the Palestinian people. This year marks the twenty-fifth year of Israel's blatant occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands. This reminds us that for decades Israel has defied various United Nations resolutions. As a result, the Palestinian people have long been suffering injustices in their search for their own homeland and for peace and freedom.
At this juncture, I should like to reaffirm my delegation's full support for and solidarity with the Palestinian people in their just cause. Indeed, today's discussion reflects our continued concern and renewed efforts to resolve this conflict in a manner that is in compliance with all the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Despite various setbacks, I am glad to note that since last year we have begun to see encouraging developments for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We welcomed the convening of the Madrid peace talks, which was a significant step towards a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Palestine question and the Arab-Israeli conflict, based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the formula of land for peace and the legitimate and inalienable national and political rights of the Palestinian people. We consider the peace talks to be an important avenue in providing a peaceful regional framework and a step towards building up mutual confidence and understanding among the participating parties.
Nevertheless, we also noted that little tangible result seems to have been achieved in the current peace talks, both in terms of format and substance. It is my delegation's view that the peace process lacks some fundamental elements, including the question of giving the Palestinian people full and direct participation in the process, as well as Israel's need to go beyond rhetoric by adopting measures demonstrating its peaceful and good intentions.
We believe that a lasting peace cannot prevail unless the peace process involves all the parties in conflict. In this respect, my delegation recognizes that the unconditional participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) on an equal footing, in all stages of the negotiations and meetings of the current peace process, is essential. At the same time, my delegation dteems it important for all the parties in the peace talks to be allowed to raise any issues of concern. Israel, too, must commit itself resolutely to addressing the question of Palestine, which remains the core issue in the Middle East conflict.
It is equally important for Israel to demonstrate its peaceful and good intentions in order to help create a better climate conducive to progress. It is regrettable to witness, however, that the current peace talks on the Middle East are being conducted against the background of continued and escalating violence and aggression, orchestrated by the Israeli authorities in the occupied territories. Consequently, the Palestinian people continue to suffer under intolerable political, economic and social conditions. This is exacerbated by Israel's policy of unlawful annexation of Palestinian and Arab lands. Regrettably, this, together with the settlement policy which allows more Jewish immigrants to be settled in the occupied territories, is being continued under the present Israeli regime.
My delegation feels that the pursuance of such policies, which serve to demonstrate Israel's intention to change the demographic composition and the legal status of occupied Palestinian territory, including Al-Ouds Al-Sharif, and other Arab territories, remain matters of the greatest concern to my delegation. In this regard, we fully support Security Council resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) declaring Israeli measures pertaining to Al-Quds Al-Sharif as devoid of legal validity.
We are deeply concerned with the deterioriation of human rights conditions in the occupied Palestinian territories as a result of Israel', increasing repressive policies, which are in clear violation of the basic principles of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. We also share the concern of the international community with regard to Israel’s continued deportation policy and its implementation of discriminatory policies on Palestinian residents, as well as the confiscation and destruction of Palestinian
Properties.
Israel', repressive actions have inevitably led to a vicious cycle of violence in the occupied territories. The Palestinians continue to resist the political, economic and social domination and injustices through an instituted uprising, or intifadah, against the occupying Power. The intifadah involves tremendous sacrifices and hardship for the Palestinian people. It serves to underline an even more urgent need to intensify efforts to find a political solution to the question of Palestine.
Brunei Darussalam continues to deplore Israel's persistent defiance of all relevant Security Council resolutions. We are duty bound to do so until we see some concrete act on Israel's part, and a demonstration in some tangible manner of the Israeli regime’s commitment to comply fully with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
If the situation in the occupied territories is allowed to deteriorate as a result of Israel's intransigence, it may adversely affect the positive atmosphere and confidence which the peace effort has helped to build. In turn, it may also lead to the failure of the current peace process.
My delegation therefore deems it important for the international community to do its utmost to maintain the ongoing peace negotiations. We also urge Israel to ensure the safety and protection of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories and to facilitate the return of those inhabitants who have fled the areas under occupation. It is therefore incumbent upon Israel immediately to cease all settlement projects and give assurances to the international community that the issue of the Jewish settlements will not resurface since it has been the irritant and obstacle to peace in the region
(Mr. Jaya, Brunei Darussalam)
My delegation believes that it is time for the world body to look into practical ways to complement the current regional efforts to find a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. In this light, we further believe that the idea of convening the International Peace Conference on the Middle East merits our full support.
AGENDA ITEM 145
FINANCING OF THE UNITED NATIONS OPERATION IN SOMALIA: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A47734)
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee to present the Committee's report on agenda item 145.
Mr. OSELLA (Argentina), Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee (interpretation from Spanish): It is my honour to introduce to the General Assembly the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 145, "Financing of the United Nations operation in Somalia" (A47734).
As it says in paragraph 2 of its report, the Committee considered this item at its 31st and 33rd meetings.
At the 33rd meeting the representative of the Netherlands, on behalf of the Chairman of the Committee, introduced the draft resolution contained in document AC.547L.3, "Financing of the United Nations operation in Somalia". At the same meeting the Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
In paragraph 6 of its report the Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution.
The PRESIDENT: If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth Committee that is before the Assembly.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Before the Assembly begins to take action on the recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth Committee I should like to advise representatives that we shall proceed to take a decision in the same manner as in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A47734).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution AC.547L.3 was adopted (resolution 4741).
The PRESIDENT: We have concluded this stage of our consideration of agenda item 145.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
ÖW LIBRAR
^ 12 œ	A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A47PV.82 22 December 1992
ENGLISH
Forty-seventh session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 82nd MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 10 December 1992, at 10 a.m.
Presidents	Mr. GANEV	(Bulgaria)
later:	Mr. MAYORGA CORTES	(Nicaragua)
(Vice-President)
-	Human rights questions
-	(b) Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms
-	Opening ceremonies for the International Year of the World's Indigenous People: draft resolution
. Organization of work
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-62159 3441V (E)
A47PV.82
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 97
HUMAN RIGHTS QUESTIONS
(b) HUMAN RIGHTS QUESTIONS, INCLUDING ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR IMPROVING THE EFFECTIVE ENJOYMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS
OPENING CEREMONIES FOR THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF THE WORLD'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLE: DRAFT RESOLUTION (A47L.33)
The PRESIDENT: This morning the General Assembly, in accordance -.ith the decision taken at its 3rd plenary meeting, is holding a plenary meeting devoted to the opening ceremonies for the International Year of the World's Indigenous People, under agenda item 97.
In this connection the Assembly has before it a draft resolution that has been issued as document A47L.33.
Today is a unique occasion in United Nations history. On this Human Rights Day we inaugurate the International Year of the World's Indigenous People, whose observance will take place throughout 1993.
The Year provides an opportunity for the international community to focus on and respond to some of the needs of indigenous peoples. During this morning's general debate several Governments will outline their initiatives and plans on this subject.
The formal portion of our inaugural meeting will conclude at approximately 12.15 p.m., when the Coordinator of the International Year, Mr. Antoine Blanca, followed by the Chairwoman of the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, Mrs. Erica-Irene Daes, will open the special meeting, and we will hear from 19 speakers representing indigenous peoples and communities from all regions of the world.
A47PV482	.
3-5
(The President)
The short time we have this morning should be devoted to the maximum extent possible to our indigenous speakers, but I want to indicate briefly my support for their efforts and for the activities of the United Nations, Governments, non-governmental organizations and others in this area.
(The President)
Approximately 300 million indigenous people are spread across the globe, from the Arctic to the South Pacific, inhabiting some 70 States Members of the United Nations. We use the term "indigenous people" because they were the first to live on their land, beginning hundreds or even thousands of years ago. Yet today, after conquest, occupation, forced assimilation and enslavement, followed by neglect, some of the oldest societies in the world are among the most vulnerable societies in the world. The international community is increasingly coming to appreciate that so-called civilization has much to learn from so-called primitive people, but the question is whether we will learn our lessons in time.
Indigenous peoples live in some of the most fragile environments on the planet: tropical forests, dry lands and deserts, the Arctic region and mountainous areas. We acknowledge their special knowledge of the environment and of nature by calling them the guardians or caretakers of the Earth. It is only the new sensibilities the rest of us have developed about the grave ecological damage we are doing that allows us now to appreciate the way in which indigenous peoples instinctively relate to the environment and otherwise conduct their lives.
But at the same time we are witnessing political, economic and social pressures, most of which have historically been within our ability to limit, that are rapidly threatening the very survival of those who have so much to give. Their patterns of family and social structure have been disrupted, their lifestyles have been denigrated and their protection has not been a priority.
Instead of following indigenous peoples’ example of how to love the land and how to live with it, too often we have coveted it and tried to expropriate
(The President) it. Instead of using the diversity of indigenous cultures to develop our sense of tolerance for all people, too often we have blindly tried to integrate them into the dominant society. Instead of being inspired by indigenous peoples' values, customs, heritage and ability to adapt to their environment, too often we have denied them the human rights we assert to be the birthright of all.
However, there is genuine reason to be encouraged. How different is our response today from what it was in the 1920s, when American Indians appealed in vain to the League of Nations, or in the early years of the United Nations, when appeals by representatives of indigenous peoples were not acted upon!
It is important to recognize the work of many dedicated individuals and organizations, within the United Nations system and outside it, that have contributed to resolving these problems and to acknowledge the participation of indigenous peoples in the work of the United Nations.
The first international conference of non-governmental organizations on indigenous issues was held in Geneva in 1977, followed in 1981 by a similar meeting devoted to indigenous peoples and the land. These gatherings, together with a United Nations study by a Special Rapporteur, influenced the establishment, in 1982, of the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations. The Working Group reviews national developments regarding the protection of indigenous peoples' human rights, disseminates information and promotes the evolution of international standards.
In 1985 the General Assembly established the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations to provide financial assistance to representatives of indigenous communities and organizations attending Working Group sessions. Regrettably, only some eight Governments and three
(The President) non-governmental organizations have to date contributed to the Fund. The specialized agencies, notably the International Labour Organisation, deal with issues relating to indigenous peoples, and the human rights mechanisms review allegations of specific violations.
In recent times many Heads of State, Government Ministers and representatives have addressed the General Assembly on the subject of the new world order and the revitalization of the United Nations. But our world is composed first and foremost of people. Ultimately it will be how we deal with the daily problems of human existence that determines our success or failure as an effective instrument of world peace, stability and progress.
This is, therefore, both a celebration and a solemn occasion. We pay tribute to the dignity and the struggle of indigenous peoples. We focus the attention of the world on their uniqueness and on the tasks that lie ahead. We proclaim the importance of maintaining indigenous peoples' cultural identities and preserving their accumulated knowledge so that we may improve the welfare of the entire human race.
Today, in this General Assembly Chamber, before the representatives of indigenous peoples gathered here, and before the many around the world who watch us and await our leadership, let us reaffirm our commitment to taking concrete action in this coming year and beyond to bring to the world's indigenous peoples the full benefits of peace, human rights and development.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Today, on Human Rights Day 1992, we launch 1993 as the International Year of the World's Indigenous People. The theme chosen by the General Assembly is "Indigenous people - a new partnership".

It is no coincidence that we are launching this Year on Human Rights Day. Many of the 300 million indigenous people in the world face social and economic disadvantage in the societies in which they live. In the past some of the world's worst violations of human rights were perpetrated against indigenous people. Today, indigenous people are often among the poorest, the worst housed and the lowest paid; they usually have less access to education and welfare than other members of society.
For centuries indigenous people have lived at the margins of national and international life. Some have continued to live according to their traditional ways and have not adopted the predominant language or religion of their country. Many have been outcasts in their own lands; rarely have they been incorporated into the large societies in which they live. Often they have been denied citizenship by the authorities of their States.

Often the ancestral lands of indigenous people were "discovered" by colonial Powers and then allocated to foreign settlers. In many countries the "indigenous people" were relegated to reserved territories or confined to inaccessible or inhospitable regions.
Some Governments viewed as subversive those who did not share their sedentary lifestyle or the culture of the majority. Nations of farmers tended to view nomads or hunting peoples with fear or contempt. Many "indigenous people" seemed doomed to extinction.
Today a welcome change is taking place at national and international levels. Many indigenous people have formed their own organizations. They are active in seeking improvements in their situations. In the last decade indigenous people have come in increasing numbers to United Nations meetings -those of the Commission on Human Rights and the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, and other conferences dealing with human rights, development and environment.
There have also been important changes in many countries which have benefited indigenous people. More and more Governments have recognized the multicultural character of their societies. They have restored land to indigenous communities and supported institution-building and socio-economic programmes for indigenous people.
1993 will help to focus the United Nations system on the special situation of indigenous people and on their needs. One aim of the Year is to provide help to indigenous people and communities in areas such as health, education, development and environment. The emphasis must be on practical action, in the form of concrete projects benefiting indigenous people. An important element of these programmes should be the participation of indigenous people in their planning, implementation and evaluation.

The commitment of the United Nations system to the cause of indigenous people is long-standing. It goes back to a time before the creation of the United Nations itself.
The International Year is being organized in partnership by the United Nations Centre for Human Rights and the International Labour Organisation (ILO).
Since its creation in 1919 the ILO has defended the social and economic rights of groups of those whose customs, traditions, institutions or language set them apart from the other sections of national communities. In 1953 the ILO published a study on indigenous people. In 1957 it adopted the very first international legal instruments specifically created to protect the rights of people whose way of life and existence were threatened by dominating cultures.
My own involvement in and commitment to these issues goes back to the time I was a member of the committee of experts of the ILO Convention in 1957, and its Rapporteur.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), as a part of its contribution to the World Decade for Cultural Development, has encouraged cultural expression and activities by indigenous people.
A major turning point came in 1970, when the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities recommended that a detailed study be made of discrimination against indigenous populations. The report provided information, definitions and recommendations for action by the United Nations. The work of Mr. Martinez Cobo, the Special Rapporteur, helped galvanize the United Nations system into action.
A new and non-paternalistic ILO Convention was produced in 1989.


For the past decade the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Population, which is open to all Indigenous people and their communities and organisations, has considered international standard and guidelines for the treatment of indigenous people. Over 600 people from all over the world attended the Working Group's last meeting, in Geneva in July.
Some indigenous people’s organizations are asking how the United Nations should now proceed. What should the mechanisms be for ensuring that the United Nations system consults, and takes account of, indigenous people? This is a matter for further reflection and discussion.
I have set up a Voluntary Fund for the International Year of the World's Indigenous People, to provide resources for practical assistance to indigenous people. I appeal to all Governments, non-governmental organizations and other institutions and individuals to contribute. Without a full financial commitment from Governments, the Year will not be the success we hope for.
It is important that this Year should see the situation of indigenous people brought into centre-stage as a subject of public awareness and debate. Members of the media, teachers, non-governmental organizations, and other Individuals, and Institutions will, I hope, help stimulate discussion and provide Information. Cultural events are extremely important in this regard.
But the really crucial role of the United Nations is to promote and protect the  human rights of Indigenous people. The way indigenous people are by States, and the international community will be a major test of the seriousness of our commitment to a genuinely universal human rights regime. If we are serious about development, political participation and human rights, we must address the special situation of Indigenous people.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

Soon this Assembly will be asked to consider a draft declaration on the rights of indigenous people. The adoption of such a declaration can be another milestone in the long struggle by indigenous people for recognition of their rights.
Agreeing on the text of the declaration and reaching consensus on the treatment of indigenous people will not be easy or straightforward. The situation of indigenous people varies widely. Some communities wish to preserve their distinctive ancient culture apart from the mainstream, while others seek the path of integration into modern society. Some members of indigenous communities may wish to leave them; others may wish to pursue traditional cultures without change.

Similarly, the policies adopted by States differ widely. The political and legislative history of the Indian and Inuit communities of Canada is different from that of the native peoples of Brazil; practices and attitudes, as well as the legal framework, are quite different in the United States as compared, say, to Ecuador. Australia and India, Botswana and Norway, approach indigenous affairs differently.
The balancing of individual and community rights is not easy, particularly when one civilization commands hugely greater material resources than the other. Human rights are universal but the promotion and the protection of human rights of indigenous people require a special sensitivity to particular situations.
One thing is clear: the human and community rights of indigenous people will flourish best in an atmosphere of respect and mutual tolerance. If the majority society understands the values and achievements of indigenous people, it will be far more prepared to uphold their human rights.
Education and public awareness are therefore important. We are making progress. It is now clearly understood that many indigenous people live in greater harmony with the natural environment than do the inhabitants of industrialized, consumer societies. And the medical and botanical knowledge of tribal peoples - especially on herbal medicines - has begun to be recognized as sources of valuable knowledge for modern medical science.
It will take time for the international community to achieve agreement on principles which protect the rights of indigenous people, and yet take account of the different situations across the world. By dedicating 1993 to indigenous people and the idea of partnership, we mark yet another milestone.
V47PV.S2
17

I believe that the Year will be the starting-point for two partnerships -one between indigenous people and States, and another between indigenous people and the United Nations.
Throughout 1993 let us listen to and work with the indigenous people. Unity through diversity is the only true and enduring unity.
We are building the future. I welcome the Year. I believe that we are in sight of justice for these most disadvantaged of people.
This meeting is directly addressed to indigenous peoples. But it. is of equal concern to all peoples of the world because the situation of indigenous peoples must surely prompt us to ponder more deeply human rights as they are today. Henceforth, we must realize that human rights are not only the rights of individuals. They are also collective rights - historic rights. We are discovering "new human rights", including first and foremost, cultural rights.
The twentieth century has virtually reduced the world to what some have called a planetary village - a village, perhaps, but provided that cultural diversity in it be preserved. But there is no certainty that the twentieth century will bequeath to future generations a positive inheritance, at least in this respect. A few months before he died, the French historian, Georges Dumezil, noted with dismay that, as the year 2,000 drew closer, the number of languages and dialects spoken throughout the five continents is half what it was in 1900. The modern world will therefore have proved to be a major destroyer of languages, of traditions and of cultures. These languages, traditions and cultures are foundering in the flood of mass communication whose instruments, too often, are in the service of the same cultures. And,
today, cultures that do not have powerful means of communication are threatened with extinction.	
We cannot acquiesce in this situation. Another name for the world is "diversity". What - sort of a universe would we have if there were no differences? What sort of a world would it be if there were only a single language? Of course, we are aware that - to quote Paul Valery - civilizations are mortal; but simply because they are mortal, we surely do not need to kill them off.	
To allow original languages, and different cultures and traditions to perish - this "non-assistance to endangered culture" - should, henceforth, be regarded as essentially a violation of human rights, an inadmissible violation. One could even go so far as to say that there can be no possible human rights without, at the same time, preserving cultural authenticity. The examples of the marginalization and then the disappearance of cultures have indicated that when a community is kept outside international life it is very difficult to maintain among its members even the most elementary human rights.
Thus, it is no longer possible for us to allow a single ethnocide to take place. Let us pledge that we will be more vigilant in this respect than we have been thus far; let us organize an alliance; let us sound the alarm as soon as a civilization, a language or a culture is in danger. This commitment, which should be one for the entire international community, represents, as I see it, the historic dimension of the International Year being inaugurated here this morning.

The year 1992 is indeed an excellent choice because our efforts to defend indigenous peoples has been given brilliant recognition .by the award of the Nobel Peace Prise to Mrs. Rigoberta Menchu. Mrs. Msnchu was thus honoured fort "her contribution to social justice and to reconciliation between different ethnic groups”. 
May I extend my warmest congratulations to the new Nobel Laureate. I am also very pleased to announce that, at our request, Mrs. Rigoberta Menchu has agreed to serve as goodwill ambassador for the International Year of the World's Indigenous People. When I had the pleasure and the honour of meeting Mrs., Menchu a few weeks ago here in New York, she told me what faith she had in what was- being done by the United Nations and expressed her moral support for the struggle we are waging in favour of human rights.
The International Year of the World's Indigenous People thus
coincides with the year in which we celebrate human rights, inter alia, by holding the World Conference on Human Rights next June at Vienna. In both of these instances what the international community is trying to illustrate is the same single value, the high value of any unique characteristic.	
It is high time for this, because technology in itself has an immense capacity to level differences, and if we are not careful, it will gradually reduce men and women to mere interchangeable parts. If this were to happen, the world will be limited to a single culture, a single language - in other words, it will be reduced to the lowest common denominator of dead cultures, and we shall be able to speak with a single voice only when we have nothing to say.
I said a few minutes ago that the situation of indigenous people concerns us all. By respecting them, by defending them, by helping them to take their place in the community of nations and in international life, we are protecting the world itself, in the conception we have of the world with all its diversity. And we are protecting each of our cultures, each of our peoples, each of the unique individuals that we all ultimately are.
The PRESIDENT: I wish to propose that the list of speakers in the debate should be be closed in half an hour.
it was so decided.
The. PRESIDENT: I therefore request that those representatives wishing to participate in the debate should inscribe their names on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
(The Presided)
I wish to propose further that, owing to time constraints, the length of statements in the debate should be limited to 10 minutes.
It was so decided.
PROGRAMME OF WORK
The PRESIDENT: I should like to make an announcement concerning the tentative programme of work of the General Assembly, particularly some changes and additions to the programme I had outlined previously.
First of all, I should like to inform the membership that we shall begin consideration of agenda item 143, "The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina" on Monday, 14 December. In this connection, the list of speakers on the item is now open.
The agenda items originally scheduled for Monday will instead be taken up on Wednesday, 16 December - that is, agenda item 33, "Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa", and agenda item 34, "United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa", will be taken up in the morning, and the reports of the Third Committee in the afternoon.
It happens, in fact, that draft resolutions submitted under agenda item 33 require additional time to permit consideration of their programme budget implications by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and by the Fifth Committee.
Furthermore, the completion and issuance of Third Committee reports also require additional time, in view of the fact that the Committee did not conclude its work until yesterday.
(Ihfi_££aaidfiRfc) I hope that on the remaining days of next week, in addition to the reports of the Main Committees, including the Second and Fifth Committees, we shall also consider all the draft resolutions, under various agenda items, which were being negotiated by the delegations concerned or which had programme budget implications to be considered by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee.
I now call on the representative of Canada to introduce draft resolution A47L.33.
Mrs. LANDRY (Canada) (interpretation from French): It is a great honour for Canada to introduce to the General Assembly, on behalf of its many sponsors, a draft resolution for the celebration of the International Year of the World's Indigenous People. I am also pleased to inform the Assembly that the Bahamas, Cyprus, Honduras, Panama, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain, Suriname, Tajikistan and Vanuatu have agreed to join in sponsoring the draft resolution.
Many Governments, contributing their experience and insights, have participated in the process which led to the present draft resolution. Mention should also be made of the contribution made by the indigenous representatives, whose advice and ideas have been a source of inspiration.
The objective of the Year is to strengthen international cooperation in seeking solutions to the problems faced by the world's indigenous communities.
(Mrs, Landry, Canada) Its theme, "Indigenous people - a new partnership", speaks of change, of progress in the relationships between indigenous people and the many nations of the international community. It speaks of efforts that have been made and continue to be made. It speaks, too, of the central role to be played by indigenous people in the planning, implementation and evaluation of the activities in 1993, and the years to follow. Previous resolutions incorporated into this draft resolution are explicit on this point.
The present draft resolution seeks to encourage various systems of government and public administration to take account of the special needs of indigenous people in the formulation of national policies instead of setting them apart from the societies in which they live. Each country can follow the path most appropriate for its particular situation.
Paragraphs 3 to 7 and paragraph 10 lay out the path to follow for the practical attainment of the social, cultural, environmental and economic objectives of the Year.
We are particularly pleased at the establishment of the Fund for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean. The relevant agreement was jigned at Madrid last July, on the occasion of the Second Ibero-American Summit, and communicated to the Secretary-General on 24 Novamber 1992. The agreement typifies the kind of support sought for attaining the objectives of the International Year.
Paragraphs 9 and 11 are supportive of the human-rights objective of the Year. For 10 years there have been discussions to develop a body of standards on the specific rights of indigenous people within the context
of the universal rights of all mankind. Enough significant progress has been made to bring the findings of the experts forward for consideration by Governments. In this connection, we are particularly grateful for the enlightened approach taken by the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, under the able and energetic leadership of its Chairman, Mrs. Erica Daes. We look forward to their report with great interest.
I now have a few words to say on hehalf of the Government of Canada.
The draft resolution does not attempt to address all the issues of concern to indigenous people. I doubt that any draft resolution could do so. But it does reflect the spirit of a new partnership. It opens up opportunities for indigenous communities to pursue freely their own cultural, economic and social goals without fear of assimilation and in harmony with the broader societies in which they live.
Never before in the history of the world has there been such a keen recognition of indigenous interests. The International Labour Organisation's Convention 169 and, more recently, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development have given a central place to indigenous concerns. Canada is proud of the work that Canadian aboriginal leaders, in partnership with our national representatives, were able to accomplish at the Rio Conference in bringing environmental concerns to the forefront, My colleague, Mr. Jean Charest, Minister of the Environment, also recently confirmed to the General Assembly Canada's continued commitment to the process initiated in Rio. It encourages us to honour the commitments we have made, and will continue to pursue, in this vital area.
This has been a historic year for human rights and indigenous peoples. A few weeks ago I had the honour of meeting Rigoberta Menchu, winner of the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize - the first indigenous person to be recognized for work in support of human rights.
For 10 years discussions have been going on to develop a body of norms on the specific rights of indigenous people within the context of universal human rights. Significant progress has been made.
Some indigenous people want discussions to continue at the level of an expert subcommittee in order to make more Governments aware of their aspirations. Many others believe that the time has come to consider adopting a declaration that brings together the principles under discussion in a charter of internationally recognized rights and freedoms.
On balance, Canada believes that in the light of the progress made the General Assembly could request that a draft declaration be brought forward in 1993, the International Year of the World's Indigenous People, for initial consideration at the intergovernmental level.
But even the adoption of a declaration of rights and freedoms for indigenous peoples will not be enough to ensure them their rightful place in the international community. There will be a continued need for the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, which, under the able and sensitive leadership of its chairperson, Mrs. Erica Daes, has contributed so much to advancing the cause of indigenous peoples. We shall want to consider carefully, with other Governments and indigenous peoples, a possible new mandate for the Working Group, (spoke in English)
The new partnership that we are launching here today is something which Canada has been working to establish with the aboriginal people within its own borders for a number of years. We still have a long way to go. We have suffered painful setbacks that have left scars that are only now beginning to heal. Still, we Canadians take pride in our efforts and feel an ever stronger sense of commitment to building a new relationship based on equality, justice and mutual understanding.

In September 1990 Canada's Prime Minister, the Right Honourable Brian Mulroney, captured the spirit of this new approach when he introduced the Government's native agenda in our Parliament. In describing the new relationship that Canada hopes to build, he issued a warning that offers a beacon to all the nations of the world as we embark on this important year. He cautioned that achieving our goal would take
"creativity and perseverance ... courage to see things as they are;
honesty to acknowledge them for what they have become, and the common resolve to correct them for future generations".
Canada's native agenda focuses on four main areas: accelerating the settlement of land claims; improving economic and social conditions on reserves; building a new relationship between aboriginal people and Governments; and addressing the concerns of aboriginal people in contemporary Canadian life. In many ways, 1992 was a red-letter year in progressing towards those objectives.
One achievement that attracted international attention was the Agreement signed between Canada and the Tungavik Federation of Nunavut to create the new territory of Nunavut by the year 2000. It will be a territory governed by aboriginal people, mainly Inuit, covering an area one-fifth the size of Canada - an area larger than many of the countries represented in the Assembly today.
As many representatives are aware, Canada has just concluded an extensive process of public consultation to renew our Constitution. What they may not know about is the historic breakthrough achieved by aboriginal people in the course of this process.
For the first time in our history, aboriginal leaders representing Canada's four national aboriginal associations joined the Prime Minister, provincial Premiers and territorial leaders as direct participants in the process of constitutional renewal. Together at the same negotiating table, they were able to reach unanimous agreement providing for constitutional recognition of aboriginal people's inherent right to self-government within Canada. The Government of Canada remains committed to proceeding with aboriginal self-government within the existing constitutional framework and in accordance with its current policies.
In addition to constitutional discussions, we have been pursuing a non-constitutional approach to a community-based form of self-government, as well as tripartite negotiations with aboriginal people living off-reserves, the Metis and the Provinces. Within these arrangements, a broad range of activities such as education, health care, justice, economic development, language and culture can be brought within the ambit of aboriginal self-government.
The people of Canada have clearly expressed their wish to see aboriginal people become our partners in the governance and development of our country. To this end, a Royal Commission on Aboriginal People is conducting an extensive inquiry in hundreds of aboriginal and other communities. It will then make recommendations to Parliament on a broad range of economic, social and cultural issues of concern to the aboriginal peoples of Canada.

But we cannot make progress on this or any other issue simply by looking back at past problems and injustices. We must also look forward to the world that we are creating for our children.
Canada intends to help build a better future for children, including indigenous children, through a Partners for Children Fund. And the needs of indigenous children have been recognized among the priorities of this Fund.
Canadian non-profit organizations and indigenous groups are being encouraged through this programme to submit projects to the Fund which support the aims of the World Summit for Children. Projects addressing the needs of indigenous children will be led by indigenous groups and organizations.
Let me conclude by expressing the hope that 1993 will find us with the wisdom and strength to build a new partnership with indigenous people which will bring all our children into a new world of tolerance, compassion and mutual respect.
Canada, and all the other sponsors of this commemorative draft resolution, pledge our full cooperation in the pursuit of the new partnership with the indigenous people of the world.
Mr, SARDENBERG (Brazil): The launching of the International Year of the World's Indigenous People is a unique event that marks an important moment in the activities of the United Nations. Over the years the Organization has understood the need to give special attention to the problems faced by various social groups that for one reason or another find themselves in a particularly vulnerable situation. That is very much the case of indigenous peoples.
(Mr, Sardenberg, Brazil)
Indigenous peoples have their own ways of life, their own languages and their own cultures, which often take root in a close relationship with the land they inhabit. They often need special protection and assistance from Governments.
Much to its credit, the United Nations has been able to emphasize not only the need for that special protection and assistance but also the important and irreplaceable contribution that indigenous peoples can make to national development.
Brazil has participated actively from the very beginning in the preparations for the International Year. We intend to join every effort to make the International Year a success, to make it a truly common endeavour that clearly defines a turning-point in the promotion of human rights and dignified standards of living for indigenous communities.'
As stands out clearly in all of the resolutions adopted on this matter, the International Year is not meant to be a social event or a frivolous celebration. It is not intended either to provide us with easy opportunities for exercises in rhetoric. On the contrary, it reflects the united view of all Member States that action-oriented efforts are urgently required to solve the problems faced by indigenous communities.
Indeed, the International Year provides us with a unique opportunity for pondering the various problems and difficulties with which indigenous communities are confronted and to face squarely the measures required to address those problems and difficulties. The adoption of such measures is a moral duty and is the political responsibility of each State towards its
' Mr. Mayorga Cortes (Nicaragua), Vice-President, took the chair.
(Mr, Sardenberg, Brazil) indigenous communities. In addition to that, international cooperation can and should make a significant contribution to national efforts to improve the situation of indigenous populations.
For that contribution to be positive and constructive and really to make a difference in the lives of indigenous populations, the activities undertaken within the context of the international year have to be pragmatic and results-oriented, as stressed by the Secretary-General in his introductory statement.
The resolutions adopted by the General Assembly on this question point out where the basic problems lies human rights, the environment, development, education and health. In all those areas a lot remains to be done to ensure that indigenous populations enjoy a better life and higher standards of living.
It is the view of the Brazilian Government that all our efforts must invariably be carried out within the strict limits of respect for the cultural diversity of indigenous groups. It is never too much to recall that the goal of development, a universal human aspiration, is not to abolish cultural differences but rather to allow different cultures to flourish and prosper in an ever greater degree of freedom and mutual respect.
Due account must be taken of the different situations of indigenous populations in various countries and, not least, within each country. Each particular situation calls for tailor-made initiatives responding to the specific needs of the communities concerned.
The International Year is based on the notion of a new partnership. That fundamental concept should be present in all our efforts. Indigenous groups
(Mr, Sardenberq, Brazil) can and must have their own voice in expressing their needs, their claims and their own views about how to solve their problems. We are convinced that each Government, in the planning and implementation of activities under the International Year, must listen attentively to that voice so that the initiatives we undertake can genuinely reflect the new partnership we want to build.
In that connection, we believe it is most appropriate that the programme of activities for the International Year calls for full consultations by each Government with indigenous groups. The participation of non-governmental organizations in the ceremony that will take place later today is an extremely encouraging sign.
Respect for human rights must be an essential component of all activities directed towards indigenous populations. The situation of vulnerability in which those populations often find themselves entails the need for particular attention and protection.
The future declaration on indigenous rights, on which the Commission on Human Rights should start working more actively in 1994, will set out basic standards of respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of indigenous peoples.
In Brazil, an important part of the effort to promote and protect the human rights of indigenous peoples is the programme relating to the demarcation of lands. Ensuring that indigenous lands are securely demarcated and respected by all is a major responsibility. It is an essential condition for guaranteeing to indigenous communities a fair opportunity to enjoy their
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil) human rights, to be able to make their own contribution to national development and to benefit from that development, within their cultures.
Of course, each Member State will define its own priorities for action within the context of the International Year. For Brazil, fulfilling the targets established by the Brazilian Constitution will continue to be at the top of the agenda.
(Mr. Sardenberg, Brasil) The Rio Conference highlighted the importance of natural environment to indigenous communities. There is a broad range of possible actions with respect to the relationship between indigenous communities and the environment. Among these, the Brasilian authorities value highly the promotion and utilization of knowledge on genetic resources and the organization of gene banks in conjunction with plants traditionally utilized by indigenous people, as well as the promotion and diffusion of traditional practices and technologies, with a view to facilitating the conservation of natural resources in indigenous areas through appropriate ecosystem management.
"Human rights", "land" and "environment" are key words in understanding the situation of indigenous people. For Brazil, these three crucial areas will provide essential guidelines to be kept in mind at all times in the planning and implementation of the programme of activities of the International Year. Encompassing all three areas is the need to promote development opportunities for indigenous populations, with full respect for their culture. To that end, it is imperative that the International Year make a significant contribution by mobilizing financial and technical resources for programmes that can be of concrete benefit to indigenous communities, especially those in developing countries.
It is our hope that the voluntary fund established for the International Year will be provided with adequate resources to ensure the effective implementation of result-oriented initiatives for the benefit of indigenous communities. The question of how to mobilize additional resources for such activities should be a major priority of the technical meeting that is to take place next year.
(M£'_J&£â£Sb££&_Ë£2^
The Brazilian authorities are finalizing the elaboration of our national programme of activities for the International Tear. In addition to overall questions of human rights, environment and development, specific proposals in several areas of direct interest to indigenous communities - especially the crucial areas of health and education - are being actively examined.
In the field of health care, it is envisaged that the activities to be developed will.attempt to place greater emphasis on preventive medicine, including puerperal assistance, epidemic control and epidemiological surveillance, basic sanitation measures, immunization campaigns and the training of indigenous health workers. The participation of indigenous communities in these programmes, including with a view to having traditional indigenous medicine incorporated in the delivery of health-care services, will be essential.	■'
With regard to education, the proposals under consideration are aimed at guaranteeing indigenous people better access to basic education, bearing in mind the need for greater participation by indigenous representatives in the elaboration and implementation of programmes of indigenous education. It is envisaged that such programmes should include teaching materials that reflect the socio-ethnic specificity of each group and that their implementation should include the training of indigenous personnel for the teaching profession.
Efforts undertaken in the context of the International Tear should also reflect the need to promote the culture of indigenous communities by, among other measures, improving school books concerning indigenous populations and contributing to the elimination of ethnic stereotypes and distorted images of indigenous cultures in the communications media.
(fc-SasMmL-teil)
We are convinced that as we proceed with the organization and
implementation of activities in the context of the International Year we shall have many opportunities to exchange views with other States and with our partners in the community of non-governmental organizations, with a view to enriching our own programme of activities and ensuring the most effective results.	,	.
Indigenous people throughout the world place in us and in this . Organization their best hopes and expectations. We must be ready to listen to their voices and to respond to their legitimate claims. Brazil is committed to that effort.’ ■	’
Mr. O'BRIEN (New Zealand): It gives me particular pleasure to participate in this special meeting to launch the International Year of the World’s Indigenous People, which is to be observed in 1993. The International Year has special relevance for New Zealand - a nation whose founding document, the Treaty of Waitangi, represents a compact between two races. Our delegation today includes a senior executive of Te Puni Kokiri - the Ministry of Maori Development - Ms. Miriama Evans, who has travelled from New Zealand to represent her Ministry here. A representative of the National Maori Congress has also come to take part in this launching ceremony.
From the outset, New Zealand has taken an active interest in the preparations for this International Year, having been one of the sponsors of the relevant resolutions and having participated in the two technical meetings that have taken place in Geneva. We are keen that it should be successful and meet its objectives.
(Mr. O'Brien, flew Zealand)
As has already been noted this morning, the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations has for several years been drafting a declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples. That task has now reached its final stage. It is possible that at its eleventh session in 1993 the Working Group will be able to complete its work on the draft. This is the general expectation, and New Zealand believes that, if it eventuates, it will represent an excellent contribution to the International Year of the World's Indigenous People.
New Zealand has participated in the Working Group each year, taking part in the preparation of the draft declaration. We have also taken part in the Working Group's annual review of developments. We believe that the process under way in New Zealand of honouring the promises made 152 years ago in the Treaty of Waitangi is relevant to he Working Group's proceedings.
Just as unanimity of thought, word rnd deed is sometimes difficult to achieve in this Assembly, we cannot expect the road to harmony between indigenous peoples and later arrivals to be without debate within our own individual nations. There are many views on how peaceful and prosperous coexistence can be advanced in New Zealand, both within Maoridom and within other sections of our society.
Here I should like to mention that in the context of the Treaty of Waitangi a historic agreement on fisheries has just been concluded in my country, between the Crown and the Maori. It is expected that the New Zealand Parliament will shortly pass legislation giving effect to this agreement. The New Zealand delegation to the eleventh session of the Working Group on Indigenous People will provide details of this agreement in its statement at that session.
(Wt-Q.'lMOTr Few Zealand) But there are some who consider that the fisheries agreement undermines the rights of Maori in New Zealand. However, it is seen almost universally as being fair to all parties and as resolving a long-standing and contentious issue. The two important points are, first, that there is a willingness to right the wrongs of the past and to protect Maori rights and, secondly, that there is a willingness by all parties to participate in dialogue to achieve progressive and positive change. The fisheries agreement has not been achieved without extensive public discussion and negotiation.
We are very pleased that Mrs. Dues, who has made such a sterling contribution as Chairperson of the Working Group on Indigenous People, is here today. We were grateful that Mrs. Daes was able to make time in her demanding schedule to visit New Zealand earlier this year. In the course of her extensive and intensive programme around my country, she discussed the draft declaration on the rights of indigenous people with a wide range of Government and other agencies and with the Maori. She also took the opportunity of these consultations to speak about the International Year and to explain its purposes.
(Mr, Q'Bries, >w_geaM) At the international level we are pleased to note that coordination for the Year is being undertaken by the Centre for Human Hights in Geneva. A small secretariat, including indigenous people, has, as we know, been established in the Centre to assist the Under-Secretary-General for Human Rights, who has been appointed as Coordinator of the International Year. It is good, of course, that a programme of activities is planned which includes the funding of projects for indigenous communities that are of direct benefit to them. We are encouraged that these projects are to be planned and developed in full consultation with indigenous people and to be implemented by them. They are to be funded from the special Voluntary Fund for the International Year, which the Secretary-General mentioned earlier this morning. I am pleased to announce that New Zealand will contribute $15,000 to that Fund. This contribution is being paid in Geneva today and we hope that it will promote, in a practical K-ay, promote the purposes of the International Year.
The New Zealand Government has been giving attention to national plans to mark the International Year. The Government has approved the establishment of a national committee to coordinate activities for New Zealand's observance of the Year. The committee will comprise three Government representatives from Te Puni Kokiri, the Department of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Women's Affairs; four Maori representatives from the Maori Women's Welfare League, National Maori Congress, Maori Language Commission and the New Zealand Maori Council; and one representative from the non-governmental-organization community.
The tasks of the committee are: to provide and promote a partnership perspective to projects that will commemorate the Year; to encourage agencies to contribute funds for the Year and to implement activities for it; to
(Mr, O'Brien, New Zealand) encourage the private and non-government sector to implement activities for the Year; and to assist, as appropriate, the promotion of any New Zealand role or profile in international activities.
Te Punj Koki ri will have the lead responsibility for the observance of the Year in New Zealand, will provide the secretariat for the national Committee and will initiate a number of activities. New Zealand is accordingly well placed, we think, to observe the International Year in 1993, with the structure of its national committee having been decided.
Non-government activity in my country will be an important ingredient of the Year and will underpin the Year's success from the point of view of both indigenous people and Government. The Government is aware of plans already made by Maori to host several major conferences on indigenous issues, and with international participation, during 1993.
In conclusion, New Zealand looks forward to observing the International Year of the World's Indigenous People at both the national and the international levels. The Year's theme, "Indigenous People — a new partnership", encourages, as the Secretary-General said this morning, the development of new relationships between States and indigenous peoples and between the international community and indigenous peoples. That partnership must, above all, be equitable and based on mutual respect and understanding. New Zealand is happy to co-sponsor the draft resolution introduced by Canada this morning.
Mlii—CAKQBAU (Fiji); i have the honour to address this special meeting of the General Assembly, convened to mark the beginning of the 1993 International Year of the World's Indigenous People, on behalf of my
(Mrs, Cakobau, Fiji) Government, the sovereign, democratic Republic of Fiji. As I am a member of an indigenous population myself, speaking today is a special personal honour.
We in Fiji welcome the decision by the United Nations to mark 1993 as the International Year of the World's Indigenous People. It is our hope that the Year will help to draw international attention to the situation of indigenous peoples and to highlight the unique contribution which they have made, and continue to make, to global social and economic developments. It will help us to evaluate initiatives already taken to assist indigenous peoples and, most importantly, to reassess our programmes in support of indigenous peoples.
Fiji's Prime Minister, the Honourable Major-General Sitiveni Rabuka, on 8 October, at this year's session of the General Assembly, expressed sincere and deep appreciation of the valuable efforts of the Working Group on Indigenous People in drafting the Universal Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People. In addition, he expressed our Government's support for the declaration of 1993 as the International Year of the World's Indigenous People. My presence here on this historic and special occasion is continuing affirmation of the significance which Fiji places on indigenous rights and interests.
The theme for the Year, "Indigenous People - a new partnership", has been appropriately selected. This, we believe, will certainly help to provide a much-needed framework within which the new relationships between States and indigenous peoples, and among the international community, can be developed. This new partnership must, however, be based on mutual respect and understanding if the process of dialogue and consultation with one another is to be meaningful and effective.
'	(Mrs, Cakpbau, Fiji)
Indigenous peoples are among the neglected and most vulnerable people in the world. They are people whose rights have not always been adequately recognized, their cultures have been ignored and their development has been hampered. They are among the world's poorest people and, equally, have often been alienated from the decision-making process in their own lands.
In this regard my Government fully supports the stated objectives of the Year. Most fundamental among those are the need to ensure the fullest participation of the indigenous people in decisions affecting their development; the need to provide adequate funding for projects of direct benefit to the indigenous people; and the need to improve their knowledge and awareness of their own rights and responsibilities. The fulfilment of these objectives requires a common and concerted effort by the wider international community. In order especially to ensure the greatest possible involvement of indigenous people in the planning, implementation and evaluation of programmes and projects affecting their living conditions, there will be a need to examine appropriate mechanisms by which consultations on these matters could be improved.
The programme of activities and projects for the Year carries our full support. It clearly demonstrates the need for a well-established infrastructure for furthering the objectives of the Year at both national and international levels.
At the national level, we must establish national committees to prepare a national programme of activities, raise public awareness and encourage the fullest participation of indigenous peoples in all activities undertaken in connection with the Year.
(Mrs, Cakobau, Fiji) From the United Nations system, we shall be looking forward to. the funding of concrete projects for the indigenous peoples. As envisaged in the programme of activities, we feel that the organization of an international trade fair of goods produced by the indigenous peoples is an excellent idea, and we wish to see preparatory work on this trade fair begin as early as possible.
The Year will be an occasion to highlight the uniqueness of indigenous cultures and the value of those cultures in the present world. The indigenous people have developed techniques and skills that have allowed them to survive and flourish in some of the most fragile ecosystems. And this they have managed without causing serious depletion of resources or damage to the environment. In particular, indigenous peoples have knowledge of plants that are suitable as medicines, and to this day traditional medicine continues to be a useful source of Western pharmacology. As noted by the World Commission on Environment and Development, tribal and indigenous peoples' lifestyles can offer modern society many lessons in the management of complex forest, mountain and dryland ecosystems.
The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), convened in June this year, supported Principle 22 in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. This Principle states that
"Indigenous people and their conununities and other local communities have a vital role in environmental management and development because of their knowledge and traditional practices. States should recognize and duly support their identity, culture and interests and enable their effective participation in the achievement of sustainable development." (ACQNF, 15126 (Vol. D. P. 12)
Another important document adopted at UNCED - Agenda 21 - devotes a separate chapter to strengthening the role of indigenous peoples in the establishment of arrangements to foster active participation of indigenous peoples in the formulation of national policies, laws and programmes relating to resource management and other development processes that may affect them.
Furthermore, the indigenous peoples have contributed significantly to the arts, sciences, technology and other areas of human knowledge and endeavour. But there is little recognition of the contribution of indigenous cultures, through their music, arts and craft, to the work of non-indigenous artists and thinkers. Nor is there full and proper recognition of their knowledge of a wide variety of plants for food, medicine and other purposes I mentioned earlier.
While it may be appropriate to recognize the historical debt of modern society to the indigenous peoples' knowledge and discoveries, we must also consider ways and means of protecting and compensating the present-day knowledge of indigenous peoples. As a very minimum, the knowledge of indigenous peoples has given, and will continue to give, vital clues to scientists, thereby saving them expensive research and development time. We are aware that this subject has been discussed at several seminars organized under the broad heading of international property rights, and we hope that something useful will eventuate from them,
We in Fiji hope for concrete results from this Year. The Working Group on Indigenous Populations must continue to provide an open forum for discussion, cooperation and dialogue between indigenous peoples. States and non-governmental organizations. It has an important mandate to review developments in the promotion and protection of the human rights of the
(Mrs, CakQbau, Fiji) indigenous peoples, and to give special attention to the development of standards. It would be highly fitting if work on the draft declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples were to be concluded during 1993.
We welcome the new principles that have been adopted with respect to the fundamental rights of the indigenous peoples. For example, article 30 of the newly adopted International Labour Organisation Convention concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples refers to indigenous peoples' rights to be fully informed about their rights and duties in their own languages. It also refers to the indigenous peoples' rights to participate in, and to take control of, their own development.
The Convention further calls for the consolidation and strengthening of indigenous societies and their cultures and traditions through control over development affecting them and their territories. Such action is to be based on their own needs and value systems, and comprehensive participation in all other relevant development activities within and among States. We wish also to underscore here the Convention's recognition of the collective and individual rights to maintain and develop their ethnic and cultural characteristics and identities, including the rights of peoples and individuals to respect for their self-identification. These rights include also the right of each indigenous people to pursue its own cultural, political and economic development.
I now wish to allude briefly to my country, Fiji. Allow me to shed some light on the situation regarding the indigenous population in Fiji - a situation which, in the recent past, has attracted some attention both locally and overseas.
The indigenous people in Fiji as at 1991 was estimated to number 366,000 out of an estimated total population of 750,000 - less than half of the population. The new Constitution of Fiji, adopted on 25 July 1990, however, gives the indigenous Fijians a majority of seats in the House of Representatives in order to guarantee, protect and promote their special indigenous position. It also contains entrenched provisions in relation to native land and Fijian affairs.
The Constitution recognizes the Great Council of Chiefs, also known as the Bose Levu Vakaturaga, as an important institution in the social, political and economic life of the Taukei-Ni-Vanua - the Fijian people. This recognition is in line with the historical role of the Great Council of Chiefs in guiding the destiny of Fijians.
(¡ÈMxJ^aax-Eiji)
The Great Council of Chiefs derives its authority from the status of its members associated with their chiefly lineage. As a consequence, our new Constitution formally recognizes the Great Council of Chiefs and has vested in it a number of important functions. In addition to appointing the President for a five-year term, this chiefly institution selects 24 Fijians for appointment as senators to the 34-member Senate. The Fijian majority in the Senate is to ensure the protection of Fijian interests, customs, land and traditions.
In addition to its concern for the Fijian people, our Constitution is guided by the protective provisions in the Constitutions of several other Member States of the United Nations and the recognition that these countries give to the special rights of the indigenous people in their countries. The international community’s growing awareness of and sympathy for the cause of indigenous groups was a source of added inspiration. The Constitution also takes account of the 1989 Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention adopted by the International Labour Organization, which I mentioned earlier.
It should also be pointed out that our Constitution was formulated by an independent, multiracial commission of prominent individuals who visited all parts of the country and were guided by the views and opinions of the people, and whose report and recommendations, after months of study and deliberations, were unanimous.
The Constitution does not disenfranchise any non-Fijians nor does it deprive them of their rights. As a matter of fact, the Constitution places great emphasis on fundamental rights, freedoms and representation. An elaborate Bill of Rights was formulated in 1990 and made part of the Constitution. The individual rights conform to all major United Nations
■	(MES4_^&&&aii<JEiii)
instruments relating to the protection of human rights. Among the rights specifically guaranteed are the rights to life, liberty, security of the person, the protection of the law, freedom of conscience, expression, assembly and association, and protection for the privacy of house and other property and from deprivation of property without compensation. Every person in Fiji is entitled to these fundamental rights and freedoms, regardless of race, sex, place of origin, political opinions, colour, religion or creed.
I also wish to add that at this year's South Pacific Forum, which was held in the Solomon Islands, Fiji mooted the idea of an indigenous regional conference, which was well received by the Forum island countries. Fiji is of the firm conviction that security and stability in the South Pacific region are related to how well we address and accommodate indigenous interests, particularly as an overwhelming majority of the island States are largely indigenous in character.
. In conclusion, I wish to stress that Fiji accords considerable importance to the International Year of the World's Indigenous People. This is why we supported General Assembly resolution 46128 last year proclaiming this important event. We believe doing this will provide the world community with a good opportunity to step up its efforts to improve the living conditions of indigenous peoples and collectively help resolve the problems they face, and also at the same time ensure that their rights are protected. We hope that the programme of activities envisaged for the Year will lead to global concern for the life and welfare of indigenous peoples.
Much can be gained from the full involvement in all facets of planning, implementation and evaluation of programmes of activities for the Year. Moreover, indigenous peoples should be involved in all aspects of the decisions concerning the activities of the Year that will be affecting them.
A47PV.82 53	v
(NE;LtdC4'Q!?ftUt.
All in all, the success of the Year will depend on the funds that Member States will be willing to allocate to the Year. We hope that all countries will contribute generously to this worthy cause upon which this world body is beginning to embark.
We in Fiji see the International Year of the World's Indigenous People as a major step forward in the cause of the indigenous peoples of the world. Indeed, we believe that such a move will have a more positive and pragmatic impact on developmental objectives in the developing world, while on the international scene it can only strengthen and promote a deeper humane and more sensitive understanding of indigenous life, which, in turn, will enrich our common humanity.
Ms, GILES (Australia): I am honoured on this momentous occasion to affirm, on behalf of my Government, Australia's strong commitment to the International Year of the World's Indigenous People and its theme of new partnership. That concept of partnership is underlined by the fact that many representatives of indigenous peoples are here today to join with us in making this inauguration a success. My Government is particularly pleased that indigenous representatives, including prestigious Australian indigenous leaders, will have the opportunity to put directly to us and to the world their concerns and their aspirations.
Australia sees the International Year as only the start of what must be a long-term process of building understanding between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples throughout the world. At the national level, a variety of well-chosen activities to celebrate the Year will certainly have beneficial effects in increasing awareness of issues affecting indigenous peoples.
(Ms. Giles, Australia)
However, those benefits will be ephemeral if there is no close cooperation between Governments and indigenous groups in planning and implementing those activities and if there is no mechanism for evaluating the experiences of the Year and ensuring that programmes take full account of the genuine needs and aspirations of indigenous groups.
(MsbUaUssx-Jtìiafcralia)
At the international level, too, there is a need for improved understanding of the complex issues involved in responding to the needs of indigenous peoples. The United Nations system itself must use the Year to come to grips with these issues and to draw conclusions from the activities of the Year to enable appropriate new directions to be set in consultation with relevant indigenous groups. The meeting between the United Nations agencies and indigenous representatives is to be applauded as a valuable first step towards establishing dialogue and partnership.
Australia has been pleased to assist the United Nations in preparing for the Year, in particular through the secondment to the Centre for Human Rights in Geneva of an indigenous Australian, who will continue to work with the Centre throughout the Year. Australia will also support the Year through contributing to the Voluntary Fund established by the Secretary-General.
I am happy to say that in Australia public concern about the need to redress the history of dispossession and disadvantage of indigenous Australians continues to grow. In September 1991 a national process of reconciliation was established under the guidance of a Council comprising 25 prominent Australians, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and non-indigenous Australians. The Council's aims are, first, to promote a deeper understanding by all Australians of the histories, cultures, past disposition and continuing disadvantages of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and of the need to redress such disadvantages; secondly, to foster a commitment from government at all levels in Australia to cooperate in addressing progressively Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander disadvantage in all fields; and, thirdly, to consult with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and the wider community on whether reconciliation would be
.	(Ms. Giles, Australia)
advanced by a formal document, or documents, and to make recommendations on ths nature and content of any such documents.
The process of reconciliation has been formulated to keep faith absolutely with the aspirations of Australia's indigenous peoples and to open up the potential for a substantial evolution in indigenous and non-indigenous relations in the lead-up to the centenary of Australian national government in the year 2001. It is the Australian Government's intention to work in close consultation with indigenous groups to ensure that activities during the Year appropriately highlight this process of reconciliation and give it added impetus.
My Government also hopes that the Year will effectively highlight other steps towards new partnerships between non-indigenous and indigenous peoples in Australia. One such step is the Government's response to a report of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody. The Royal Commission investigated 99 deaths that occurred between 1980 and 1989 and found that those who died were victims of entrenched and institutionalized racism and discrimination. The Australian Government supported virtually all of the Royal Commission's 339 recommendations and is committed to spending an additional $400 million over the next five years to address the underlying causes of deaths in custody. To ensure proper follow-up to the recommendations a detailed regime has been established to hold Australian Governments accountable for their obligations, including an annual
. state-of-the-nation report on human rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Federal Government will be appointing a commissioner for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice to the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission.
(MsuJzilftSx-JaatEalla)
A momentous development for indigenous peoples is the recent decision by the High Court of Australia to recognise a form of native title for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. This follows a challenge by Koiki Mabo and others to certain State laws in respect of the status of traditional owners of Murray Island in the Torres Strait. The High Court's decision is regarded by jurists and historians as a major step foward in the common law interpretation of the doctrine of communal native title. It rejects the essentially racist notion of terra nullius, which asserted that the land was desert and unoccupied, and by which the dispossession and oppression of the indigenous peoples of Australia was previously justified.
Reflected in all these developments is the positive approach that Australia is taking towards the broad issue of the rights of indigenous peoples to self-determination. Australia's is one of the few Governments to have supported the inclusion of language referring to self-determination in the draft declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples being negotiated in the Working Group on Indigenous Populations. While also recognizing the legitimate concerns of States to preserve their territorial integrity, we believe specific recognition of the right of self-determination for indigenous peoples as separate and distinct peoples will assist them to overcome the barriers to full democratic participation in the political processes by which they are governed and to enjoy the full range of human rights.
However, given the variety of circumstances in which indigenous people find themselves, we should not prescribe the exact form that self-determination should take. It should encompass a range of possibilities. In our view, a system that guarantees full and genuine participation and fundamental human rights, and recognizes the special position of indigenous peoples, could provide an adequate and practical
(Ms, Giles, Australia) realization of self-determination. The Australian Government hopes that among the achievements of the International Year will be substantial progress towards international consensus on this fundamental issue.
As an integral part of the Year's activities, the Australian Government will support the holding of workshops, seminars and conferences. In June 1993 the Constitutional Centenary Foundation will hold a conference on the recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the Australian Constitution. In July the second International Indigenous Young People's Conference will be held in Darwin. In December the World Indigenous Peoples' Education Conference will be held in Wollongong. These meetings will involve participation by indigenous groups from other countries and by international experts on indigenous issues. We hope that the discussions and results of the meetings will not only advance and strengthen international bonds but also generate ideas that could be used in other countries to develop effective partnerships between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples.
The true significance of the International Year of the World's Indigenous People lies not so much in the activities that are planned to mark it as in the opportunity that those activities provide for indigenous and non-indigenous peoples to build new partnerships based on improved mutual understanding and awareness. This concept of partnership is crucial to the achievement of the Year's goals: the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language and religion, and the strengthening of international cooperation for the solution of problems faced by indigenous communities in such areas as human rights, the environment, development, education and health. Let us all genuinely grasp the opportunity that the Year provides.
Mr, RIVERA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, let me extend fraternal greetings to all on behalf of the indigenous peoples of Nicaragua. May the Creator bestow his blessings upon all of us in this Assembly.
The indigenous peoples of my country are pleased to have the opportunity to be officially represented and to participate at this session, which will surely echo around the world when we officially inaugurate the International Year of the World's Indigenous People; Nicaragua is grateful for the honour of being able to address you here through me.
Now that the turbulent, confrontational five hundredth anniversary of the "meeting of two worlds” has passed - an anniversary that has raised so many questions - the opening of the Year dedicated to indigenous people provides a most opportune forum for nations, States and Governments, and for all men and women of conscience, to focus their thoughts and deeds on the world's indigenous peoples, whose struggle to survive and whose age-old cultural contribution - at times ignored, at other times silenced - has unquestionably shaped the personality, lifa and spirit of the modern world.
This immensely important event cannot be allowed to pass as just one amongst so many others, because beating in the breast of every indigenous representative here is the history and life-experience of heroic generations that have suffered constant aggression and borne all forms of colonization, exploitation and discrimination - generations of our people that have struggled to resist efforts to dispossess us of our lands, mutilate our native languages - the highest expression of our civilizations - dilute our very blood in a mestizohood that spelt peonage, and - perhaps the cruellest cut of
A47PV.82 .	'	.	'®2' ’ ■ '
(Mr. Rivera, Nicaragua) all - in a tragic confrontation between the civilisations, to wrest our very minds from us through the constant and alienating imposition of foreign religions, customs and ways of thinking.
But there is also in each and every one of us the life-force of our peoples that has been passed'down from generation to generation; there is in us their collective spirit of survival, their heroic ability to fight back. Our peoples are like gnarled thousand-year-old trees that are still today spreading their seed and putting forth shoots. These are peoples of martyrs whose voices, resurrected, now flourish from the high, bleak wastes of the Andes to the lush shores of the Caribbean. They are peoples whose heroes are of such towering stature that they have survived the treacherous march of time to inspire States and countries of the world to relive and extol in them their highest values of leadership, popular appeal and foresight. They are peoples of sages, of men who identified themselves deeply with the natural world, with their environment. These were the only human beings who knew, and have bequeathed to us, the right way to preserve their modus vivendi with their ecosystem, to protect the natural environment and maintain the resources that made their land the generous and protected source of bounty that it is - the world's patrimony of living nature that makes ecological balance possible even today, as it offers us a bridge between man and his environment in a harmonious conjunction of factors whose beneficial action makes it possible for life on Earth to continue to survive. In this respect perhaps more than any other, all nations - because they are still in our debt - must recognize our contribution and wisdom, and the vital link between indigenous peoples
(Mr^wst.HiíamBal and tiie environment. They should do so by promoting our authentic ethnic development and our full enjoyment of the natural resources our peoples have guarded so jealously for so many centuries.
In the unyielding calendar, which bears the powerful imprint of our peoples, there have been tries, on many occasions and in many epochs, when it seemed that nothing was happening; but there is a sea change spreading throughout the world, as if on the hide drums of our forebears. The actions of indigenous peoples are bearing fruit and, before the eyes of the world, the revitalization of our cultures is showing itself to be unstoppable. Our languages are being recognized, with their structures and their dynamism, and in some countries they have been placed on an equal footing with the so-called official languages. Our artistic creations are reaching the peaks of endeavour in all areas: painting, sculpture, music, dance - even in literature, where we are no; just the objects of analysis or picturesque characters from a colourful folklore but rather vital players and the creators of momentous works.
In the economic arena, with our own traditional methods of production, the rational use of our natural resources, the massive contribution of our labour force and our capacity for generating goods, it is indisputable that we are contributing to the progress and development of each and every one of our countries.
In the social field, our social dynamic is interwoven with the other peoples and human groupings along a two-way street of mutual enrichment; they and we are offshoots of a single stem, differentiated but indivisible; our presence demands recognition by all governments.
. A47PV.82 .	; ' .	.	' " 66 . ' '	.
.	(Mr. Rivera, Nicaragua)
The Ibero-American Indigenous Fund collects and systematizes all of these things. Above all, it demonstrates a keen interest in them and takes a new approach. Our countries are Signatories to this fund, whose purpose is to sponsor and give direct support to our integral development. Thus, , Convention 169 of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) marks a new phase in the work relations of our peoples. This very inauguration of the International Year of the World's Indigenous People and the efforts to draft international instruments on indigenous people's rights represent clear successes achieved through the indomitable resistance of our peoples. But we are not being granted any gift, and words alone cannot restore us to a life full of possibilities. Our unwavering ability to flourish in our land and among ourselves is what enables us to surmount all obstacles. The historic truth of every step we have taken - big or small, but irrefutable, unpostponable and complete - has brought us the world's universal respect. Here I should like to express recognition for the efforts undertaken by the organizations and specialized agencies of tT.' ited Nations and some Member States that have been sensitive to the demands and the needs of the indigenous peoples of the world.
Perhaps what was missing, the element that we were lacking, will finally become flesh and blood now, during the International Year of the World's Indigenous People, just as our shamans, our wise men and our priests had prophesied. From the four cardinal points we are now moving forward; the drums of the Mexica gods accompany us; the chants of the Mayan temples forge our spirit and comfort us; the flesh of the Miskito warriors is transmuted and rejuvenated in our own flesh; the quipus from the Inca kingdom serve reminders
-	(Mr.-Rivero, Nicaragua)
■ of our history; the visionary poems of the Quitu-Caras protect our shadows.
The Aymara bombo drums, those virile seashells, announce, to one and all, our footsteps and our sense cf fraternity in the manifold unity and solidarity Of the indigenous peoples - a unity that by right takes pride of place in the world: not in the spirit of mere vindication or testimony, but rather with the conviction of our thoughts and actions, in the belief that our reality and our contributions are vital to all States and Governments.
Today's world, at the close of the second millenium, requires us to be the contemporaries of the future. Our commitment is to help our peoples attain the scale and scope demanded by the signs of the times. We must now focus, on an era of peace, understanding and mutual coexistence without concessions or compromises that would rupture universal harmony and fraternity.
It is therefore the moment for us, as indigenous peoples propelled ' forward by this idea, this destiny that we can no longer deny, to make our presence much more visible iu and essential to the actions taken by our States. No event, past or present, can impede us any longer, for while it is true that we are demanding rights that have been continually deferred, we also have the mandatory obligation, like all human beings, to seek the welfare and the grandeur of our peoples and countries.
But it is also the moment - without further delay, without any more gaps, lyrical statements and hortatory declarations - for the Governments of the States in which we exist to recognize our historical rights and give us access to decision-making, to concrete participation in the design, follow-up and implementation of major national goals that are to the benefit of all and that allow us also to have genuine self-government, as has been achieved in some of our countries through agreement with the Government or through autonomy laws,
(Mr,..................................................KiY9M.-Wi9aF.wa) which enable us to use our resources, maintain our own geographic areas, be responsible for ethnic developjnt and share, in harmony with the other human groups that are members of our societies, the plans, projects and programmes for real and sustainable economic and social development. In this recognition of rights, to all indigenous peoples of the world the land represents the very basis of our existence, for it is our element and represents our own indivisible universe, our inheritance; no one can uproot us from it, because possession of this land is the material base for the community that ensures our survival and our historical memory.
In this way we will be able to overcome the unjust events that have hampered our development, distorted relations between our peoples and prevented us from attaining self-sufficiency and self-determination by subjecting us to schemes belonging to the past and now without validity.
On this occasion, it is proper for all sectors of the world to think about the situation that has been imposed upon the indigenous peoples. Without a doubt, as this International Year is inaugurated, there are no just reasons for complacency or conformism, but only for the recognition that there is much to be corrected and changed. We must work together in seeking a common path towards historical justice for our peoples, on this Earth that we all share. We must bend every effort to achieve new and positive relations between States and indigenous peoples. At all events, as our current struggle progresses, we are optimistic about the future, certain that the historic vindication of our peoples chrough the establishment of solidarity will embrace an ever-growing number of national and international sectors.
(Mr. Rivera Nicaragua)
And what about the role '¿hat the indigenous peoples play in pacification, stability and governability of our convulsed and impoverished nations, some of which exist in conditions of enormous violence? Minority groups can no longer be described as having no importance or significance, because we constitute an enormous, robust presence and we play a fundamental role in these issues. In the fields, in the cities - in whatever circumstances - our contribution to achieving and maintaining peace is indispensable. This is evidenced by the fact that we in Nicaragua used to be ignored; we were allowed to fall by the wayside and were consigned to serfdom. As a result, the Government - finding itself in confrontation with our people, who understood what their rights should be and would not allow themselves to be humiliated - had to desist. It eventually gave in and lost all credibility and power. Thus, without our support, without what we represent, without what we are, it will be impossible to ensure genuine peace, stability and democracy, and it will be impossible to achieve effective governance in our respective countries.
In the case of Nicaragua, the indigenous peoples, particularly the . Miskito, the Sumo and the Rama, not only have contributed effectively to the transition towards peace and stability, but are continuing to participate in the effort to achieve national reconciliation and democratization.
The indigenous peoples are the central flame of the major solar cultures that have become part of th, many other cultures that make up this world. But we have our own personality, our own value system; we are sincere in our search for an era of world peace, harmony and progress.
We want to be the guarantors of the process that is changing mankind. Our efforts, combined with those of the other peoples with which we share this
(Mr. Rivera, Nicaragua) world, to forge the respect of Governments and States for our rights will not only serve as a model, but will herald a new era of well-being for all peoples.
In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of our indigenous peoples, to request the Assembly to adopt the following measures:
First, the issuance, during this international Year, of a universal declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples;
Secondly, the creation of a specialized division for indigenous peoples and the appointment of an Assistant Secretary-General for Indigenous Affairs;
Thirdly, the establishment of a specific programme for the integrated discussion of all matters pertaining to indigenous peoples; and
Fourthly, an intensification of the efforts begun at the World Summit, specifically those contained in Chapter 26 of Agenda 21.
Long live our age-old Indian America! Millions of voices, raised in unison, call for your rebirth.
Mr. SOMAVIA (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I have had occasion to speak from this rostrum on many occasions, but I must confess that I do so today with a special feeling because this meeting should have occurred a long, long time ago, and we must recognize that the United Nations is politically indebted to the indigenous peoples of the world.
What brings us here today? The promotion of pluralism; respect for diversity; recognition of the indigenous peoples' reverence for nature; their contribution to the values and cultures of contemporary societies; the immense human wealth which stems from those who before anyone else were in charge of our Earth.
There are two fundamental reasons why the Government of Chile wanted to participate in this ceremony of particular interest to the indigenous peoples
(li^isffldLdaila) of the world and to the development of an international system that recognizes their unique attributes and values within new concepts of political, cultural and economic cooperation:
First - and this is a matter of national pride - with the advent of a democratic government, Chile has embarked upon a new stage: one in which pluralism, in general, and ethnic and cultural diversity, in particular, is considered a major contribution to development and to the progress of the human race. Prior to the election of President Patricio Aylwin, we, in conjunction with indigenous organizations, produced a draft programme for the integrated development of Chile's indigenous peoples.
On the basis of that ethical and political reappraisal of the problem, we initiated a process of institutional and normative development within our domestic legal system, in accordance with international instruments relating to the subject of indigenous peoples and the .^¿lication of universal documents on human rights to indigenous peoples. We also encouraged a change in public attitudes and a heightened social awareness of the rights and spiritual and cultural values of these peoples. In that manner we have sought a fuller understanding of history, without which no society can have any destiny.
(Mr. Somavia, Chite) The second reason why we have chosen to express our views here is that there is a need to reflect our understanding of the International Year of the World's Indigenous People as the beginning of a new epoch in which human rights for all acquire a dimension for peoples hitherto marginalised, as is highlighted in the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, which has been approved by the Third Committee and will soon be put to the Assembly.
These ceremonies should represent a practical political commitment, and not just be an occasion for rhetoric; the international community should recognize the need to involve those sections of the population about whom we are talking in political decision-making and plans for cooperation, with the necessary respect for their cultural values.
Consideration by the United Nations of the subject of indigenous 1 >oples has occupied an important place in the work of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Working Group on Indigenous Populations, the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and all other bodies which deal with the complex subject of minorities. I must stress that recognition of the right to diversity, which does not necessarily call into question the unity of the nation State, is central to the subject we are discussing. Diversity must be considered in a multicultural context. That is how we should approach incorporating the indigenous sectors of the population into the concept of sustainable development, where they can prove their worth as part of their society.
(Mr. Somavla, Chile) On this basis, we deem it necessary to point out certain aspects which my Government considers should be gone into more deeply so that the International Year we are inaugurating today may contribute effectively to the genuine development of indigenous peoples.
The first aspect that must be taken into account is of a philosophical and juridical nature. The Year should reiterate recognition of indigenous peoples' special identity, and reject approaches involving assimilation. This would give rise to respect for their juridical and political concepts, and their religious values, the preservation of their places of worship, education in their own languages, the teaching of their historic realities, and the maimer in which they resolve their internal conflicts. Here there emerges a concept of ethnic-cultural unity which should be fully realized in nation States, it should be an element of integration within diversity, but it also presents challenges for the international community, challenges directly linked to the philosophical problems, which have already been highlighted, of cooperation and development.
A second matter for consideration in this International Year should be the elimination of any form of ethnic or racial discrimination against indigenous peoples. The traumatic ethnic experiences in the international arena today should prompt in every human being condemnation of any expression of racism or xenophobia. Dealing with the whole issue of indigenous peoples cannot result in intolerance and discrimination in a new guise.
(Mr, sanagiax-Chils)
A third level of analysis relates to the need to incorporate into planning, executing and evaluating programmes and projects of bodies ■ within the United Nations system the diversity of societies in countries in which various ethnic groups live together. The direct participation of such communities will make it possible to avoid the imposition of scientific and technological models that may be rejected by the very communities they are intended to benefit.
In most of our societies the indigenous sectors are the most impoverished. That is why this Year should be a point of departure for these vulnerable groups to become masters of their own destiny, domestically and internationally, with genuine access to goods and services. If anyone knows poverty, unemployment, marginality and non-integration into society, it is the indigenous sector of our contemporary world.
Therefore, it 4s pleasing to be able to say today, in this Hall, that after all that has been done, with everything that this meeting represents, we have the opportunity to deal with these problems with a now political will, because yesterday consensus was achieved at the United Nations on convening a world summit for social development, where we shall seek new and creative answers to the traditional problems of poverty, unemployment and social integration, which in one way or another affect all our societies in both the North and the South. In this search for new answers to these problems indigenous wisdom will be welcome and necessary. This fact should be reflected by action on the following central ideas.
(MuJOTaYi». Chile) The first is the international community's concern ebout the
possible consequences of development models on indigenous lands and cultures;	.
The second is the importance of understanding the relationship between indigenous peoples and the environment. Their respebtful, harmonious relationship with nature constitutes a message of hope for those who have to make political decisions in order to- solve the serious environmental problems with which humanity must grapple, as is explicitly recognized in Agenda 21.
Thirdly, there is the importance of establishing room for dialogue between policy-makers, organizations, agencies and financial institutions of the international system and representatives of the indigenous -communities. Explicit recognition of the role off non-governmental organizations can have an extraordinarily positive effect in implementing what has been called a new partnership. In this context, the technical meeting on the International Year has contributed, and can make a further valuable contribution, to reorienting this new dimension of the subject, to which all peoples aspire.
The matters I have outlined will make it possible to preserve a proper balance between, on the one hand, the civil and political rights and on the other hand, the economic, social and cultural rights of indigenous peoples. Only with a proper relationship between those two groups of rights can we give expression to a concept of sustainable development with full recognition of the special position of indigenous peoples. We must open up the United Nations system to direct participation of these communities in cooperation for development.
A47PV.82 .	.	60 - ■ "	‘
(ME^JîsmaY^^
As previous speakers have said, the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to a member of the Quincha community of Guatemala is a tribute to the thousands of indigenous peoples represented at this solemn ceremony, who have determined the composition of our societies, and who are struggling for a world of greater equality, while retaining their values and cultures.
We all know who are the people, the individuals, men and women of flesh and blood, who are the foundation of change; we all know the human being whose strength, passion, enthusiasm, vision and organizational ability make him or her capable of turning dreams into reality. I should like to refer to some of them who are present. First I should like to pay a special tribute to José Santos Millao of Chile, not only for his dedication to the cause of 41s Mapuche people, but also because of his exemplary participation in the fight to restore democracy in Chile.
(MuSQmis.Chn?)
We would also like to pay a heartfelt tribute in particular to the Centre for Human Rights and to Mr. Antoine Blanca, Coordinator of the International Year, without whose efforts the presentation of the indigenous problem would have been even further postponed.
But perhaps our most profound gratitude should go to a woman who has dedicated her life to the struggle for human rights and the cause of indigenous peoples. I am referring, as members already know, to Mrs. Erica-Irene Daes. Mrs. Daes, you symbolize justice, understanding and the recognition of diversity. Thank you for being here with us.
I should like to conclude by saying to the representatives of indigenous peoples who are with us today, to the leaders of non-governmental organizations and to the public in the audience that this Year represents an opportunity for indigenous peoples and for our mixed societies - an opportunity to reconcile themselves with their roots, and, by taking the path of harmony, understanding, cooperation and respect for diversity, to contribute together to a better world for all.
Ms, TRQLLVIK (Norway): Before I make my statement on behalf of the Nordic countries, I should like to express my great joy - shared, no doubt, by all of you - at the fact that a most distinguished representative of the indigenous people, Rigoberta Menchu, today has received the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo, Norway. This is truly a source of inspiration and encouragement to us all.
As Vice-President of the Norwegian Sami Parliament, I have the honour of making this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
The International Year of the World's Indigenous People in 1993 could and should play a major role in advancing recognition of indigenous people worldwide.
(Ms, Trollvik, Norway)
The Nordic Governments are strongly committed to the need for indigenous people and the non-governmental organizations working with them to be closely involved in the planning, implementation and evaluation of activities for the International Year. The Nordic Governments have made substantial contributions to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for the International Year of Indigenous People. National committees composed of indigenous representatives and representatives of the relevant Ministries have been established to prepare national programmes of activities in connection with the Year. In the national programmes, emphasis is placed on information, cultural activities, exhibitions, seminars, and so on.
The Nordic Governments have, in various international forums, expressed deep concern at the situation of indigenous people worldwide. It is a regrettable fact that many indigenous people are unable to enjoy their human rights and fundamental freedoms. It is therefore essential that the international community be aware of the situation of indigenous people so that the utmost can be done to secure their enjoyment of human rights and to take effective measures aimed at eliminating any discrimination against them. We trust that the International Year will also play an important role in focusing on and in promoting public awareness and perception of these problems.
The International Year as such should be regarded basically as a vehicle and a framework for new action and new initiatives having a lasting impact on the realization of the theme "Indigenous People - a new partnership". While we certainly welcome action that has an immediate effect, action throughout the Year should also be taken with a view to achieving long-term and sustainable benefits for the world's indigenous people. Within the unavoidable constraints of limited resources, priority should be given to
(Ms, Trollvik, Norway) projects and activities that benefit those people who suffer the most, and where international expression of solidarity is demonstrably urgent.
During the past decade, we have witnessed an increasing will and ability on the part of indigenous people to coordinate their views and formulate common policies. The Nordic countries welcome this development and hold the view that the establishment of contacts between indigenous people is important and should be encouraged. In an effort to facilitate such contacts, the Nordic countries contribute financially to various indigenous organizations. The United Nations Voluntary Fund for the International Year is an important tool in this context. At the recent United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,, we witnessed a significant example of such coordinated views from indigenous organizations. More than 25 organizations agreed on a proposal recognizing and strengthening the role of indigenous people. The proposal was submitted by the Governments of Denmark and Norway.
The Nordic countries believe that the international Year could and should provide a new beginning in the promotion of the rights of indigenous people as well as in the process of building confidence and justice. ORGANIZATION OF WORK
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to inform members of the Assembly that, owing to the large number of speakers in the debate under agenda item 97, and in view of the lateness of the hour, the debate on this item will resume tomorrow, 11 December, in the afternoon, after the consideration of the reports of the Special Political Committee and of agenda item 26, "Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic".
I thank all those inscribed on the list of speakers for their cooperation. The meeting rose at 12:50 p.m.
,tea
MUSHÄ^
jEÄiä^
IW - ^ £ £ ^ 18& £ & 1992^ 10 JI 27 U
SUz.l^io^^fj
^tA^,^^
,tie-fKisswiJit. ift,Bi®a-,<>,. s w s b b g - m n a,11 i i e s , a u m k 'RirariiSDCi-iüOi).
Di sir. GENERAL
AC. 147PV.lH
10 November 1!W2
'-■"'£ 1 £ t S Ä tf !3 Ä £ IE e , Ä ir !‘i t S I-P S ' ft.
CHINESE
92-61597
MJ
ftâ<¥M
it < , < iS s í ). , - i fi 4 , f S -  3 è, Ci í 4 A1992^10 JJ 24 B JF tëM¥Â= â,,ifIWMÀéÎ-ni,¥RMt!i,-^»JIMÂ,±
-8é. í,Jtí,»tHOíS^S^AM,A'éaHÁ4í iKitti,ftfiwwii,'iï»',fif,»''mi.
<OS4®ií>
ttgríttattMKffi^ . t?Mílí4,-í84 jfttÎMMMâMèmftiHülttMMJÂMM,,» tts,itw,)ti-wfOBijtmifEx, Mrwaft f,»iïftÿA.
(BitMt)
tttÄtt'4±JfÄ® . >AÄiti4-iÄ^Ät.
MÉM<A:ií)(Rttt): <SíltíFWíM®. Ää® fHl,iÿ',fl»ô'.
ílís:Blttill:F,^írt,SH,iAÍÍ-l,í't',SéíW. , WIFW íHftfiOtiiültto
,O4M£fti978'tMféft,fM»¥,Bft-fl., M,£ ¡SaíftFSÉiéW'l'MSfiéíiHfítíSíftMítWiiStt i$ &   -è- ' W ^ ft , g ft í tf, ft $  ? fl ft ' ii g ft , ft » ft ft fl fl g ÿ J >
W»ÍÍ!Áfltt,ÍÍl,,'Síitfft. ,JH8tt,eSSÍTfttt»é -t»fMBSHWf--»it'iâttïi'i,fl,O)iSÎ M.
FP
íl'íiMííHKfií'WiéKHWS^R,,ií,M^Í,,i UEMílST'6. ,A+i$4O$m»',WMftíiít ^'í,®íín4ÍS'F',6l'<íH<¡MÍ<,,,í’?,' Wittig,:.,
ftW-ÄT-fftOMiW,. »,±¥','1»tt^jEOiBi'. <MM, »ííMMjEftÍWégtt',iJrM. 4O£,ft'&» '^íiMÍ,»ÜtMiífcíiW,T,,S0ttílí»i(?t, á,íms. í^wjíTiM-mmüfi^mtMítttft ÜÍHlt ,SitÎKSif M,» o
Ä+iSftÄBÄSitiliäfiilttfttSXtiWSlii:». 1992' 6fl,'BH?,ttttÄMii,iHM?KMWmft>i:ttÄ »,I-ÍKTÍXT,',»»,. >4lHrtÄ,®^4iSäiMi,3l ÄS?,,. MMSÏ'ftMim,»M».
4±¥i$Ä£M4'O'm'M^,,ÄO®iRiM', ,OHBt®ft',»'ttO'rtWO''W'£iTiRÄft!BP S»1MMIWM.,Í584ÍMÍ,I. 4äWiiie,MTilWätt »,ttii''H®,HiW,. 1995', <Wtt,i>Mi, &'ÄÄft)W»1S. ,?M-iS^tttt»tt»fl995'fi^8ft^ii aSHRÄ».
“■too. ,M. 4ii<înt,litÂ¥H" (AC. 147
L.1,M),
<M>í,iSft-ííAM,mMttmttjit. '»äi ÄiJ-Äiri’feS»!, <'S>ft>aSSWíS4ffMéXilí. Ä ^^,Äft^MttüS,WWiWftiÄ®iSM. ÄfE 136HÄ Sí ttW, M» ,'O » ÍÍM Aé'MüÔIHftitt<, O.
S4í!ftW,S,mflM'',,ttittW¥4f''íí^,^tt ,tirft, ,M,tíMS^'WftM'. M.tt^JStH
í,sfi,ím,iftwíiismamií4í>iffí
£<W<OÁRftM£OW,í. WOO'-£,ft,'O OOMÄO^ffiOÄt^OSfio ,TM». tóH, ,' mgí"jí;'ftttíT,M?,,M,Áflí,B'íi'awítto
í , ¥ ® t », , fl È , '  S ' f í A Ä ' , Ä ft ¥ & , »I ,, » W í % ' Tfti»lÄftiSMft'f-K,ftW,. ftítüííí^MMWMSfSft-OJI £ ft ' &.. ,in^ft,ÄÄ,'Ä¥WW'»''4'S,iW3f T, ÍM E ft£fttf£ínO®Oft.iESÍ>m ïMÂÎ»HW,ft »»Wít-Süií^HM.fflíttíiiSÍÁtl^ítaAíMft-WiíS.Í ft4sí»f< ,tíüflS^M.
HlííSf£ttírtí^íl.?ÍÍéM,;í<fW,»'»í.^,'i S<iftííS'.ÍS»|ifmWttffi;trtM,gttMElS'
WW». SX'-,íXftift,,¥í8'Sífft''bí't4,
té,», WÉÆOflM^ftffifrSflM^tSOif.^ A^„ MiSftSMÄWftftit'i. SSM, íftí’fí'd'íéí^Wíi
FP
WÎ''ÂSÎS,Iilâi,M,H0ÎÂ,Hët!SÎ,Îiftft»'
i,flßW'Ä¥» 't, ÍÍÍí,,»ÍHtMMiiMltt4Ka ^Ä4ii,iM,MflaiJMMitÜKä,ittitti'¥,8ii»iW
í»WM,ftW»MÍÁí,íiíiílW»ttí-^.
±1<, »,'> ■ Ä,», litt.
äi < , £ » £ ' ) : ft 4 B E fio 4 24 B - Ep , 4 s B - ff & ft ä - fi i ü ,fi. iTSMttfti,,ÄEgMTWrt¥Mfttt. ,M Â‘WÉM?H,,¥ftM®” ft,fr(AC.V477)Ef^ftS. , 4äM4mH“Ha,”H,ftM.
S,“MW ftlftíWE+^iifttTíifUM^Í-Mí, ¡ti í»f, ,WMKÍÍH. “MM”H,M,í¥íMttftíiit
O
it¥fttt'Ml. 15O4Ht£g®»T, WMft». ±¥4M& gffiéÂ ,,,,. íT'++í,ííílíSWJ:,íiftftM'> 7». M4<BEg^iäi6^,Ütt-iZ. BEg'SiWMÍíiliíí,i5 >iiííE,Httí.
M.íífttWKttíSftfMíieKWíSHiMH
g».
$-,^<w,,,AMrái$w,., Ä8,¥i-+tnw 8Mií,íí,¥-WKM-5í4|ilíJ-rtBmttW,£í» Ä'Ä®-W= »t¥4MftiilOEÄÄS4BSi’ffTäftfliTiJ. Ä¥ MWí. ,IH, MW,ÈWWEt,l-tt.
i^.^ft. Mlfta»Ä',itE,iiW. ,-B!»,^». , ¥íMi>'ftMMtt,i0fEg-K'ttT. W£gST,»tt iftftit,, ^í6,,MMli<!aít.
£H",feíftW,í,?(é,<'í-»ítt?'?IM. ,M» íTÁ"!iieíi»<mm>. o,£H<,,&<.&.»>.. Mä,iäM¥4tlttili<iHÄ,-W. MSttí. 3Wft ÄJfrftÄAAOO,'',,,,?®'-^,»,^,'.,
,=,í»i. ttiiU»fli"Mrt®HMÄÄÄ-4'tfiHi ?. M, SWift S^SÄOSWASSÄM. ^B6)t<írt O > . 1995<ttBft±i + fli,il995f$tSjS,|tf,tgSiRJfi ttlttftiíí.
'W'H. 4tt. ,Wíi<i'S,m,Mff»ííctí ftH. i^ WKäÄÄftiföÄifc^i i£W44SMiWftJiiM-Sft t
,^ííttMíSiSftííiTgtíéiMMÍí'Wtftüitt tftffé® ; 6t.ft,ttft,.U,íS,íí)SÍMÍMit¥í|i'Hfc iM,Sitft3MW££t',íf¥o
AC. 14TPV.18 T
(KWt)
st'. tt<iWtt,',nii¥'Tm6. ^xüitt'»'. a fliMA'M,wHü,mw,8Âflâi8-M.
,mwn&ft<w»'B£a,fttm;fe'., â<iâ,iwîaü4-<ï a^a,'-,'®'^»®®»^'»^',. ,wasií»fiH'tn',r ittttflftítMfií',. MXMtM.
FP
Ä,BM,Wtt. Ä1W,ÄiHO»'Äft,lMAX ftíftlS,.
HÉ,¥í!ííirtTOM',S. ÉSrt.tt',»,,,, ,ft,,,» S'míSSSMÍítt,í,AíWÍ4ílft, ft. tt-rt,i®MLttJltaäWi,i6iS964i,ä-SiiS ,ttttÄfatw',,MttflföftiA. ,s^üimíism 'ÏHMWÂSSttiWi-,ft4MSJ!|t<i,.
S¥ittrtiäiW>ftWttM4,tt,. ,,tiiWÈ ♦ HSft,^o SífUtt,iB'í»'ígmM!í,,»Tm sw,. ,^ftsntWiitä'Wii.
tí-W>W®WRM'K’ffl,!. iMSHtMM,' ^♦WWïlM^Wfl. äi4¥ÄH4,»,müi»t,i,il 4£4ífffléif'R4ítt,i-S»,1}íííiíít,,iW.
Hi,Äi1T'iHBIM-i!,®fiO>fWttÄi. SO' ,♦4MSi»H,i. ,,,,,. Sä',M1fffiit»>i,0MOTiä4 SSiHiSttfi^ft. ÂgM-ÿ»m,'¥iimÂSftê,gÎ
AC.lU PV.IS s
Ä,lÄ'Ä5i'',EW',ii,lK,i!ag,,Min5IT.
f,'ií.,S¥tít'-ílSStté-»äÄSi^äXifitttMfifti g. ííiSfíSltíií»1i?í.M®MftílWM±MíifgJá.Síl M^f7'íWfíítt',iu. ímíífstíít-,.
ìS(>x?ÌMt): ÄHÄ-i^,iinKM't,tti,S,i fliflSRi’miSiMfi.UiiKASMWWHii. Bit,is í fi "è-ft.»', ÍÍ tèÜïWM.
LH
Ä^ @49565, 68,142; KW69<t)
Rf M,SítíW4, g fi-,»,
W-jWéiMí): 'étnüit,¥HJííií-BM,,i,Éx ítt,5Mtó0, 10^24Bff»ft-ÄÄ,,'''ltÄ. 'f4O'i ÆMa^iijftO^^^^a^^ç, í^ttftMS', ftHttfiU»,-,mííiíKííS».
ÍS, 4ftí4Sí|i4Bfeíl5iilg<. ïi^lWHiEMi, UflEgi,ttíi¡sfistttÁ,¥fifi. ijiMMISÏÎMB BSÍií'.iTMiEiíiM.
,,4ÄÜiii',ä4SjlÄ¥»S0. Wit8J:fítt,T,iii'' tt,B.¿?2!?'iHH. ,,HSmtìEStttiilM^fttt ,HR,; Äi’lBttS^iiMiMJtÄftttÄiittttlrtftiiä S>í,ÍS!tSÍÍi<l'!>l,ttiEOMWí.
ÍÍ'»ÍSW,, Wrtä. Stifte», ,Ä ft , B ä Í r, ft fc , f» A ft S ± Í Ä R fl i ft , t % ft ® a S T  ft H , ft Í tt.
^>R"JW'i!ifiR,--,AÄiJ:i»^,IÄ-e.gÄW'
'KTSMííi<ij>»ttlTT,,SSilMttítt4ímBS
í)Jí^»(ttW. ,ttfittOW-SSMttl^ÄTi-t Mlftftft.WTiäMÄSCT. ■OM. ,MB,,, ff,äftw'taiiüittttü,. a-»,ÄMÄfl,ä, 4,¥OI4,^<,^TÍ££n£tf±»i»i$íOJ4',££-,OK iML
MWM,,»<WttS>.Egí^SWHffltííH,ft tU-o HttSSi’'f>B4ÄM+S,M,W'^S>,mSif ,, B'ttMmHMtWttEÄii< WtlS » 1%% b„ <Hm,ais»ss,i'tEäm otsftmMw.s !'SlStì995Wèìt,iittSfi,MÌl^K,BRtt,K,<W
HWMWiiftJigWÄtWWitÄäWfi.MtBÄI
ítíaMíOMHWMfiíéegíCáíHWy^iííii -fSÀiiia. ^,i^^tit^-^ÄÄMftÄttÄSftWftö^®,, WH,1HW,OÎÈ^ÂÎHWÏM<. MrtiigÄi ,ttiÄMitüÄ,ä<8ä^iiM^.I^. ^XMAft fiSMlft®,4illMWffíiS-4AWÍ,flfttt.
M.WSttWH^WÍÍMWmTO.WMá', íJ,t'®íH,'ftSisS?Í,fiMiftttWWHIttM. ,ifíffttí^Sí^íJí^ííiMítfí®, R,ÄWiS'W,H
^B,Äi»4,,,SÄMÄ'iliWXÜMii'MMi(^ Üí'S,HHÑMttíiHStíg.
ftJTÎWWIM$W4WÏ,,ii»Sitt,fïï».
LH
,m,,,, saj:Xrw,ftfn^È;gìe,iff®,--4-' Sr»1ffi,M»,äft&W'Äiti$&'. ,WMftBJAiíiKÍÍM BftmjtsMsmtüiíin!.
ítís,4lí4tttt,ft4íiíAí'ik. -Ê',Â^®M»£T S^'WSftííWílíStt. MÄ»ÄM'l'T,M¥iMÄfR Ä4rtO4ÄM,,tWi'A4tttt. ä?t,WMS »ü, K,tÄälM't®ä,,.
,ÜAÍiljSüiESiíiMMí'ÉiilSIWSMMií, 4 K,Srt, ,¥,'>¥K4MÍ't4ft. ÄMMiiJWil!^?i íSW^,R,ftKií''i>Elífí.
,ttæW-'EWA'>ÏTttiïtt'. Wi»íSTM,HM. E i5tt?l'®fiít»,SÍÍ»$J!<l » WH.itfUttiï-W ÄS, ttÄättWE. it'^StWtÄÄM<K,,m>.
,i»,MmOf¥M,WiíM.WBit,MS±iX AR'i»IMT<WHÄä'S».
ííM,,mT< w,wsí:ft»,aüíttí,M'ttww Ettiüiiit-ÄMSOTT,.
í >fí.rtttíi,tfUiíÜiESiító8KWH>ÍWW, äiftÄ5ÄÄ£ifSi,.
,ÄiO',££. ^-S-ftftfaÄif’ISftftftftftBISMftt.S^ft, íínISftHS^MtftUtSÍÉAH,.
Stï',MfltXM'Î,,iftiME'lft,iÎimHÎâ, 8»tí 8 tttisíTftfa S»
@  il B » ^ M '' Ä ft 111 & ft T  ìe $ ft ft, ft ft iti M it , '1 » ® ft ' ¥ »¡».ÍÍÜBSiíf^ntiHÍW. 7fiegEttitHft»f,->b íeütt,É¡fttWÍW,fJtóSilÍWiÉ. S,1,'ÍIÍÍM flft.<4M>H',O»OSiOft't:ft''»í'iFI,ftiíi1'<ftÁ M,. Aft,ftinfifaSiË4'jLKft<,,',ltftmWftHMWftlb M'^'o Si»»äitffi,i,Mii,ttt!irt4,WWÄM» im?R,,iiiiíHimttíii»flí'mnií.
' is, ft in > ' â , ê ' <   A $ o ' t ft in » ' ft ft ¡B  , $ ' is fa i,,tt,B,»ÄI,ieai'mi-,,ft, MHftÜtMÍ.
tíM('iM><8WSt)4í:KffJé»ttt,í»±,8tt)tH 4,. tm^a-ff.íaftíaMtt^ftiff+ítTt^tii^it.
i'ft»tft,fttrÂiOMT'fft. ^ft^ft^iffttiiAft + ÄÄ MW'HttÄ. »WÄHft»'MflftS'Kitt,i,ft itti». if,'ftÄft,Ä4ft»®ft,teHitf,OÄ'Ä5S,¥ ,ttiifr. iíti.mÁtíMi^flwtEíiiíám 4Âft,»MÆHêfa®'ft.
ÎfttAiïfl,aWîBtt4ftétti<iÂiinftÂ,4^J: f,.üiäil:W,'>Ä'tti-1MfiÄt. M®',fl^tt,í(ltó, Mflüi6¥»ii,í'Sí,lttí-0<í'>f',MÍ,'>íiJí'í4W isii'í,ííwg¡ttrÁí-é,éiMitíMfiHí"í . ftUftíftft O “faf,,” (AWzmta-^WftOttííSííU. ftW'
ft44íiíM?MlSJi',MT'Míiftttt,^WjtííHS Äii»,4a'SftÄMo MÍStSítíSÍ^IÍÍMtM. K» »l'ii|),ä,,iWnR,WW,!i. Ä‘MM” W,,,í i»)iM!íífráíA“Mí’WHÁR,Mí»'tt” <A47277,%
“Äi^f” â+»ttHÂÂ^4ttSAflttt^,Sîfft. íft ÿ W Ä  ^ ♦ - M fi ,I WS, li ^ H 8 Sí', W < tr, iS ft W ÍÉ W Íi > ä o tftiiiStttiWMÄMM.tt, ‘i," . ,ft»,, 'iÄÄ'?i-1,,KtffÄ'WJ»,'Ää'ftii.
,tííití. ,,»,,8^1,®,»,. ,li», ‘Hfl ,'M8,S‘'W,Bíiíí,M+WttW,,AnííW f.ïli^MrtfMmttÂ.WRiï^MOHU'SX,” . <A 47277, W)8fl’[KltW<'Httil4?t“M>ÍB" $»££&, 8'ÂIïÎtttii. Æ^EM^.^WâS^WitftiiSMWft A o MJ
t5t,í®iWíííttfiMiHit,,8FitÍTttÜi,M^S ®,t-,<tt'M,. ■ÉSA)H®gSíí'HíimÁíK'iHií
.)tJïfitm.8»iÎMï, ,^''»,14. ’’ (A47277, Mise
'Wï£tMA+'Îi^^,ÈiiWii|<1'rt3ifHMÎftg MK o isM8,HHÍ"ÍSÍft!ííiSS,,ií¡H8SiíM fio Bit,ZíH4ü,M. íí+tíí»t'í,!B,ÍXttí>,S^íiE
UÍSMaMRí',,S,,ttKJÍ,M-5,'rt,,', MM» íí,'HíK'^'W4KM'íí'MÍ'íí'W ^À^È»'',^,»»., BíÁ^AWitíSMrt'tfttóT ,¿®ROftiESÁO',<¡O ,WSW »M-TK
“jWWMÄ'^W'ftXfi. " <A47277, WS) WME,,MM0¡Í,'ÍÍ. ,6MiiS»ÿM,ÏEÜif. -O£Ä,<ftt,»i&, E.T'OO,k
iäi4ttW»,tt,MWffAffiW,i,iW,,Wm 'S£4íüiííM±í'fit»,5>Á-VitSmJHÍ,fít5 'W,,»^sUi$H',Â'M,RÂin-OTÏo MMÄÄEif »,WSH'.
^^,,,eom.tBft''''!,)-'®'. »Tttöss.ts ,fte-ííí^ttrt. íftBiÁtismfiíoa.-m,!'}' Saítt'i>íl8I'l'ttKMMttKftSírtí. Mttttt t»g»M8 + . tt'ííWSiüáártM'+íítte, s,íí)iffi. ÍSftí?,ÍWí'Sítt-SHÍ,.,.MH »â,ïiÿ'’riM<t'ttMgÂ,iiifii>iii,.
^Rft<i',H?»THÄS,tt-|ttWT'''HM,i 0'„ ,MíttíEíWmfltHMM.ttSKHftmH ft,M,.. ,MWK í,IBÍO(H)íía, B^B, 0'í» tM'M',It4Míri|ittíl^'í»HS»!i,. ttt,t,tfl ítSSÍ-'Mm. Híift'5OííWíJ!,KM»»g»M>éI'. -»,SíeglL-Mtiíá-s^-íliMB. B^^H-SUfUíiÁf
ÍSÍ--II. íftí,B'. ÂtâSfitft^WÎiWiWiè. SHXí ïj!,^TsEgffi6.
jlt^.MaASt^ftttt&iÜBkT-SiH-MW'^,'''^'^®' fi084Säi1Sitii, ^i^.^¡3ii.»^ii^. 4,ä'itJti’%-itMÄ SÍíí;'Í»WÍ.Aí SÄtäÄZitÄHISttS..
il.jrittttiUBitWiiittBOiKfi.iiiilttiA g,^é BBï,tt.X4&ft? êij,8MSâf'S4iéiJà,WB ftgO-lfco ,'>SHi^ÉMi,:¥,?i>,îi^,'ft^âJ'êW
í fü è , , , 1$ Wí B ', ft í. í» Sï OI SÄ ±'>T W Ä - ,■ S,ÄÄiSÄ,. SttM. ,,fMHíagttSfttflíJ KSaawsí-é-BZWMiO®-»^^'. ^Ü. K^ÍlMM±í|ífS-+M ítíS^. MIÄO»itaft£M.4K£^£fl;fc£'it»O.feflÄ m»,síMSttM. ^<n,E'^,ax,,Mt£,iU-Bftttí^HWS-Sítttí^T'Cliii:i»1if!i4'tiUfiSM. H ',''BiiiWM'^ttÄBttBii'iW»TttStt. MÁff 8,tflé^'ímK8t,M±MnTmfffl. ,mm íattWtt, ftfl.EH^Í-4, SMM±fto ftí.tlttítttít Wié.tfcSWi»ífc. 0it>tS'4iÄÄ-+Ä!iSttil>'tS1i'
ft R í a a fl í , i$ ' í »> t s æ ti s ' a '  s ¡s ^  a .
'^>iAÆ,i'üttfttt»i-,trtf9^ft,Bfti£SSftft''Bftt i,Äi7HSBWHÄ±OTM. »iKèlÂÂftSaii'iÉMS íiHSÍíííí. ligjtMSIéíiféííttlftft'^Sif. Ä8 ♦£®&,2i»'O£B,,Äftf Ottíïgifrtt, '>£®W,tÂ., t
AC.147PV.18 IS
UT0'. tB, itlWIWSÏÂlÀMïÎUitigKH^tt. ïÀmsn,-f,a,.'»Mmi!»ft'm,M,Â,,r' awfttt,,»ii»gBff^,0tttÄ!iiiis.
,^:OÆÂ^,JÈMàW<,-'b'Î£<ii:à,£O ®<. éa»'ift,íi»'í,it'. <wfl,>ínm,B,»í tóU,MWWttí'W. S'-Mí,E»H, % "b'K,iBííéEM®íA»ttí.íMinSSOW, tt&EWWW, i'íHt''íawj!m-íowH» titilé,&$&%%.&. ,ÍMW. fií,'H!!K'íí^EMM -5WHTW. fc'>,'ÍHtft1'$ft'&é^,,aT'M,flM^ '^Ü. 'S4ÉíttR'É,'JÍ!E,|Jt»í"1tBíMíl»í'í^ iéû LH
,'Wí,',H6í81í,Mftm8SíííT<WttHM ft»- MswMä»Ä,ft»T,-ssttiiitfmi<is'miwni> TMISfttt,. ft<S¡éft^ift£W.5E,ftjr',,iMWíW HXW>T. Bjt,'K,fittïOttiiÀÏ,H. 1989-, E,, AWM,4',m'7^,,M4'ÀïMft. Ätft^Jäft^ y^>i'iiwtttätt4ÄE,m“'s" ^»ft,í= a,, ,íi^',tnw'E'8iSWtttta,'íítt,wttits
'Ä'4»ll’,l4aiiiÄ6iMHi»''t5ftS-4,i-'»,?', gi,WB<i'ii»HH»ft'BM,HÄ. 'HWft A £ ft h ä ' m  > à , <n ft ft ,, t m ft ä in -  a ft k ' ^ ? ft $   ' % s t,fi. M<,ft£ftíl>-M,ft''fíft-K:,lí'í»JtE|8|Oft4fl
AC.147 PV. 18 ie
ííí44í'ft4MÍ. MMBSáíimSHHttft^E.-^ÄEftfrf frO-ÈÂèOtëftJÉEftâ, ££',:, 40 WS ♦ W'ttft,M-ÄftitiL
±®Jt£,í',RSKffttTO,4Wíí<MM^Wí wttéífifiMS,xs»tt. íiwíiíimswms,,, ttiM.SftifíWíiSÍXttílttW. iítiliíHJílliTWí1' SWHi4äMME,tti<i,|i. ^ííí4Míü^g,tt,M SiÄia^iii.ikii'H'i,. ,,^,w.ÄinEg,'»»^^ iUrtit'?'. U''U4Tii.lSÄrtiÄifc'l,i)tt. 4^ '  a » ' s ,^ bi ä ' , ä 4 ,, i ft , í T a , £ -it ü £  ,i , f ,i a s ' ¥ 5
44Ä^ft,'£,^4»OW-Ü:ft'Ä'4ft',fti7!fW'MT 'ÜW, 4i,ftliST»SW'W,. i,fti,,M,fitt ^HUWifittÄWIT.iigHmttÄtt^WÄMtt 4'o
llhfcMiii<t')<RWfiittt):tMttMÄWK lftiíft'tf"MiíW»í,flWW?. ,íH8,,ÉfMfóBíii íW,^Í^!B'ft,ftS®.ft1f1ftiW4<MMo ftílííit, ±  H ft X ft. < it ft IMS Ü filM »
^Ki'igtífSiHíSHAi’iítt.ííftffíí’iSÜ.Bííttí’ra ai, iÄRiiöftÄJtaftOo »MtitHíiíí^MmAfiw »,$''.: ft'MBTR.
, í » 4, 4 , fi à í -it ft  fi,  T A  4- 4 ft tì ' fr H , I £ ff 0 2 r '. 4ftftM»4T''''EMfrM|Si,OftS',l!!,^t''R'|SI'mfrO Sí^Sí, 'fii0,,ilfiKiM<-TAfl^l<l±ii<Hüit
ffl,TOtt4Mtf¥'££,Mtt£'^£O£ttO. ÄiHA. iílSíiiiail!,i,-fiíWeWT4KM'SíiR»éS',iíí!lií4 IMRÍímft^HÉHíS.
4 it W. ,4®’TÄJ) Wíf ffl $ ÍÍ+4S. '&&%%'»&^ th Ä, áB»$>^$£WÉU'b'»£a<. ä'Mt4', HMfMW ,,M-,,A-^fi±ft',O£fi±'J'®'£fift',iM's£'!Ä.
¥$iSKS^ti992|ifl3iBfiftHS^BtWÄtM,W J1ÄÜH,. MlSi.WaWíBMt'W,»-??,,'' ¥,iO,fc^-e»'£O<it,:MdfcMWitÄ, HH,WE M'>®»<X.^'^t,Wftf»^i<>
,ÜttJi'í'W ,!ÍM^(WOT)étf(ÍT1992M31BÍ4í »£t,4-Wft-,JtW£ft. ,'><t'íí'í»ft,í'íl^,» ,Mí. '&$>¥. ,Wí’^^ÉÜiíSH.
LH
mü,,,o,imT,-,msBs»êim4
ftífttSSRMíí^ftíhíMiétíHIftJ'!?».
,Wí,»»tW^,4,i,4íB,J4'ftX<í''ÍUÍi^', Äi.ttUtsiiHft. Bft.EWHStíttEM'l'tttJiW^Í
».,Híf^O)!íí'í»B,iitHWf®'Wíírí?lííi. ft Ul£SifltKWTOMWÍttf,ftRaíMWflí,tR. ,il O^MWlftMMKBit.ftfn^FISfP^SWMlWlftJiHtì
>ilSÄSf,,tätt. ,ÄE&BifciEX, ¥fí»$áíijllrtíít' ÀMÎÿSStttt'», ,^r®:,,-^»^»»^^»,,,,, I Í < Ä ài - 1K S S 4K S .
' é, , a R' au ', sttxüí» h-s ¡b tti s,,m$£ m t '¥ ^SÄBS^ttMiiA^ifSfiiiS. a-ftlttfí»'$8M ,,ftttáííiSftitt.i-^S’ytlSííftüíf’l^iWSg,! ,ÄM.
Tftftí-ííítftSUtí. itóWttftSí.í^^ííiMSÍ BR»HM,iWÄ'iftätiflittS. KÄ,,,Ärt'^M ttfttt,fiMií|'l ê'±ia',Â8'W,JilMMMStt ÄiM<nwt„
4iii'im^HM,aMa--^'Btft$!B<,'fc$'O-'i!!: 'fts'át'3sé.^,w®^,rttt^í.ttíH'. ä-^Oft^ASin^aOT-tfiiKìÈàOOéV. ,MSÍASÍ^ íMaMínf^ttfi^íaííttüisím.
4 , i ï, ft fl ,. ft Ä Ü ä i , 4 it i ä - ' it (»1 i, 4 X Ü ft 9 it , ¥ fr ¥ WÍIftMjiíSttTítt,. KA,BI»tt4'aBfr1O,iO4frl991 i6^Bï,»4$Mtw-oina'w,jiittig. ,A!,
fiüSíí.íí+BíW-fttiíij-Xi-itt. ,
' a±Ssft'ifti(Jä)iHä
'ft>'-R'H,,',»M»s'+^AKí’ií^^soifcsMr hib-wt,^ms>,'ii»8Tïsw'as. ,æ, ♦$Â,ft,fâÿ^it-^Wflfisaa',,^-,,-!^^.,, O l,âit4MMilt»âi-M,,t'HÜïl,tRJ9,,a
HÍ.MlgíííattftWtMiílWütRíiíífBííMíf ftit®'i>Urt»S>,ÍSM»i,'. ttrt,Äitt,ft?M . ííí>'BííÍifWÜA,tíi<i'. M'ttt'ÏH ttJÄ,it»’r»Ät'+'Ä'itü<-,4ii,MÄ»t tÄ^WMäSiS^itftt.
tsw.síftftaiiííttíMun^ft^í^ssft ,<, W»)í,IÍÜ1W,ft , ,♦', » ,,ft-,l'W 3U itM,g,Äil,tiltilfmi’äitt»E^M. 4 Wi, ÄfU<Oft' , ,Î4mAB » , WS. tWE®£ T'»l»itltWttmM,fiM,i>BaM5. à,ÿlfH ÍÍMÍ , ítt,ÍÜ> S' ttíBíi»Á , WitO »Oft' 4.
'ÍB-,,ÍWMÍ8WRH- lO-$- ÄM'ft±»T ftÄWflM40Mttft^rtiiSWS®»TÄ^. KM',M . &'5Wü®Mo ,B-itfAÄOXttOftÄliOISfr^S^ 'ft,'Wtt, Bit.W'iS^^f'tf$l. 4^. ,,4 fÄSMäftitt'i<;Mii',Mfilia. ij-ä-SittitWS 'tt,fiM,ASitt. Äfliä»SMi»i».
FU
H,¥i,iäi-,lä!fciffiM7,rtäS8tt,,iil,gi
SÄ. írt^ft^MJtiíKOS^,»,
^ttaSUJÍlüiW.ítlíl^ÉMÜMÍÍií,^»». ,s ÄÄm',MMÄ,OÄ,$äM»'TÄfi$-asoit£ÄÄ ftïSHiilâ'MjEWf. i^^w^
M,»í 6 iMiüiÄ,, IB B ftft^ftRíiiAíiít^^iiXftStt 'i.tt»Ä,lW4WTjElf^ft,iSiÄ'. AOK4-M-XSÄ ttWi,t,i(,±?''MtUWÄSftÄi''ia.
B',,fl'ttí®463afül!tóitifttt¥^®W»'Wl'®
,WS.M'Ä,i.MBMHit®ft,Ä,,MBI,lftft -+'£<48'.
Bilti^^MiMSlIi^iiaitft'',,,^»,^,
ftSW^,».
,tfül.BASeiEttTÄitt. AMHBMttißt1 íft,íntAfi'ÍOTI'áíaJ'aSi!i»»Aá4jlWB'í4FI M.
4 S . í f M , 1'1 > ' Ä fr a £ ft1992 $9 ^ 30 B Ä ¡B » M , ft , , ,g. ft £ ' ,ftÜSf'f'ftfltitWIt^-ifMBSM.W.ÄflMW -Mft. iH,S),»Bft'HÄäft'Ätt,AMWä',4 HMftM^íítl,
4H--^®,,KO,' “ WA,” ft,t,ibftíMÁt»S XÄ,t£i»i,Wtt,. W. SUHBHORfB^E^Wi, äiitisift^ääHo
írtl»í:í8lttí'-í$tS'fMS-B. Ä <1141992'6 ^29 3íTíi0tó'Wffi!iX)íílM»m8±íá,R,JtW8 iWi'^Wttft,W'.
Mg,,EWttaMW^äxi,mi4fltti»i 'üfrfl.WÉíítMttlsíimftSiHííirt. ÄinWM'g WHSt'l't(BHH'i'fl)ttfttíitílMWÍ[BBgS' i,iW,iÄ,lä'iXiiftitf4»ti4,ÄKtetttiT'li>
BSiMWMWKTM,tt!R6’HK'ä,6i»H¥, tlS,,ltt-4MASM0SRÍ'iFÍ^fjlt.
ft»,HÏÎiB,i»ÏRm^4iW,MMHBÀ RüiÄi'JMWMaxiiiiJifiiiüs.ä.iSBtt^tiii. a a. tB, ,'í'MM>4HiMMí'-fiX<É'-WiÜ¿
Bft,ttÄillitt4iM^i4iiW,ÄRKM^MB»
SÜt-Â^^MisÊftÿXÆtliï^^t^fl^ïMi-^ioT, ï à,,tt—f,Éft'iftêSW.
itSflílSttWéSttíW 84f|iff,íílltt4SM4ííí ^ftttttit.
MM.(,ïÎl)(KttÎÏ)4,flMii''fttWÎÏS44â Ms fi'MttWiJ.'TKÄllilitt. Âit-TSifcWÎrt’fitÎM '5Í,'HítWH»í,í4W,S1ffl,4flH.tt®4US,íí ,iiOliBäMMM.AÄMif^äMISiM t.S?l'mWI +, 4W H & K S AHíí , fi  i ».
ííh'í UíiiS^ÁÍMiáfW-fMBtSííítftíí Ç
“ïSitMM^HWÉ, ^iM'iStt,ftWff. ” (A
C.V47,PV.3,,t6M>
ttÄ'Ä8T¥WiH»Mft. á^í. ^ÄÄMtOttÄ,fi,M' ♦^£S,!Bfrt'±féftftMllft¥---»H-tSl. 7'MKSUfi, ,X tÉtHiïïiiiÂiM.
,S
SitÄiMiiHiWüiiiÄtfcfiliWäi,!,. ,Wlítttt SilMMittMilÜiäiSrtil. í4iofl23B »O'l’ttEaMi-OÍA
' .i-Ä't»SRm,ft,äÄM. ” (AC. 1477,,14g) fr Í H M íf ' i R  Ä  ft S i  ft ft g í i- Í ft ft ft ä ' ä Ä, ft ill ^ íf Í ■&— ft BASASI». JtíHAfí'<í6,ft,W,Mí4»Hftftí Ao
4-ftïm,Â,4tT?,ftâA4,éttm,Î’,, So J5K^Síí,K,ftft3t»,ííf^í^H,í»ftíliJ-ítilA4fíSí - ä S ft B ,i ft ft H  , ,, £ $ , % ft 1 ft Í ft if Ä ¥ ft »
1992S3fl24B,,éíMHftíí^S>tf,AftWWH ftSWÍMÍíHí,T-,St,Mtt<MííH»í
" 3Sü4Î-ÂS2:f>)>âÎèii'ÊïStft-+tMÂM” .
,?i.’tttä-WÄS,BiÄÄ'WMliMiättKi, M-t'frä,W. 1989¥,¡Éftfti-^,'ftj|l|, MMitfftÿ. ftSÍ¥:rftmSWftíHt'S-MSRWOíÑft»,W ft, ft è R 2 z H  ± fé ft ft M A- S »
^M^Í>mttllU8mmMíia,lJttttÍ!tí»
MWAi'»Wrft,tOT&MMttWft4,fttt£,
ait.írtítrtXtMíJíft. W£ftS£ftW,,±±® iííirt,ftgítft'flMaftWMií»r. ,,»ÍÍÍHfta ft>4BM-,wti'ii,í,m,e^íSími»A.
ff&^SèÂftÆjii^ÀttM&ilÿbXSO^iWaHlWÂ'Sft,! ¡8,ttAOWiUfta,ftftä,M:4ÄÄ,&'ftft,i9|J4EPftO »,,lïWSi’ÂÏHSiMÈÎ^SititRASiM. <Wä'S> »,tt^aíTSOftM.BMaíííSM.ttiífHíttí' ÍMÍ. Hi, <'S>»É,-SÂ'»tKWSWtÂÎMS HÄ.
4S»Mfttt'flÂt,M,iI-»ÎÂ^ingf,'^'ïo 4ä nfi,tt»tfftóé,'í'O'i»íííi''ÁSM,IH,ÉM'lft £^,1,„ 4ir>S®aïftïsMr,W'(ii'»,Î,ÇMÂ ijittt',IÄ'ltSi. ,ííifrí»,í®i'WSííMS!ítíií í.i^OÍ^MSM^^atíitftft®^^^
Sitiólas ^a^^WHnfiKttTMtt'. SM4ÄP S,Üft-'i»t'l'. -ííWiíW-',®Wi»T». 'B»ï HÜÍR,!íflífSW>t afc,ä-WM44ttÄft. W.äfflt S & SI í i M íí ^ » í , , T ft STí. ft t ft ' ft ft ¥ ' , ft g 4 4 M.
iT^^UH.^^^^ÜitBfto Win, MMB^ttWttftSê fttíí|,ií-iWüí“í:ttí” . Bft,,i7l'i'ïrtÎ''fttt,.T ft ffl í , Ä St S & '  S R B T 4 g a ♦ > ®t à'H $ 4 » 4 Í & , ft  B t B f SS ft MifíftaSJsaílftSftHtí)!'?. ft^,Äi'iÄS-iBi,®<R.Äi’¥
EMífl,, ÍWM,?fíiíSMÍSWei»»^MI, gttSíMrtHÍI,tt?»»lí,W,ttKSK4TOM Mifte. %mWFt'fefcfa®&^$ñM%^^&&®^ $<£.», a', a-wäs , tt» , 'í tt, a® w hí ímíííiüi ’TtS.MítMÍÍBWéíMaKW. ,íílíUi.M <íO4^S >M^M<ì-4'’f',iMiÌtìttMtltÌit,a> ftilt'I4,IWMrítií»,Á»i'i,4X1!.
ÍSWMíÉ,,íittHií,tt6ttttWii tí ü'WÍ ». ,-<ft,®-O1É&MR.ffl,OrtO,»,. WW. »'f>fift,W<íiii. mälifttTH®. WíKW^Mí üijÄi?ÄS,i»i^4iatii-wtt,iif.
tÉ,,M+fi,,WWfflá,rtX4tt. ,mâM»»1 i4KtÄia<i,ia,^»S»4MMK. ÍW,f,5t'>ai( ,,íiíí¡WK,»'Kíi''Hí’l'--HitW, BOMA? itíléírtE.
LH
MMii.(Ä'W)<6lSiiWt>'Äift'Ä>ÜMM,, WMtrtÄi-iS^i,. ,UMMÄW,-fi'6i,W »ÍSí»í»íftí',M,)míl4WéU±Míll,|iff. Ä fl ft fi, 4 <í : < 4 li ,i a Ÿ T ft ft fl ,; I ff ü ft A $ °
ä , i í í , , ft g & ± , a a , $ it fi ' 11 a.
^HwMiitiaftÄi'fiiEiiftWiiaffS. wmsÂ ,'-.i?.w»ì-ii.Ha. müíiBiímí. ,ss,4 Hílrt^ttkaSíííiWftíMMHÍtt.
Ä(l'+4'ffT,ftift,ESi'K,^2f-itir,lälSÄ',Wi <'»,ftSSí'fíí^. ¥. »tt'. W. Miífttt. S»i W»Mis»flÄWiiÄ.
B,i0a^»¥ftín,ai'''4’,i-íi’'í,wm'RÉ. , ft < » , ± - it , £ ' S , ' $ £ Í ,, £  , ï Æ it ^ f , ' ♦ < Ä S ^ i> 6 Ü¥W.
ÜiiSStlWÄTttÄi'ItKW-'Ätti.WWWMWiliäit! Mtt. aW^^Säi-^MiiÄW+^^ftÄM, ,M'£M
t-fit'ÜB,fltt,iitiÄA<na,>^<i(A47277)o ÄM ft'ä'Ä,,M,iw<i-wmiM'B'astti (fÍ4R,»ííí'. OW^,W£,MOeOfcftÄ.. Hffl,í?ftí,faIìî^ií^íi'WJ:íi'■44»i±ï'SïS'f,-, Ä Ä ä it M ^ M  W í> ¥ ^ ® W-è- ® Ä W ^ ^ ft ® .■».
ÄilBtttttMii “Wéifmï'ii>'¥ftWï”fttt(A C.l477)tíl,í,í'HÍ,ít^iíí'í-W<¥ÍSftíIft 4<iM4-,MÍ't,,tWíHHÍÍT. tSStM^í» &B££ftSräft£<£Wft--W,
MHtw.imw'4a<ii'itfittwwTEAt So Äi'lil:äai>Ä?MtBttT< »,^,ÄittttJ,!»,, illitttilM'ilttHÄ»»»5ö= ®yM'ift,?O ttütt, iBii®Mt!iÎ»tHii®ttÂsïÂlÎi'ftîW,ittfl iSt2,fllM<SMWMWS. sil»t(tM¡5®í,fjii 'M.
<WitiíSíftJítS®líBtílfÁ,f,'MW,EHi"!Kít
<wns>4Oira,'itm,ií(üiwtR-. w< ,'íms > (wwTMm^^i^-í'MOswMMO.. M,. ESMfl4,'t,^f4TMíllí'>»lt'K'iJt»ft^ iÄ'U^KI,4-Ä,,W,!ä<4Sl>,i'SI'4!».
ft»ïUÂ£&'wr,Â®i»tt4ft,ÀÆJiU'o a,SÄ,'-xtMÄ,»'E4®ftÄJj££$Ä<, Bit, Mt'tt<'f,i ÄÄ, 4?, ,mfflt'SW,RititÄ»Wft > tttîÂ. Æ,+ £-W'£,££,£',K»'ii¥,'»1»'O,,fcjEÄ>&'M, W4i'iWS,i. ÄflM»ftft'i,>iWS^' Äo
ÍSiíSB,14Wi¡M^i,é. 4ili»<Mttft»!'ÄBii ¡tèsi», 9jtÆ8IHNmMT B A,tííí'mím itfrftftí.
4£ftt5'»T£'£lJMtB,W,.> O,í®,í¡Eit,Í IHM’-SítiM. I,Hi,-'ittBíl,tt®MHí' WM,»,,, Bfi,4SU'tSMM». WWrgíWéí,, ItttiiiiätiiiiättrtSiiii^B',.
t,-^ii,tt'4M4636W'ttiMÄ?fi^,ÄÄi -ttft^iMS^SWHíWí'ftíííiMftínTíiílUH HíK,,i'MíA. ï-êâÎ<Ît>mMil. ÄffKSü ití£'t,4<íif¡tittW»M»,aRÍStt.
ÄSS.'^EÄaÄÄHilÄiiW, è'. RiMMEOW', íiiUÜí-^H , W,MMH>ii|ï^i^ittj^f t TOtt»77o í-í 8^140,iäi^UW't!i^MM,i-il:m,
iStiMBÄäfWiiXHÄW^iUWÜiUWÄ»» M.ttMft, HWüSWÄiHiiiMÄSttfeOSÄTW U,. i'fl992f9fll0JfÄiitB,-äift<:iil,iÄTftK,'M
LH
tt.Wini^iWSÄftiM^MttiWiütti^äii, íHa-,^fHíttw»snaswxíSí,sítítWí í4Ht'f4,'KÍWBS,M,. ftif,AWSti3j»',,íl mR±^£,4,ft,40®M®l!ifií-3ío Wlíírt'l'M, , < fi £ ft ,i ft ,, Ä fl A ' t , ' » W ft ft fll ' 3 < ft £ ' % ' $ £ Í ,.
Äi'S'ÄEgJteÄ»i>tt-ittBSiiMftbä,Ä1'S '4,fltt.,¥fti'H,Ä<®iJ:Ä»Ät5ftttM. £»<,£ lt,W . ES,, . inAft,IT,fiäS,'?fträtt, 0E» ÏÏÀÂWXÂ^ÎIWÀ. ftflÉ4íiríMH,»lí',Bíit WMftRift^Ä,» Mij'W<74Á>íWíftS',,mÁR ieBMg4,WHIÄ,>TSWifftÄ';,fti7ft|t.
ttw,si'Miwns»fli='a,'Mft»sw. i Âlrt,<l9M8HMfllÈWWs»i,»Mrtag»W ,ftttftMS. ^ff.aflES^ÄÄiW.Äft+Jkft.^it^MAtKä
,>aM,ft»i>». '8KiW,Kitm'iMHft-Â fi^ft^^Â®,','',^,,. illicit, AÎÂflftrtWM iftK. ±, tAfc. ÎfiÂiHftH¥ftiM®WtMlttWtMi>l', ,Eft&,ÂflBHW6^6 i. ^fr-íS^ftM.ftílttíítt^í
HiütaJitft^iefr^ittx^W^ti^Jt^äftW^Mfi
,a,'ttä,'ift4±,ÄiMtt,i>W,ii,.
WiMi>Seg,iMARWÄÄ, BiEMW,ilM Ä^m’iÄ.ätäHM^ÄÄinsas^Ä,. Ríí,í,í4. Ä»i' ffttt^ííHíí^ítt^tíWfrlUMí^WOWK ,H»rt^íHRSWí'SISí4.
' ,MMüèEitÂTIHItattHWMttf 0,MÍ SW,iMJ:,í!WttWftíí.
,,¡tiOíáitíilllSÁÍ^íKítiífSílMIííi.HIÍW ,ÄE^MimMftÄÄ,. ^t»tìfW,»ft¥AE£
íjTW^,iríi.
^,MMÂ^MÎt&^Æ . ,UEKítí4tó'S4,'lHftWiÉ ííit,í,3Í,IMtfflW . W?MilttÄHMi„,l>', Ml-ft^Üíítt. ,SáftíSil,MttMM±ÍWSÍMt M^t^^^+^-ii.
ÂHit<,,ÂiiM4BSfiW,4-'i-Jtftli±MiW ÍMM4'í4,ttéí»M,iíí-t-líSÍ4,Mttit5't-.
^i£i,,Äi»BM,äliS?f^^iiifiHÄ,Ktt,iäii ££»$->, 0it»8tí(Si-UH,<8l:Sé)i<ig4,ííB^í MWOftSít'íKíéWAS » T'if4ttiLi"SlílMÍ¡ilt MfÈiï(S4^èfrèÂ<fÎ^)i!ilêisf’ait. itÉ.Â’IRilSiii'âR 441,IÎ4tfmï4)SiWÂÎÎ.
ÍÉ-7tt±í-WÁ»8:.tj4Hft4iL ,ttWSì-rt
ttJi^üKWttéWSM.
Ä in il %, ^ F t » Ä % > ä Bl S $ £ Ä È ft 4 ' ' , tí » % - ' M £ » T % SM.
^US,WÄftt?0WH. SSEgífi.MÍMÍit 8Wtt,SÄ8(,4E,SfiiiWTä'i.
,,,O»ÎâttliWÏWftiaà8,tU'B+iM M-i®,t,,tttHS.tfittM'iMiWjtW. 4 XSW'í.,í,Ettá,fiWF,HÍ'E4ttWM,Üií HíffíBÁRÜiílWtt^fttéíil.WMíttMSÍ. 4 AiiXWWtt^OÎXi.ÔÀOÀitttÎtÎÎTii.
ÄililÄ'4iiff0gjEi>iW». HS. OMBi^Ç i<6,ttiEíiSííWffl». ^l“ÍJIí,,<Jl1íftítítSÜ i.iiMflikÄgäiliilttWH.
LH
,ftMÄ88e»iM-i,'ÄtiiiS»Ä3,H6Ä? ». Mn8^Îx,991iH2fi®iBRHIW'®ÎMÂlîïTif MSfiSÜÄHIfiiM. ■OÂMÂÆWæ^zjB <Í»S^O fit -£ÄTt ft±®o tÄÄii t,ttMJílí^H±Xí'BKÍf,M ä^B1991W310Ift<i(MW,WettÄ>i,l>,li,M Ts,ttèim®M,i»TMixj. ii-ir^e^FOa ii»B,M.ä^ftiai.ÄÄ'i8i,^;f?-'Mtt<ttWÄ^ ^S>,ltó. Bft,M,ij'Stt,,4-t4n. ,Pím^^tJíS, íffifWStt4íXfflMXímt,MM¥Mf.
♦ F t » » , í t M <  O H Ä ' B » ' H  ' IS ' , > » 14 ft ' ,, Ä '
'EnoÄ-rt,m<wttÄ®rt>t'i®. oMsUiuwÄ jtW,K'M:O»jU., WiMÄ,R<^fjtM. ±', W WM¥S»|,,',Mft><VC.l47A.l)i(iH»iftX,a4
,H,^-rtÄUM<,¥»>4S,ili,i“4ftgW4i ,MiftirH ” ft'><W.W7),iiT?,MBiSftftit»,, W,ä,TÄttÄ,,ttM-M,!. BttWH. ,-ÍS, ^,,,,,^,,,,,,,,,ux^Ta^
HkHn^^^^=
Ä'Sii,ifittiH',iii'MÄ»l4MMH,Äil Ä,¥^,jEO>äis»i£amitffl., ^ï',-,l0,tf itti^^WittfiMöO.
tíi¿l<í¡Éfi)(í¡íMt).- ±íu,itít,attaíi<w ,MífsWímH.Í^'M^tttíJtSWííRSrtMtt ÍÍXS4SÍI,IÍ,.
4ü®,; 'BMMÍ?tt,,MTM»aM^MW,H. , ítm^SWflMiWM^HüW,,'. í,,'», ,,,.,MíU ífn^títtMAÉftME^Íü, M,tt = ÄiftÄ6E^^. itJlT^ÁtlIttasSH.M^Ází &. Mft< tirtä,ÄÄ4itäiSit.
6Mi,a,,iÉi,itfJá,MlíilHlWé4|ssiífi,s ,^1» 0,íArttt,4W,£M-E±Sím;f'k í'>W,íífRttft aíAttíHI'S'SrtííX»ij-Bft. i-ffttlêSiiÂ
Mo
ilïMTW^,. Ä»itH',ij-,fiTM,i,ttM,ll£ ttïMH. Hft,s,4®í»fMe^í»í. ü-äaftaMüit í & OJ, ;W é ?í , 4f , R & i4 fr M ♦ , W , W M ZW’I , ft !B M ■' ' S. ftMÜi,gtt,»M0tíitíttW'',atfttti4é,íí ÄHW'<i,ftB'ftffÄ.
ft fl ft %, E , Ä , fr ft I ft £ 4 M ' E , ft 3 fr ä ft H ,, Ä ft i t U BI £ Ma,,., ,aíí,,WÁ,-»EMmíi8íi,,wísi ftWM^ft-^B,44l4äfiftii4Sft-+iiäÄ.
ÁítttS, HMSftR,, nfti.ÄMMft8,. »IftÄ» tfElík,i,É?M,ftltattÁ», Sft. MM,. ¥'i. % ttW^KSBtftftftlíWfMíftíTWSft. ftg,í4W ttWiSStMatftM^fliOft^iiSMMilBfti 4ÍMK¡Sft»íftíÉrtlíftM,MBW. BitííííHííIlft ±®MÆ> HRSftÄÄ^MttiMiiftiäJiittKfti^io
ífHfta',.,E<í4-Mgít®SAEUi'íWiíWíft 1íttft4ftft^o ijitMt,ftHKÄE,iH±Mfttt,Attft -íáí't^WW. tt,B8-H990|9fl0gfóB,MÉÍf4'f' ft $ ± A ft ft S E (ft Ä1ft ft iti Ü ft fé ft W ± . il Ä Í & ft 4 Í & ft :
íttí®»íE,ttftíft,?f®Wíí"1K,W,ií^íS ÍJfSfflWMm». WttírftW. S,XÄW,A AÍÍWÍ. »fti?ft4,ü'ä4,''Btttt'4iS,MÄ.
ftMäiiiiftM44M''l’,Hti4H,Sft|ii|ä'ä
í^í,ilS,M,W»íiX».Kttíi»Ittíííft'. ” <A 745435, OTg) '
WG
W»^H,í4í>¥tt,iSftX-ftitütl+íémSt. I frfiiWàS4i^ïif^»,>ttititlTa)Ê6tt±fîWW»,ÎT'
».'.(IftiftWäittÄ. -5''ttüi,ill^H,áMiíMBií,ttí í.ttfiMííMfl.W't'H,. mMHértMM,iü» ,O^SÄlOAIflfiS,,1».,
M;,^MÄ,,'W±»K,^i'K'¥iSi(,i,iS, Ä, MiíftíiíftáJl^^M^ífflSmMi^MSííí». K n,HÉMMse.o-+ttíWMW,iM. íü,,ha'e ,MM, ^fsEíííiMírSSflMüliKS. Bit,ÄHM^,ij-i S^ífS,ílííít'M®'m'M,irt.
ÄilE,T<üi¥4m'EaÄK,j|tTi',iM, MSlí'P Mft,,f,M,tttt»,itBfi<iW'¥'MÄthg'M»ÄT ÍÉ. Jf»ÄMiJltt,,ttftSffiHttäÄS-ttÄEAiW<F, 0 it,íllW,mStt,W'ttímK,íiíiílí8ÉA,if'f “ttBxtt’ ili.
Kê,îttiMÎHtMa,a¥4t»Îiï'. '<£-, KÉ?ltt^¿ÍW,líf"¥4iií,í" WÎ4636LŸ5Î!,. ,È^liï, Ü-ÍAíft®,A',fflf¥4iLÍÍI<'iHÍ.
' ±íí?í±4ü.
ÄilEttftÄÜft^ÄS. tóttK,tt3ítn,>,WttMí ÍÍÍWtt. ,1988 ',iltf,,Sii''i,ÄM®^Jl^ii!Wt ÄWitttirtMSE. íl989íí!imU,íitMítMfíft» XífT^-W.
HWOWMtAÍSStSÍjE, W. í?. ,MííMiS ttMM»H4íEií8IÍ!tt. W4¥líáH,,é»í ttíM,tMfti<ig,ttttííliR»Á4W»ííítt-B ft. 8B,iläe,Ä,'Ä»i!l'<itA,,ÄKMiii,,''AM S.fiJtlfiÄXI. W,B4»izAS'iÄK^gi±M®<,', O'¿W,&O, RäOtt®ÄT'ä HH,,1SM.
MÄ'SS1)VAftO,0',Oß'Wilo g»,,,?» Rfcíl^,ft,H,ÍÍH'.	'
,-,ttEttttÄ'S,WüSWXi. tfMKíi-SÍ t 0 04 WtiÄSÄiiÄM, 8-AMííf.
i;,'B4^S,iftÄ'f’Mitt,Ä'äW,ttUMttA 4v'iíí,ft,íÍMffSI».
M s ^ , & ft ^ OI Æ ft ft , , W O , ,M ft s ^ , £ S , ,Ä ¡é
ttíttlftíSSA^lSííHrtiíilíXMÍÍ-a^fetiíB. 0it,éswiiU»iw,',ái$íaií£4UiM£W£'fí,i?u..
4 4 £ ®, íí í 4  £ 4 + í < i £  Ä S E íl Ä £ <A45435) IS ib :
“ílrlWíi-WJftíflil,ltt,í,,W,,íí-+tSí®E4í
ííffíMtt’. lA435,109%)
K fi ?1 % ft i f ft ® ft, fi A H è ftfi A, 4 + ' it - $  S K ft, S ft ft if t Aft—,-Mft'tti,EW,ÈèM,tt,ft,ttSi'iit WtttïttïMittÂSK.
'JF±'ftEftftttÄftÄfift,»ft4 7fiKM,Hft7'ftÄ.it'ft K.i-BfißmH. ®,'ftfi. Si?l»iTÄiHittKtt,, WÏH,ii- RÄftÄ^W.
'®Kftfiftttlii..ftASfi»®±ft|p1Ä,ijXfti'Eft®'RMfto 4 i,ii,Mi,,ft®t1j:tKHÜiaRä)i.M,ii. EM8ÏSÂÎ4-í»'T»rtí>fMtt,m. 'E,S>FÍ,MÍBM^M ftftft£ftftftfi'OHOftfll¥ft£4Híflft,fetOTftftft ,té. í4-+ttS,,tí7H,,'l’Wft. »ÍIH8,,',é4' £MKftftRÄ±W,Hftfttttt,,,
ÄOfiRM,,MBW, “ Klfeftft?” AU®±ftft, SSW ft fi S % fi 7 », Ä ft ft ff Kl A , T' fi ' a » è , fi4 SI ft BI S fi ft + ft fi ft ft ,08'XU'é>fWT-WM B o
Äiä-ä8. '
GJ
fi fi ® fi , 8 4 Ä1992' 9 fl 2 0 £ T 4 +1 ft K ft ± ' ft Ä S K ft Ä fi t fi ft ,ilèf 7'ftSftftfi. ftéftfi+fi.
7tíí + ftHW®S,4^ijKW,MSi±8'f,ttT-í tt,fi®n. ,í^itMSStí-Uí.iíiifÉflifflffl^Mflftíi ». ” <A47æ7Bg >.
, âit iff,, Kl fi , HWííSí S, »? '»'ïflMï Æ
Xii>HOiWfÿitt»j!;H'g,'i'f^ft^i<!ai(i.
ïtfKÂMDiÂttttiWa.W.moWeiiiîlÂift tt¥tt,BfiM,MiBJÍ. <',4Ääi',ilW,a^f MttiÄiWiÄ.
,B,,as&,,£,£m,iW^'a^4,:fc'4,i»r tüt. ¡EMft,aÄ^,^fttfeW»,lTttt,Äfl£MiT-fiitfi T.
Ättit8^ttitÖE . WiJtirt-iü'.
&SáM<í8,í)(K»tt>4ttttítt^'É4WW ,-&,}»¥ W£® ” ttO^OÄtt, 063(f) í,4AiWc.i47
Ää¥ftS'i Ä£&,A “í-ÍSé-X” £AC.l47INFl Add. 1., :4fôttitWTÆ6P&l$XAC.l47INFl,-fefé7 019924-10^ »BÍ-í8MítH,i.
TWæti.
UNITED
NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A47PV.112
30 September 1993
ENGLISH
Forty-seventh session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 112th MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 20 September 1993, at 10 a.m.
President:	Mr. GANEV	(Bulgaria)
-	Adoption of the agenda and organization of work: letter from the President of the Economic and Social Council [8] (continued)
-	Report of the Economic and Social Council [12] (continued)
-	Social Development [93] (continued)
(a) Questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
-	Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the organization: draft resolution [10] (continued)
-	Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments [17] (continued)
(h) Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit: note by the President
...
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegations concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
93-86563 (E)
The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti [22] (continued)
The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security [28]
Question of Palestine [30] (continued)
The situation in the Middle East [35] (continued)
The situation in Central America: procedures for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace and progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development [36] (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council [40] (continued)
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security [42] (continued)
Question of Cyprus [45]
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and aggression against Kuwait [46]
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development [79] (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations [103] (continued)
Current financial crisis of the United Nations [106] (continued)
Financial emergency of the United Nations [107] (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations [111] (continued)
Financing of the United Nations peace-keeping forces in the Middle East [115] (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group [116] (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group [118] (continued)
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina [143] (continued)
Convening of an international conference on Somalia [152] (continued)
Restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields [47] (continued)
Closing address by the President
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
Closure of the session
[2] (continued)
The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK: LETTER FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL (A471011)
The PRESIDENT: This morning the General Assembly will first turn its attention to document A471011, which contains a letter dated 2 September 1993 from the President of the Economic and Social Council addressed to me. The annex to that letter contains the text of a draft resolution on the International Year of the Family; the Economic and Social Council recommends that draft resolution for adoption by the General Assembly. The President of the Economic and Social Council requests that, in order to facilitate the preparatory process for the International Year of the Family, action on the draft resolution be taken before the end of the forty-seventh session.
To enable the Assembly to take the required action it will be necessary to reopen consideration of agenda items 12, "Report of the Economic and Social Council" and 93 (a), "Questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family".
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to reopen consideration of agenda items 12 and 93 (a)?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: May I take it also that the Assembly wishes to consider those two items directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: May I further take it that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the consideration of the draft resolution contained in the annex to document A471011?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEMS 12 and 93 (continued)
REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
(a) QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE WORLD SOCIAL SITUATION AND TO YOUTH, AGEING, DISABLED PERSONS AND THE FAMILY
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution contained in the annex to document A471011, entitled "International Year of the Family".
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt that draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 47237).
The PRESIDENT: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 12 and sub-item (a) of agenda item 93? It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 10 (continued) REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE WORK OF THE ORGANIZATION: DRAFT RESOLUTION A47L.65
The PRESIDENT: In connection with this item, which includes "An Agenda for Peace", the Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as document A47L.65.
I should like to point out that in the English version of the draft resolution, in the first line of paragraph 5 of section V, the word "should" is to be deleted.
The draft resolution before us is a consensus text. It is the result of extensive consultations undertaken on my behalf by His Excellency Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations, as Chairman of the informal open-ended working group on agenda item 10, along with his close associates, His Excellency Ambassador Juan Antonio Yáñez Barnuevo, Permanent Representative of Spain to the United Nations, who was the Vice-Chairman of the working group, and His Excellency Ambassador Francis Mahon Hayes, Permanent Representative of Ireland to the Untied Nations.
I wish to express my deep appreciation to them for their productive efforts and to all Member States that made a significant contribution through their constructive participation in the activities of the working group.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today represents a solid step forward.
I call on the representative of Egypt.
Mr. ELARABY (Egypt): It gives me great pleasure to report back to you, Mr. President, on the successful conclusion of the work of the informal working group on the report of the Secretary-General "An Agenda for Peace".
The draft resolution contained in document A47L.65 is the result of an extended process spanning nine months of consultations and deliberations. The active participation of many delegations has been a clear indication that Member States are determined to address the Secretary-General’s proposals contained in "An Agenda for Peace" and build upon what has already been accomplished by the adoption of resolution 47120. This fact was clear throughout the entire process, in which clear recognition of the vital importance of enhancing the role of the General Assembly in considering, evaluating and implementing the proposals contained in "An Agenda for Peace" was demonstrated.
The point of departure of the Secretary-General’s report "An Agenda for Peace" was to strive for reform based on a vision to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations to meet future challenges. The ideas and proposals presented in the report were discussed within the context of the working group. The draft resolution aims at elaborating and refining many of these proposals. By reconciling divergent views and stretching far enough to attain a consensus, the objective was always to seek a balanced text that would command the widest possible support. No doubt some delegations would have preferred more articulate formulations - and I subscribe to such a view - but, in all candour, it should be noted that time was needed for Governments to take stock of the rapid developments we witness every day. Time is now needed for Governments to analyse and digest these developments, and then agreement on the required improvements will, hopefully, be reached. When faced with difficult options one has to be a realist and accept the gradual, incremental approach.
The draft resolution acknowledges the importance and usefulness of several
measures suggested by the Secretary-General in "An Agenda for Peace". With
respect to certain new concepts, such as preventive deployment, demilitarized
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt) zones and post-conflict peace-building, the draft resolution contains progressive development to the extent possible, reflecting that they are relatively novel concepts that continue to evolve and develop.
Agreement was also reached on some measures to improve the implementation of Article 50 of the United Nations Charter in order to alleviate adverse consequences arising from the carrying out of preventive enforcement measures taken by the Security Council. The draft resolution invites the Security Council to consider a range of measures with a view to establishing appropriate means for resolving special economic problems. It is reassuring to note that the draft resolution encourages States to make greater use of the International Court of Justice for peaceful settlement of disputes. The draft resolution also decides to keep under examination all the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral in this regard. It is therefore expected that the General Assembly will examine the Secretary-General’s proposals to authorize him, pursuant to Article 96, paragraph 2 of the Charter, to take advantage of the advisory competence of the Court, and that other United Nations organs which already enjoy such authorization will turn to the Court more frequently for advisory opinions.
In conclusion, allow me to express my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having conferred upon me the responsibility of chairing the informal open-ended working group, a task which was by no means an easy one but which was greatly facilitated by your support and guidance. The cooperation of the Vice-Chairmen of the working group, Ambassador Yáñez Barnuevo, Permanent Representative of Spain, and, later, Ambassador Hayes, Permanent Representative of Ireland, was crucial. Their wide and distinguished experience in political and legal matters assured the successful conclusion of our work.
I cannot imagine that the task of the working group would have been accomplished without the invaluable support, advice and creativity of the Chairmen of the drafting groups, Ambassador Osvald of Sweden, Ambassador Cárdenas of Argentina, Ambassador Türk of Slovenia, Ambassador Sreenivasan of India and the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Singapore, Mr. Mark Hong.
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
Their tireless efforts and outstanding abilities have contributed immensely to the success of our work.
Before concluding, I should like to acknowledge with appreciation the support, the patience and the perseverance of the Secretariat. Assistant Secretary-General Benon Sevan and his collaborators, Mr. Tapio Kanninen and all the others, carried out their tasks with admirable dedication.
Finally, I should like to express my gratitude to the members of the delegations who have participated in the work of the group and constantly demonstrated willingness to cooperate with the Chair with objectivity and, more importantly, with flexibility, thus enabling us to reach a successful conclusion of our work.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A47L.65, entitled "An Agenda for Peace".
May I take it the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A47L.65, as revised in the English version?
Draft resolution A47L.65, as orally amended, was adopted (resolution 47120 B).
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of this resolution on "An Agenda for Peace". It follows a previous resolution of the General Assembly, resolution 47120, and eight presidential statements by the Security Council on this subject.
Today’s resolution is an important step forward in the follow-up to "An Agenda for Peace". It covers, in particular, preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peace-keeping and post-conflict peace-building. This is encouraging progress. It will help to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to respond to a world in a state of rapid transition.
I am gratified by the attention given to "An Agenda for Peace" by Member States in the 15 months since I produced it. There have been many meetings, both formal and informal. The process of debate has resulted in today’s invaluable guidance. Today’s resolution shows the determination of Member
States to pursue the effective implementation of the report.

The resolution expresses general support for the concepts of preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping, peacemaking and post-conflict peace-building.
Other sections of the resolution, however, require action, both by the United Nations system and by intergovernmental bodies. They are those concerned with the role of the General Assembly; special economic problems arising from the implementation of preventive or enforcement measures, i.e., Article 50 of the Charter; post-conflict peace-building; and the safety of personnel.
I welcome the recognition by the General Assembly of the important and effective role which measures of preventive deployment and demilitarized zones have played in the past. I am gratified, too, by the decision to give further consideration to the role of such measures and to their effective implementation in the future.
I also welcome the Assembly’s positive response on the subject of special problems arising from the implementation of preventive or enforcement measures. The Assembly recognizes that an immediate solution should be found to such problems, provided Member States wish such measures to be effective, in situations where they are applied as an alternative to the use of force.
The Assembly recognizes the need for sustained cooperative effort by the United Nations to deal with the underlying economic, social, cultural and humanitarian causes and effects of conflicts, to promote durable foundations for peace. I am pleased that the General Assembly has acknowledged the usefulness of the concept of post-conflict peace-building. I am grateful, too, that the Assembly has affirmed its readiness to support a wide range of activities in this area.
While the resolution does not address all the recommendations contained in my report concerning the use of the International Court of Justice, the Assembly has reaffirmed the role of the International Court of Justice, under the Charter, in the peaceful settlement of disputes. I look forward to the Assembly’s further examination of all my recommendations concerning the International Court of Justice. They include recommendations on the use of the
advisory competence of the Court.

As Secretary-General, I am moving to implement all the recommendations made on "An Agenda for Peace" by the various intergovernmental organs and bodies involved. I have set up an interdepartmental task force in the Secretariat. It will work out practical measures in response to specific decisions by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
In "An Agenda for Peace", I stressed the importance of measures of economic and social development in laying the foundations for a peaceful world. The work of the United Nations in the social and economic fields is inseparable from its responsibility to promote international peace and security. I intend to explore these linkages further, and to develop a more comprehensive concept of international peace and security, in "An Agenda for Development".
In the post-cold-war period, the world needs a new system for maintaining international peace and security. In "An Agenda for Peace", I set out proposals for strengthening the effectiveness of the United Nations in discharging its responsibilities under the Charter.
The proposals form a consistent and integrated set of measures to address human security in all its aspects.
The resolution which the General Assembly has just adopted takes a step towards the realization of a new international consensus and framework for action in the field of international peace and security.
I hope, therefore, that the implementation process will now proceed vigorously. I will do all I can to facilitate it. Where recommendations have
not yet received formal consideration by Member States, I urge the Assembly and the Security Council to do so without delay.
Last but not least, I must pay a special tribute to the Chairman of the informal open-ended working group, Ambassador Nabil Elaraby of Egypt, and to his close associates, Ambassador Yánez Barnuevo of Spain and Ambassador Francis Hayes of Ireland, for their tireless efforts during the past eight months in negotiating the text of the resolution adopted today by consensus. I thank them for their contributions and their collaboration.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote. May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. WISNUMURTI (Indonesia): It is a distinct honour and privilege for me to speak on behalf of the non-aligned countries on the resolution which we have just adopted, contained in document A47L.65, concerning the SecretaryGeneral’s report on "An Agenda for Peace".
Let me start by expressing our sincere appreciation and thanks to Ambassador Elaraby of Egypt, Chairman of the open-ended working group dealing with the matter, for so ably guiding our deliberations. Once again, he has shown his leadership and wisdom, which have led to yet another concrete result in the form of the resolution, which addresses important aspects of the Secretary-General’s report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" complementing resolution 47120 of 18 December 1992, entitled "An Agenda for Peace: preventive diplomacy and related matters" adopted last December. We are also indebted to the Co-Chairmen of the informal working group and the coordinators for their dedicated efforts, which have culminated in the adoption of this resolution.
The concepts, issues and approaches contained in the report "An Agenda for Peace" are of fundamental importance to the non-aligned countries. The basic action, as emphasized by the final documents adopted by the Tenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Jakarta in September of last year, is that:
"’democracy within the family of nations would require the fullest consultation, participation and engagement of all States, large and small, in the work of the Organization’." (A47675, chap. II, para. 28)
They also endorsed
"the Secretary-General’s view that resort to preventive diplomacy could be pursued through early identification of potential conflicts; engagement in peace-keeping where conflict occurs; preservation of post-conflict peace through peace-keeping and assistance in the implementation of agreements achieved; post-conflict peace-building; and the adoption of measures aimed at addressing the deeper political and socio-economic causes of conflict". (ibid)
The Tenth Non-Aligned Conference also attached particular importance to the restructuring, democratization and enhancement of the effectiveness of the United Nations.
It is within that framework that since the report of the Secretary-General was first discussed in the informal working group last year the non-aligned countries have made valuable contributions in addressing the various proposals contained in "An Agenda for Peace". From the beginning of this exercise, which began nine months ago, we have been conscious of the complexities of the issues involved. They are of interest and concern to all Member States in varying degrees. We also recognize that many of these proposals are new and evolving and therefore call for a cautious approach and serious introspection.
Because of these compelling factors, we have been imbued from the very beginning of this exercise with a sense of the need to be flexible but without, at the same time, compromising on the immutable principles on which the Non-Aligned Movement is built.
Having said that, let me express our satisfaction that the second phase of our discussion on the remaining aspects of the report "An Agenda for Peace" have gone equally well. The useful and exhaustive discussions that took place among so many Member States have helped to clarify the ramifications of the issues and concepts involved and to bridge the differing views. The results, by and large, were profoundly gratifying. We need only recall the substantive areas of consensus achieved on a number of pertinent questions. At the same time, it
(Mr. Wisnumurti, Indonesia) should also be noted that, being a consensus text, the resolution contains certain elements and formulations that did not fully meet our expectations. This, however, does not undermine the fact that, in many parts, the resolution generally reflects the views of the non-aligned countries.
In this context, we take particular note of the section of the resolution relating to the strengthening of the General Assembly’s role. As may be recalled, the non-aligned countries called for enhancing the General Assembly’s role in accordance with its powers and functions, as provided for in the Charter. The resolution seeks to achieve this objective through, inter alia, the full and effective use of the functions and powers set out in Articles 10, 14 and 22 of the Charter. It is understood that the call to enhance the role of the General Assembly should not be confined only to those Articles; thus, it should include other provisions concerning the functions and powers of the Assembly that, in our view, are of equal importance.
On preventive deployment and demilitarized zones, the resolution stresses the importance of transparency and consultations with Member States involved in any decision-making concerning the undertaking by the United Nations of preventive deployment, or the establishment of demilitarized zones. It reaffirms that such undertakings should be based on the consent of, and, in principle, on a request by, the Member State or States involved, having taken into account the position of other States concerned and all other relevant factors.
Another important provision in the resolution is the emphasis given to respect for the principles of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States, and non-intervention in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. These principles should certainly guide any undertaking of preventive deployment or demilitarized zones. The provisions that I have just highlighted could provide some assurance that preventive deployment and demilitarized zones can really promote the prevention or containment of conflicts and not instead aggravate the situation
or the conflict.
We welcome the call to consider making greater use of the International Court of Justice in the peaceful settlement of disputes. We believe, however, that this should not be construed as undermining the importance of optional jurisdiction under Article 36 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice. We are pleased with the provision in the resolution that requests States to consider making contributions to the Trust Fund to assist States in resolving their disputes through the Court.
The resolution also addresses the special economic problems arising from the implementation of preventive or enforcement measures as provided for in Article 50 of the Charter. It behoves the Security Council to recognize the urgency of the situation and to institute appropriate measures. We sincerely hope that the establishment of the voluntary fund will lead to the alleviation of the special problems faced by certain countries owing to the imposition of sanctions.
While recognizing that post-conflict peace-building is a new and evolving concept, the resolution acknowledges the usefulness of the proposals of the Secretary-General on this matter contained in his report. It is indeed appropriate that activities for post-conflict peace-building should be undertaken in conformity with the Charter and on the basis of agreements ending conflicts or reached after a conflict, or at the request of the Government or
Governments concerned.
The resolution explicitly acknowledges the role of the regional arrangements and organizations in contributing to the attainment of the objectives set forth in the Secretary-General’s report. In this context, we are familiar with the fruitful cooperation between the United Nations and various regional agencies that have acted as partners in facilitating the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
The question of the safety of United Nations peace-keeping personnel is dealt with in the final part of the resolution. We are of the view that the consideration of further steps to enhance the status and safety of United Nations peace-keeping personnel is a matter of urgency.
It is therefore clear that, in reaching a common understanding on this set of complex issues, we have succeeded in the delicate and difficult task of reconciling divergent views.
In conclusion, as a result of the deliberations during the past nine months, we have come to appreciate each other’s concern and interest. We hope that this spirit of cooperation and compromise, which has characterized our deliberations so far, will be carried forward into the future.
The resolution, taken as a whole and in conjunction with the Charter, constitutes an essential foundation upon which a durable edifice for peace and security can be built. The non-aligned countries believe that this is a continuing process whose success can be assured by the active participation of all Member countries.
Mr. MARUYAMA (Japan): Japan joined the consensus on the just-adopted resolution on "An Agenda for Peace". The document is the result of nine months of intensive discussion. While it may not satisfy all parties, it does reflect the current thinking among Member States on ways and means of strengthening the role of the United Nations in the area of international peace and security.
Japan participated actively in the deliberations of the Assembly’s open-ended working group and intends to continue its active engagement in any
follow-up to "An Agenda for Peace". I should like to stress that this consensus
(Mr. Maruyama, Japan) document is only the first step. We will have to elaborate our thinking further and work together if we are to meet successfully the new challenges of the postcold-war era.
Japan wishes to take this opportunity to express its deep appreciation to all the delegates who contributed actively and with patience to achieving this consensus. Our particular thanks go to Ambassador Elaraby of Egypt, Ambassador Yáñez Barnuevo of Spain and Ambassador Hayes of Ireland, who chaired the working group of the whole and skilfully managed to bridge many differences. Our thanks also go to Ambassador Osvald of Sweden, Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina, Ambassador Sreenivasan of India and Minister Counsellor Hong of Singapore, all of whom performed the difficult task of guiding their respective working groups.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan): I should like to begin by paying a special tribute to Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, the Permanent Representative of Egypt, for the most sagacious and determined leadership that he provided to the ad hoc open-ended working group of the General Assembly which finalized the important resolution that we have just adopted. Ambassador Elaraby has done us all the greatest service through his skilful diplomacy in bringing together an understanding on issues of great importance and diverse, long-range complexity.
We are also grateful to all those representatives who chaired, with great skill and ability, the various drafting groups in which various sections of the resolution were negotiated. Without the hard work put in by them, and of course by individual delegations, this resolution would not have been possible today.
The subjects dealt with in resolution 47120 and the latest resolution, which complements the earlier one, are of great significance, especially in the present context. Indeed, in our view the Secretary-General’s report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" came at a most opportune moment in the history of the United Nations. We regard this report as one of the most important documents to emerge in the field of international relations, and feel that it contains a visionary perception of the evolution of current trends.
We therefore warmly welcomed the report, and wholeheartedly supported the
many far-reaching and constructive recommendations contained therein. In our
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan) view, these suggestions were of particular interest and value to the small and medium-sized States, which constitute the bulk of the United Nations membership. We had hoped that other delegations would regard the Secretary-General’s recommendations in the same positive light. We therefore went to the open-ended, ad hoc working group with a forward looking and ambitious brief.
Unfortunately, the final product that we have today adopted falls short of our expectations. We have accepted it in a spirit of compromise as a consensus document representing both the lowest common denominator and a delicate balance among divergent positions. We feel that in the search for consensus a number of caveats and qualifications had to be accepted, particularly in the case of important concepts such as preventive deployment, demilitarized zones and postconflict peace-building, thereby detracting from their importance and effectiveness.
We were particularly dismayed at the refusal of certain States, enjoying military preponderance in their regions, to endorse unequivocally these concepts, the very purpose of which is to check aggressive designs and prevent the outbreak of conflicts.
The section on the International Court of Justice and the one on special economic problems arising from the implementation of preventive or enforcement measures were practically stonewalled by a group of delegations representing some powerful countries. While the latter section still has something to offer, the one on the International Court of Justice is in our view virtually devoid of substance.
We remain convinced of the validity and the usefulness of the SecretaryGeneral’s various recommendations, no matter how radical or innovative they might appear to some. Looking at the plethora of conditions introduced into the resolution, as well as at the grudging acceptance of ideas that deserve to be strongly endorsed, one cannot escape the feeling that perhaps the SecretaryGeneral’s report is a little ahead of its time, but, then, that has frequently been the fate of all visionaries. Nevertheless, we regard resolution 47120 and the one adopted today not as the culmination of an exercise, but, rather, as the beginning of a journey.
I wish to conclude by reiterating our warm appreciation and thanks to Ambassador Elaraby for his splendid and inspiring leadership.
Mr. ANSARI (India): India has been a strong supporter of the role of the United Nations in world affairs in accordance with the principles of the Charter. This consideration has also guided our approach to the present resolution, which we have supported in a spirit of cooperation.
The cornerstone of the Charter is respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States and non-interference in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. These principles remain as true today as they were when the Charter was adopted. We are pleased to note that the present resolution has reaffirmed these principles as crucial to any common endeavour to promote international peace and security.
The General Assembly is the principal organ of the world body, in which all Member States are represented. We note that the resolution has reaffirmed the role of the General Assembly.
The Charter recognizes achieving international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character as one of the principal purposes of the United Nations. An agenda for development is therefore necessary to complement "An Agenda for Peace". A balance between the United Nations development and peace-keeping activities is thus essential. It is equally important that the United Nations decision-making should be broad-based, to ensure the widest measure of support for its peace-
keeping activities.
With regard to preventive deployment, my delegation stresses that this should be undertaken only after exhausting fully the entire range of measures for the pacific settlement of disputes. There is also a need to exercise caution so that preventive deployment does not become an instrument to serve the partisan purposes of States. The resolution stresses that the implementation of any concepts and proposals on preventive deployment and demilitarized zones contained in "An Agenda for Peace" should be in conformity with the provisions of the Charter. The resolution acknowledges that preventive deployment and the establishment of demilitarized zones are to be considered on a case-by-case basis. My delegation is of the view that in each case where preventive deployment or a demilitarized zone is considered it should be fully in conformity with the principles of the Charter. In the case of disputes between States, my delegation feels that preventive deployment on international borders should be decided with the consent of both the States parties to the dispute. In keeping with the principles and purposes of the Charter, preventive deployment should not be considered where the situation on the ground is ambiguous and not in conformity with the stipulations of the Charter with regard to the role of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has stressed in his report, "An Agenda for Peace", that States affected by special economic problems should have a realistic possibility of having their difficulties addressed under Article 50 of the Charter. Sanctions are a means of implementing the will of the international community against errant States. They will lose their meaning if the adverse impact of the sanctions goes against the crucial political and economic stability of the larger community and in the process jeopardizes the will to act against errant States. The present resolution recommends a set of measures which we hope will be the beginning of the process of finding a satisfactory solution to a problem on which a large number of non-aligned and other States have expressed concern. We hope particularly that funds to provide financial assistance to affected countries can be established simultaneously with the imposition of sanctions, as this would demonstrate the genuine concern of the United Nations for the plight of the nations adversely affected. My delegation
(Mr. Ansari, India) also believes that such funds should be established on the basis of assessed contributions.
My delegation supports the role of regional arrangements and agencies in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. We note that the present resolution recognizes the role of regional arrangements in their fields of competence. Action by regional organizations should be limited to their own regions, should be in relation to their member States, and, above all, should be without intervention in the internal affairs of other States. International cooperation should be without distinction as to race, sex or religion, as stipulated in paragraph 3 of Article 1 of the Charter. Action by regional organizations should be based on the consent of all the States parties to a dispute. My delegation is also committed to the principle that the United Nations bears the principal responsibility in this matter.
Yet another important section in the text, dealing with post-conflict peace-building, rightly affirms the right of each State freely to choose its own political, social and economic systems and provides a clear framework for activities relating to the economic and social rehabilitation of conflict-torn countries. We are happy to note that the text avoids any attempt to prescribe interventionist measures in other States, on any account.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to record its appreciation for the tireless efforts of the open-ended working group, under the able guidance of Ambassador Elaraby, to harmonize the various points of view of Member States. We would like also to compliment the Permanent Representative of Indonesia, who, as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, effectively coordinated the position of non-aligned countries on various crucial and important issues contained in the Secretary-General’s report, "An Agenda for Peace". The statement made today by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia on behalf of the non-aligned countries enjoys our full support.
In our view, any exercise in conceptualizing new ideas in the realm of international law and practice needs caution and prudence. The challenge before us is to clarify the normative concepts and procedural safeguards that can generate adequate confidence in the wider and larger interest of the international community.
Mr. WOOD (United Kingdom): Like others, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, and all those who assisted you in your efforts, which have resulted in the adoption of the resolution before us today. Our particular thanks go to Ambassador Elaraby, the Permanent Representative of Egypt and Chairman of the working group, for his remarkable efforts over many months.
The resolution probably satisfies no one in its entirety. We for our part regret that it did not prove possible for the Assembly to give more positive encouragement to a number of the valuable concepts in the Secretary-General’s report - for example, to preventive deployment and demilitarized zones and to post-conflict peace-building. These concepts are evolving in practice on a case-by-case basis. We shall do all we can to ensure that this evolution continues in the future.
In conclusion, may I say how grateful we were to the Secretary-General for his remarks this morning and for his determination to promote further - and by action - the recommendations in "An Agenda for Peace".
Mr. HAYES (Ireland): The draft resolution in document A47L.65, which we have just adopted by consensus, is one of the most important to have come before the General Assembly during this session. It is an important step in the process of enhancing the role of the United Nations and enabling the Organization to respond more effectively to the challenges it faces by developing along the lines envisaged by the Secretary-General in his report, "An Agenda for Peace".
The resolution was the fruit of lengthy deliberations within the informal working group so ably chaired by the Permanent Representative of Egypt, Ambassador Elaraby. My delegation is pleased and honoured to have been able to take part in the work of the group, and we hope we have made some small contribution to the outcome. That outcome, in our view, is an accurate reflection of the current position of the States Members of the United Nations, collectively. We see it not as an end-point of the reform process, but as an important step along the way. We look forward to renewed efforts to develop further the themes addressed in the resolution. I assure the Assembly that we
will endeavour to play an active and positive part in this process.
All seven sections of the resolution are important. In these few remarks I shall refer to just three of the sections, but I do not thereby intend to imply any hierarchy of importance between them.
In our view, the question of enhancing the role of the General Assembly so as to enable it to fulfil effectively the functions assigned to it under the Charter, as covered in section I of the resolution, is of particular importance. Accordingly, we welcome in particular the intention of the General Assembly to make full and effective use of its functions and powers as set out in Articles 10 and 14 of the Charter. We intend to play a full part in the General Assembly’s consideration of the use of existing or new machinery to facilitate consideration of situations within the scope of Article 14 and in its consideration of ways and means to improve cooperation between the organs of the United Nations.
We also welcome the acknowledgement in section V of the usefulness of the Secretary-General’s proposals relating to post-conflict peace-building. We consider that this is one of the most important activities that the Organization is called upon to carry out at the present time, and we look forward to an expansion of these activities in the future. We consider it particularly important that these activities should contribute to the establishment of democratically accountable institutions and to ensuring the full enjoyment of human rights in those areas where conflict has occurred.
Ireland, as a traditional troop-contributing country, shares the grave concern expressed in section VII of the resolution over the growing number of fatalities and injuries among United Nations peace-keeping and other personnel. We consider that this is an issue which deserves the highest priority, and we look forward to consideration during the coming session of further steps to enhance the safety and security of personnel. We trust that it will be possible in the near future to agree on concrete measures to this end.
We believe that this resolution will make an important contribution to
ensuring that the United Nations can play the role which the peoples of the world expect of it. We accordingly welcome its adoption today by consensus.
Mr. CHERNIACOSKI (France) (interpretation from French): Since the publication of the Secretary-General’s report, "An Agenda for Peace", France has shown a keen interest in his analysis and proposals, especially with respect to preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peace-building. This is why, after contributing last autumn to the elaboration of the first resolution on the subject, France played an active part in the consultations of the informal working group of the General Assembly entrusted with the follow-up consideration of the report.
The text of this resolution reflects a balance between the positions of various Member States. In that respect I should like to say that my country hopes the scope of our resolutions will not exclude international realities or practices recently developed by our Organization. Too cautious an approach -particularly on certain concepts such as preventive deployment - will be inappropriate for the type of decision the United Nations will have to take in the new international context for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Finally, my delegation is pleased by the views expressed this morning by the Secretary-General and his intention to promote the ideas put forward in "An Agenda for Peace".
The PRESIDENT: We have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 10?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 17 (continued) APPOINTMENTS TO FILL VACANCIES IN SUBSIDIARY ORGANS AND OTHER APPOINTMENTS (h) APPOINTMENT OF A MEMBER OF THE JOINT INSPECTION UNIT: NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT (A47809Add.1)
The PRESIDENT: As indicated in document A47809Add.1, as a result of consultations in accordance with Article 3, paragraph 2 of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with the President of the Economic and Social Council and with the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, I now submit to the Assembly the candidature of Mr. Raúl Quijano of Argentina for appointment as a
(The President) member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office, beginning on 1 January 1994.
May I take it that it is the wish to the General Assembly to appoint this candidate?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 17.
AGENDA ITEM 22 (continued)
THE SITUATION OF DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN HAITI
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolutions 4720 A of 24 November 1992 and resolution 4720 B of 20 April 1993 on this item. As members know, this item has been included on the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 28
THE SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that on 18 September 1992 the Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to defer consideration of this item to the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to include it on the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: This concludes our consideration of agenda item 28.
AGENDA ITEM 30 (continued)
QUESTION OF PALESTINE
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly has adopted resolutions 4764 A through E of 11 December 1992 on this item. As Members know, the item on the question of Palestine has been included on the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 35 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolutions 4763 A and B of 11 December 1992 on this item. As members know, the item on the situation in the Middle East has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 35.
AGENDA ITEM 36 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA: PROCEDURES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A FIRM AND LASTING PEACE AND PROGRESS IN FASHIONING A REGION OF PEACE, FREEDOM, DEMOCRACY AND DEVELOPMENT
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 47118 of 18 December 1992 on this item. As members know, the item on the situation in Central America has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 36.
AGENDA ITEM 40 (continued)
QUESTION OF EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION ON AND INCREASE IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 4762 of 11 December 1992 on this item. As members know, this item has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 40.
AGENDA ITEM 42 (continued)
ARMED ISRAELI AGGRESSION AGAINST THE IRAQI NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS AND ITS GRAVE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE ESTABLISHED INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM CONCERNING THE PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY, THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that, on 18 September 1992, the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly and that, by decision 47464 of 23 December 1992, it further decided to defer consideration of this item to a later date during this session and to include it in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session. As members know, this item has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 42.
AGENDA ITEM 45
QUESTION OF CYPRUS
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that, on 18 September 1992, the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the present session but deferred a decision on the allocation of the item to an appropriate time during the session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to defer consideration of this item to the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it, then, that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to include it in the draft agenda of the fortyeighth session?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 45.
AGENDA ITEM 46
CONSEQUENCES OF THE IRAQI OCCUPATION OF AND AGGRESSION AGAINST KUWAIT
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that, on 18 September 1992, the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to defer consideration of this item to the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it, then, that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to include it in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 46.
AGENDA ITEM 79 (continued)
REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolutions 47188 to 47194 of 22 December 1992 on this item.
In connection with resolution 47191, entitled "Institutional arrangements to follow up the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development", I should like to point out that in his introduction to this draft resolution, the Rapporteur indicated that it would be adopted on the understanding that the issue coordinator would continue to conduct informal consultations on the venue of the future sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development at the resumed forty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
By a letter dated 13 September 1993, I have been informed by the issue coordinator - the Permanent Representative of Malaysia - that there was still no consensus on the venue of the future sessions of the Commission. The issue coordinator expressed the hope that necessary arrangements would be made to allow for further consideration of the issue at the forty-eighth session.
As members know, an item on the implementation of decisions and recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 79.
AGENDA ITEM 103 (continued)
REVIEW OF THE EFFICIENCY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolutions 47212 A and 47213 and decision 47455 of 23 December 1992 and resolution 47212 B and decision 47468 of 6 May 1993.
As members know, this item has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 103.
AGENDA ITEMS 106 and 107 (continued)
CURRENT FINANCIAL CRISIS OF THE UNITED NATIONS
FINANCIAL EMERGENCY OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 47215 of 23 December 1992 on these items. As members know, an item entitled "Improving the financial situation of the United Nations" has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly. May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of these items is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda items 106 and 107.
AGENDA ITEM 111 (continued)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted decision 47456 of 23 December 1992 on this item. As members know, this item has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 111.
AGENDA ITEM 115 (continued)
FINANCING OF THE UNITED NATIONS PEACE-KEEPING FORCES IN THE MIDDLE EAST
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolutions 47204 and 47205 of 22 December 1992 on this item.
As Members know, this item has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 115.
AGENDA ITEM 116 (continued)
FINANCING OF THE UNITED NATIONS IRAN-IRAQ MILITARY OBSERVER GROUP
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 47206 of 22 December 1992 on this item.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 116.
AGENDA ITEM 118 (continued)
FINANCING OF THE UNITED NATIONS TRANSITION ASSISTANCE GROUP
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 47207 of 22 December 1992 on this item.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 118. AGENDA ITEM 143 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 47121 of 18 December 1992 on this item. As Members know, the item on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been included in the provisional agenda of the forty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 143.
AGENDA ITEM 152 (continued)
CONVENING OF AN INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SOMALIA
The PRESIDENT: Members may recall that the Assembly adopted resolution 47167 of 18 December 1992 on this item.
May I take it that the Assembly considers that discussion of this item is concluded?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 47 (continued) RESTRUCTURING AND REVITALIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND RELATED FIELDS: DRAFT RESOLUTION (A47L.58Rev.1 and Corr.1)
The PRESIDENT: In connection with this item, the Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as document A47L.58Rev.1 and Corr.1.
I have been informed that Member States have agreed to continue and limit negotiations to the role, size and functioning of the Executive Boards before a final decision is taken on the result of the earlier negotiations on restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic, social and related fields with a view to finalizing the negotiations and bringing the matter for decision to the General Assembly not later than the end of November 1993.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of item 47 to the forty-eighth session of the Assembly and to include it in the draft agenda of that session?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of agenda item 47. CLOSING ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT: One year ago, I opened the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly of the United Nations with the hope for a better world. Regrettably, the world one year later has not become a better place. Conflicts have arisen one after the other. The number of victims is ever-increasing and most of them are innocent civilians. Virtually daily, the challenges before the United Nations increase; at the same time, the resources of the Organization are limited. The financial difficulties invoke unprecedented measures of selfrestriction.
Undoubtedly, the United Nations is facing important decisions. Though the road is not crystal-clear, "An Agenda for Peace" contains wonderful ideas and, at the same time, confronts practical problems. The forty-seventh session of the General Assembly recognized its importance both in the general debate and by the adoption of resolutions relating to agenda item 10. Yet, this is barely enough. The time has come for further deep consideration and reconsideration of the role of the United Nations as the world mechanism for peace and development.
(The President) It is my hope that the next session of the General Assembly will play an essential role in this regard.
It is a significant fact that the forty-seventh session directed its attention to preventive diplomacy. From a strategic point of view, this is one of the basic directions of the efforts of the United Nations. If perhaps this had been in the forefront of the deliberations in previous years, some conflicts could have been avoided. Of course, the complexities of the issues are great; none the less, investing in preventive diplomacy is invaluable.
I see the future of the United Nations vested in a world mechanism for the prevention of conflicts and wars. This future is not unattainable. In the world today, there truly exist issues that warrant preventive diplomacy, in which the United Nations can play a decisive role.
While contemplating the future of the world and trying to seek political solutions, we must not forget about the hundreds and thousands of victims of the wars. No one has the right to dismiss the fact that the United Nations is indeed the hope for saving innocent and suffering people from the ravages of war. I am thinking, for example, about Bosnia, where, if the political will does not prevail in the very near future, those who must endure the coming winter will simply not survive. The political efforts, no matter how great the cost, must not be at the expense of these lives. This is why I strongly appeal to all Member States, their Governments and their political leaders for immediate international humanitarian action for the people of Bosnia, without regard to nationality or religion. I additionally appeal to all sides in the conflict to provide all necessary conditions for this international humanitarian effort.
The terms "revitalization" and "restructuring" now occupy quite a prominent place in United Nations vocabulary. This is hardly surprising, because the Organization is taking a self-critical look in an attempt to adapt to the momentous changes that have occurred in the world over the past several years. The forty-seventh session of the General Assembly witnessed this with the adoption of the resolution under agenda item 31, "Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly". It is important that Member States reached a consensus on the reform of the General Assembly and made the first concrete step by restructuring the main Committees. It is my hope that the forty-eighth session will further manifest this revitalization momentum.
It would be no exaggeration to say that never before in its history has the Organization been asked to do so much by so many. To be able to meet these challenges, the United Nations must re-evaluate not only its mechanisms and structures, but also its practices, with a view to making itself stronger and more efficient. This can be very well exemplified by so practical a problem as the imposition of sactions, now facing the Organization and its Member States.
The irony is that sanctions very often not only exert pressure on the Member States against which they are directed, but also place a huge burden on those complying with them. It would be extremely helpful if the Security Council would come up with a set of measures involving the financial institutions and other entities within the United Nations system that could protect States from such difficulties. In this regard, I should like to emphasize the importance of the resolution just adopted by the General Assembly on agenda item 10.
At the end of my mandate, I should like to express my gratitude to all Member States for encouraging and supporting me during my tenure as President of the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly. I should like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to wish him enduring success in the tremendous tasks which lie ahead. I also extend my appreciation to all those from the Secretariat who facilitated my work.
I wish to thank you once again, distinguished delegates, for having bestowed upon me the honour of serving as the forty-seventh President of the General Assembly. With the next session, the international community will again renew its expectations for a better world. Hopefully, my successor will have reasons, one year from now, to conclude that the United Nations has succeeded in making the world a better place. I can only say that we sincerely aspire to this goal.
AGENDA ITEM 2 (continued)
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION
The PRESIDENT: We are now coming to the end of the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly. I invite representatives to stand and observe a minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silent prayer or meditation.
CLOSURE OF THE SESSION
The PRESIDENT: I declare closed the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
FIRST COMMITTEE
General ||| Assembly
FORTY-SEVENTH SESSION
43nd meeting held on Tuesday, 9 March 1993 at 10.30 a.m.
New York
Official Records
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 43rd MEETING
Chairman;
Mr. ELARABY
(Egypt)
CONTENTS
Organization of work
Statement by the Secretary-General
Vf-
This record is subject no correction.
Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned within one weekef the date cf publication to the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section, Room 1X2-750.
2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each Commstee.
93-85403 0130V (E)
Distr. GENERAL AC.147PV.43 20 April 1993
ENGLISH
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
ORGANIZATION OF WORK
The CHAIRMAN: As representatives have been informed, this formal meeting of the Committee has been convened in order to have an opportunity to listen to the statement of the Secretary-General.
Thereafter, we shall proceed to the next phase of our work in an informal meeting to consider conclusions and recommendations which might eventually be reflected in a draft resolution or draft decision of the Committee.
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The CHAIRMAN: I now have the pleasure and honour to warmly we.i< me to the First Committee Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and to invite him to address the Committee.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It gives me great pleasure, and it is an honour, to address the First Committee today in its resumed session.
A major purpose of the session is the integration of disarmament and arms-regulation issues into the broader international peace and security agenda. This includes a reassessment of the multilateral arms-control and disarmament machinery.
A second aim is to develop a more comprehensive approach to disarmament. This involves seeking security at lower levels of armaments and armed forces in the post-cold-war era.
The end of bipolarity has not diminished the need for disarmament. If anything, it has brought greater urgency to the tasks of setting priorities and of establishing machinery for their realization.
The number of armed conflicts around the world is increasing. This has brought a renewed realization that the process of arms limitation and disarmament must embrace both the acquisition and the use of weapons.

One striking effect of the end of the cold war has been a greater willingness on the part of States to supplement negotiated agreements with collateral measures for confidence building. Greater transparency in military-related matters is now more acceptable than before. The prospects of diverting much needed resources away from military purposes are now better than ever.	.
But none of this will be possible unless States, both large and small, feel secure. Measures should be taken to reassure States which feel that their security is threatened. Indeed, such measures are necessary if a new spiral of the arms race is to be avoided.
There is, for example, a growing concern over the dangers of nuclear proliferation. I also see tensions escalating in regions where large numbers of weapons have been left over from the cold war. The elimination of such weapons is a major part of the work of the United Nations in post-conflict peace-building in such countries as Cambodia and Somalia, for example.
Amid these emerging trends, there is a broadening area of political consensus about the role of the United Nations. As seems evident from the response of Member States to my report (AC.1477) on "New Dimensions" of disarmament, there are at least five major areas demanding priority attention. Let me refer to them briefly.
First, a helpful legacy of the cold war is the system of multilateral and bilateral agreements and treaties. They provide a solid foundation for further arms-regulation and disarmament measures. The process of negotiation must, therefore, continue.	
Secondly, confidence-building measures are now becoming an integral part of the work of the United Nations in the fields of conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution. The involvement of regional organizations in confidence-building through consciousness-raising should be encouraged.
Thirdly, since the incidence of the actual use of weapons has continued, and increased in some parts of the world, measures must be put in place to monitor trends in military procurement and spending. The establishment of a mechanism for that purpose should be hastened through measures such as the arms trade Register at United Nations Headquarters.
Fourthly, the process of economic adjustment to the end of the cold war has in some cases created more problems than the major military spenders anticipated. Lessons and experiences should be shared. In that way the fear of economic dislocation will not become an obstacle to progress in disarmament.
Fifthly, as a more integrated approach towards the issues of disarmament, security and conflict-resolution is put in place, we need to give serious consideration to the machinery for its implementation.
In this last respect, I should mention that the Secretariat’s capabilities are being strengthened to enable it effectively to discharge its responsibilities. I am keenly aware of the concerns felt by Member States that any changes made in this regard should take into account their probable impact on the mandated programmes and activities in the field of disarmament.
I am currently in the process of considering a proposal to relocate units of the Office of Disarmament Affairs to Geneva. As I understand it, there is a desire among delegations to consider this idea in the broader context of the disarmament machinery and the Secretariat's capacity to service it. I will therefore continue consultations on this matter.
I wish you success in your deliberations at this resumed session."

UNITED
NATIONS
Security Council
PROVIS ZONAL
SPV.2705
S September 1986
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VOW AT IM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 5 September 1986, at 11.30 a.m.
President'. Mr. BELONOGOV
Members: Australia
Bulgar ia China
Congo
Denmark
Prance Ghana Madagascar Thailand Trinidad and TObago United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America Venezuela
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. HOGUE Mr. GARVALOV Mr. LI Luye Mr. BALE Mr. BIERRING Mr. de KBMOULARIA Mr. DUMEVI Mr. RAKOTONDRAMBOA Mr. KAS84SRI Mr. MOHAMMED Mr. Al-SHAALI
Mr. BIRCH Mr. OKUN Mr. AGUILAR
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should bo submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
85-60859A	0438V
The meeting was called to order at 12.15 p.m.
EXPRESSION OF WELCOME TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I wish first of all warmly to welcome the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez da Cuellar.
We are extremely pleased, Mr. Secretary-General, to see you here in your accustomed place at the Council table, we are very happy that you have won your battle with illness and that you look just as we would wish to see you; fully recovered, energetic and full of spirit. I express to you tne warmest best wishes. EXPRESSION OF THANKS TO THE RETIRING PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As this is the first meeting of the Security Council this month, I should like to pay a deserved tribute, on behalf of the Council and on my own behalf, to my predecessor, His Excellency Mr. D.H.N. Alleyne, Permanent Representative of Trinidad and TObago to the United Nations, for his dedicated service as President of the Council for the ¡ninth of August. I am sure that I speak for all members of the Council in expressing our admiration and deep appreciation to Ambassador Alleyne for the great diplomatic skill and unfailing courtesy with which he conducted the Council's business last month.
EXPRESSION OF APPRECIATION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Or. this the first occasion when I join you at a formal meeting of the Security Council, I should like to express my sincere appreciation to all of you for the warm welcome extended to me since I assumed my duties as the new Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations, and assure you of my full co-operation in our common efforts.
H4S1
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda waa adopted.
THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST
LETTER DATED 4 SEPTEMBER 1986 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF FRANCE TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S18318)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury (Lebanon) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting today in response to a request contained in a letter addressed to the President of the Security Council on 4 September 1986 by the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations (S18318).
The Secretary-General of the united Nations wishes to make a statement. I call upon him.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank you for your extremely kind words.
The Security Council is meeting today in very difficult and grievous circumstances. As I have had the opportunity to inform the members of the Council through the President, a series of violent incidents took place in the UNIFXL zone between 11 and 22 August, during which two Lebanese and one member of the Irish contingent were killed and several soldiers of the French contingent were wounded. After 22 August, there was a quiet period during which UNIFIL made an effort, with the co-operation of the Lebanese authorities and leaders of the Amal movement, to reduce tension and re-establish calm in the region.
Unfortunately, despite those efforts, a serious incident occurred during the morning of yesterday, Thursday, 4 September, when three French soldiers were killed by a remote-control bomb near the village of Joya in the sector of the French contingent. The Commander of the Force immediately ordered an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the Incident, and preliminary reports make it perfectly clear that the bomb was detonated deliberately.
In a press communiqué released yesterday. I most vigorously condemned this cowardly attack upon members of the French contingent of UNIFIL.

I also wish to inform the Council that this very morning some 30 Israeli soldiers carried out a helicopter raid in the village of Zibqin in the sector of the Nepalese contingent. UNIFIL immediately dispatched two mobile teams to the village, and the Commander of the Force protested against the raid to the Israeli authorities. According to the preliminary report of the Force Commander, an Israeli soldier was killed during the operation and four Lebanese villagers were taken away by the Israelis.

These recent incidents most tragically stress the extremely difficult conditions in which the soldiers of UNIFIL must work. As the Security Council is already aware, I decided to send to the region a mission of inquiry to consider, together with the Lebanese Government, measures to be taken to ensure that the Force is able to carry out effectively, in the required secure conditions, the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council in its resolution 425 (1978).

Because of the incident of yesterday morning, I moved up the date of the departure of that mission. The mission, which is headed by Mr. Goulding, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, left New York last night.

Mr. Goulding will submit to me the recommendations of his mission as soon as possible, and naturally I shall report to the Security Council as soon as I receive them. Of course, I shall do everything possible within the limits of my competence and authority to avoid a recurrence of the recent incidents, to strengthen the security of the members of UNIFIL and to enable the Force to carry out its mandate. But here I must recall that, as is the case with all United Nations peace-keeping operations, UNIFIL does not have coercive power, and its soldiers may resort to the use of force only in legitimate self-defence. That being so, UNIFIL can carry out its mandate only if all the parties involved extend to it the required co-operation and if it benefits from the confidence and unreserved support of the Security Council, from which it derives its legitimacy and authority.Those

two conditions are absolutely essential, given the difficult and complex circumstances in southern Lebanon.
I should like to express to the French and Irish Governments, as well as to the families of the victims of these recent incidents, my sympathy and profound condolences.
I should also like to pay a tribute to the courage and dedication demonstrated by the members of all the UNIFIL contingents in carrying out their difficult and dangerous mission.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to thank the Governments of those countries that send contingents to the Force for the co-operation and support they are so generously giving that important United Nations peace-keeping operation in the Middle East.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As a result of consultations held among members of the Security Council, I have been authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the members of the Security Council.
"The menbers of the Security Council express their deep sorrow at the grave and distressing attacks which killed several members of the Irish and
French contingents of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. These attacks come after various serious incidents in the recent past, in particular those of 11 and 12 August, in the course of which a nunber of menbers of the
Force were injured. The members of the Council express their indignation at such resort to deliberate violence, which places in jeopardy the safety of the
"They convey their sympathy to the afflicted families and pay tribute to the qualities of composure, courage and self-sacrifice manifested collectively by all the members of UNIFIL, in service of the ideals of peace of the Organization.
(The President)
"Given the worsening of the situation in the zone in which UNIFIL operates, the members of the Security Council consider it essential to adopt with all urgency measures aimed at the effective reinforcement of the security of the members of the Force and request the Secretary-General to undertake all necessary steps to that effect.
"The members of the Security Council express their appreciation to the Secretary-General for his immediate dispatch of a mission led by the Under-Secretary-General, which is to carry out, in consultation with the Lebanese Government, an in-depth examination of the measures to be taken to enable UNIFIL to carry out its mandate, as laid down in Security Council resolution 425 (1978), effectively in the necessary conditions of security.
"They invite the Secretary-General to submit to the Security Council, as soon as possible, the report which he will prepare following the mission.
"The members of the Council unanimously express their confidence in the Secretary-General and the Commander of the Force in the current difficult circumstances."
The first speaker is the representative of Prance, on whom I now call.
Mr. de KEMOULARIA (France) (interpretation from French): First' Mr. President' I wish to express to you our best wishes for a successful presidency. My delegation has already witnessed your exceptional courtesy and the flexibility and high quality of your diplomacy.
1 also wish to tell the Deputy Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago how much we appreciated the presidency of Ambassador Alleyne.
I join you' Mr. President, in saying how happy we are to have the Secretary-General back among us in excellent form.
France asked for an urgent meeting of the Council because of the rapid deterioration of the situation in southern Lebanon. Two very serious attacks have taken place, only a few days apart, costing the life of an Irish officer and three French soldiers of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Those attacks follow serious incidents in which, for a month now, members of several contingents of the force have in turn fallen victim, particularly, as everyone recalls, and as the Secretary-General has just mentioned, 16 French soldiers on 11 and 12 August.
My Government has condemned those attacks in the strongest terms. It welcomes the expressions of sympathy to UNIFIL and the contributing countries by the people and the Government of Lebanon. But the present situation, in which soldiers of an international force serving peace are cut down in a cowardly manner, has become intolerable. It must be ended immediately.
When proposing last April that tne Council decide on a short mandate, we wished to lead the international community to evaluate UNIFIL's work better. Our appeal was heeded. The Secretariat immediately entered into consultations with the parties concerned and a dialogue began. In giving for the first time unanimous support for the renewal of UNIFIL's mandate, on 18 July, the Security Council showed that the international community as a whole would from now on measure up more to its responsibilities.
We must, however, note that the persistent efforts made have not yet succeeded. UNIFIL is still not in a position to carry out its mission in the essential conditions of security and effectiveness. That is why, after the incidents of 11 and 12 August, we made the President of the Security Council aware of the need for a general review of the substantive problems facing UNIFIL in fulfilling its mandate, with a view to drawing the appropriate conclusions. In that context, as was our desire, the Secretary-General has sent to the area with extreme urgency a high-level mission to assess the situation.
The most recent attacks have made the situation even more precarious and dangerous. It is no longer possible to carry on waiting. Therefore, France is pressing for the urgent adoption of measures aimed at strengthening the security of all the members of the Force. Accordingly, we note with satisfaction - and we thank the Secretary-General for this - the immediate dispatch of Mr. Goulding to the area. We expect that he will without delay take all the necessary practical measures and that the Secretary-General will submit to us all appropriate recoraaenda tions.
But it is also important that we undertake a general review of th? kind that we have called for, dealing with all the substantive problems in the way of the accomplishment of the Force's mission. To that end, we ask that in the course of his mission Mr. Goulding should gather together all the factors requiring assessment and review, so that the Council may reach its conclusions.
We hope that the Secretary-General will, as he has just announced, present to the Council as soon as possible his report on Mr. Goulding's mission tell us of his proposals.
I should not wish to conclude this statement without paying tribute to the Secretary-General's action and the courage and dedication of the officers and soldiers of UNIFIL.
The president (interpretation from Russian): I thank the representative o£ France for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. DUMEVI (Ghana): Mr President, allow me at the outset to welcome you as the head of the Soviet delegation to the Security Council and to express our pleasure at seeing you preside over the Council’s work as President for this month. This pleasure derives from the excellent relations between your country and mine. My delegation had the opportunity to meet you briefly when you made your calls on Missions a few weeks ago. We have no doubt that your vast experience, wisdom and skill will greatly help in the Council's work. We can assure you. Sir, of the full co-operation of the Ghana delegation.
We also wish to place on record. Sir, our profound appreciation of the excellent manner in which your immediate predecessor, Ambassador Alleyne of Trinidad and Tobago, handled the Council's affairs last month. We in the Ghana delegation have excellent relations with Ambassador Alleyne and his delegation, relations stemming not only from our shared interests as members of the Non-Aligr.ed caucus on the Council, but also from the useful counsel which we in the Ghana delegation have had the privilege of enjoying from the Trinidad and Tobago delegation.
tet me also take this opportunity to welcome the new Deputy Permanent Representative of the Wilted Kingdom delegation, Mr. Birch, to the Security Council.
I wish on behalf of the Ghana delegation to convey, through you, Sir, to the Governments of France and Ireland and to the bereaved families the deepest sympathies of the Government of Ghana for the cruel loss of life occasioned by the new attacks on French- and Irish-held positions in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIPIL) area. As a representative of a country which has a long list of nationals killed while serving in United Nations peace-keeping operations, including UNIFIL, I convey our sentiments with a heavy heart.
(Mr. aiaevi, Ghana)
In its concept and practice, peace-keeping is an innovative technique evolved by the United Nations to stabilize serious crisis situations while searching for peaceful solutions. Over the years this practice has helped defuse tension and has allowed the cooling-off periods necessary for peaceful negotiations. It has been one of the most useful tools in the hands of the Security Council in ameliorating conflict situations. It is therefore in the interest of all that the concept and the practice of peace-keeping operations should not be impaired. The Ghana delegation, therefore, would like to congratulate the French delegation on its noble initiative.
Although my delegation would have preferred a more balanced text, we nevertheless support the statement read out by the President, because of its general objective.
The fact remains, however, that the major causes of this cycle of violence in UNIFIL's area of operations are the so-called security zone unilaterally demarcated by Israel and the presence of Israeli forces and Israeli-sponsored armed groups in southern Lebanon. The history of this cycle of violence and the resultant killings stow that in all cases the incidents originate principally from ths local population's resentment of the presence of Israeli forces in the area. It is such sentiments that have driven them to force their way through UNIFIL check-points. In the ensuing arguments, tempers rise and gun-fire is exchanged resulting in the killing and wounding of UNIFIL soldiers.
It follows that the way to eliminate such tragic incidents as those that OQj'jmS "estsrdi“ is for Israel to withdrew Ite troops from Lebanon in order to enable UNIFIL to fulfil its nandate. It is hoped that those possessing political Leverage with Israel will muster the political will necessary to prevail upon Israel to withdraw its troops to the international boundary.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation Erora Russian): I thank the representative o£ Ghana for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon, upon whom I now call.
Mr. FAKHOURY (Lebanon)(interpretation from Arabic): I wish at the outset to congratulate you. Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and to express our complete confidence in your experience and in your ability properly to guide the proceedings of the Council.
I wish also to convey to your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago, our appreciation and thanks for the way in which he presided over the work of the Council last month.
I should like to take this opportunity also to welcome the presence at the Council table of the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, and to wish him a complete recovery from his illness.
The Council is meeting today at the request of France, a friendly country, against a distressing backdrop of Incidents and acts of aggression against the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) - specifically against its French and Irish contingents. The victims of these incidents have been Lebanese civilians, and officers and men of UNIFIL.
The Lebanese Government and Lebanese officials have condemned all such incidents and have expressed their deep sorrow and pain at the tragic aftermath. On behalf of the Government and the people of Lebanon, my delegation wishes to convey its deep, heartfelt condolences to the Governments and the peoples of France and Ireland, to the nedters of UNIFIL, to all troop-ccntributing countries, and to the families of the victims. We stress that the Lebanese Government will never spare any effort in contributing to the safety of the mentoers of UNIFIL.
At Government and popular levels alike, Lebanon is unanimous in its wish to demonstrate complete support £or UNIFIL. We express our support for the presence of the Force in Lebanon and our desire to ensure its safety. We insist on enabling UNIFIL to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it under Security Council resolution 425 (1978) and subsequent resolutions. We have been steadfast in that genuine unanimity, as demonstrated in more than one forum and on more than one occasion. Once again, we express our great and profound appreciation of the role played by UNIFIL, of the voluntary contributions by troop-contributing States, and of the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and his associates.
In its peace-keeping activities, UNIFIL has paid a high price indeed since its creation, its mission is a lofty one, and the sacrifices made by those of its members who have fallen in the line of duty will not be in vain. Their noble memory will live in the minds and hearts of Lebanon', we view their sacrifices as a symbol of sincere co-operation among nations in the service of peace and in the defence of fairness and justice.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I thank the representative of Lebanon for the kind words he addressed to me.
I wish now to make a statement in ray capacity as Permament Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
I too wish to convey my sincerest sympathy to the Governments of Ireland and France and to the families of the soldiers of the united Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) who have perished in Lebanon. There is no question but that armed acts of provocation against United Nations forces deserve condemnation and must be stopped.
(The President)
These tragic events have cnee again emphasized the dangerous and abnormal conditions in which united Nations forces in Lebanon must operate owing to the fact that for a long period of tine now they have been deprived of the possibility to carry out ,hankered the duties entrusted to then by the Security Council. In that connection, we believe it necessary once again to state that it is the Council's direct duty vigorously to work for the implementation, as soon as possible, of its resolution 421 (1978) on the basis of which those forces were created.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.
There are no further speakers for this meeting. The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.