UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/43/PV. 10
30 September 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-third session
President: la ter : later:
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 29 September 1988, at 10 a.m.
Mr. CAPUTO	(Argentina)
Mr. ESSY (Vice-President)	(Cote d'Ivoire)
Mr. CAPUTO (President)	(Argentina)
-	Announcement of the Nobel Peace Prize
-	Address by Mr. Francois Mitterrand, President of the French Republic
-	Address by Mr. Paul Biya, President of the Republic of Cameroon
“ General debate (9] (continued)
Statements made by:
Mr. Nwachukwu (Nigeria) Mr. Mocumbi (Mozambique) Mr. Andreotti (Italy)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English md interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be p inted in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be !enLUnr? t*16 s^?”atute °f a menfoer of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room OC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.

The meeting was called to order at 10. 25 a. m. 
ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE NOBEL PEACE PRIZE
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to convey to the General Assembly some news which I am sure will be a source of satisfaction and of pride to the Organization. 
Today the Nobel Prize Committee has informed me of its decision to award the 1988 Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces. In awarding the Prize to our peace-keeping forces, the Committee has recognized that the quest for peace is a universal undertaking of mankind, involving all the nations and peoples of the world.
The recent achievements of the United Nations have been neither sudden nor fortuitous? rather, they are the result of the persistent and dedicated work done throughout the many years of the Organization's peace-keeping activities. The Prize is a tribute to the idealism of all those who have served the Organization, and in particular to the courage and sacrifices of all those who have contributed, and continue to contribute, to the peace-keeping operations.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to associate myself with what I am sure is the feeling of satisfaction of all representatives in the Organization at the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
Ever since our Organization was founded, the peace-keeping operations have made a major, effective contribution to the keeping of the peace in various confrontations. They have also helped to prevent conflicts and, in general, have promoted the purposes and principles of the Charter.

(The President)
The new international atmosphere provides a concrete opportunity for the United Nations to play an even broader role in the system of collective security, of which the peace-keeping operations are a fundamental instrument.
Therefore we welcome with joy this important distinction that has been conferred on the Organization, and - rightly, I think - we interpret the 1988 Nobel Peace Prize as a tribute to the United Nations, to its ideals, to its purposes and principles and - I would add - to its Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, whose intelligent and dedicated efforts have without any doubt been a vital, indeed crucial, element in the creation of this new international context which is clear to all of us.
ADDRESS BY MR. FRANCOIS MITTERRAND, PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)s The Assembly will now hear an address by the President of the French Republic.
»L-^anyois Mitterrand, President of the French Republic, was escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)-. On behalf of the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the united Nations the President of the French Republic, His Excellency Mr. François Mitterrand, and to invite him to address the General Assembly.
President MITTERRAND (interpretation from French): I begin by paying tribute to the wisdom of the members of the General Assembly at its forty-third session, who, in electing you President, Sir, have made clear both the deservedly high esteem in which they hold you and the prominent place held by Argentina and, beyond Argentina, by Latin America in today's world.
I wish to add that I deeply appreciate the great honour of having this opportunity to address the Assembly again.
Having just learned, as the Assembly has, the news about the Nobel Peace Prize, I wish immediately to convey my congratulations to the United Nations on the award of the Prize to the united Nations peace-keeping forces.
When I came to this rostrum five years ago the world was dominated by the East-West confrontation, the proliferation of regional conflicts, the deepening of the gulf between North and South and repeated violations of human rights and the rights of peoples. Have those realities now disappeared? Is our planet decisively turning towards unity and peace? I shall not claim that that is so. In spite of the passing years, I seem to hear too often the same words, the same vain incantations, and to see too often the same hopes being aroused only to end in the
(President ¿Mitterrand) same disillusionment. The expectations of too mmy peoples remain unfulfilled. Two centuries after the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen there are still many Bastilles to be taken, many liberties to be won, many rights to be safeguarded. But here and there some progress is being seen, what had seemed for ever immovable has begun to move. Will hope come into its own again in the society of men?
We know how much we owe,to Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev, who have had the intelligence and the courage to have done with the arms race and the escalations of confrontation.
Similarly, the adversaries engaged in some regional conflicts - whether they have taken stock of the limits of their action and the attrition of their strength, have changed their appraisal of their people’s interests, or have wanted to contribute to the general movement towards the easing of tensions - are trying to disengage themselves from the tragedy they have been living through.
I wish to express my gratitude to peace-loving men and women everywhere who have worked ceaselessly to bring about such a result. Among them I should mention the name of the Secretary-General of the united Nations, Mr. Perez de Cuellar. Without his skill, his persistence, his constant readiness to serve and his cultural resources, we should not have come this far.
For the first time since the last World War the two greatest Powers have begun to explore the path of disarmament, it must be stated that their agreement on the elimination of United States and Soviet intermediate forces in Europe is a good agreement. On behalf of France, I unhesitatingly approved it from the very first day. It is now my expectation that the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will make progress in the reduction of their strategic n. :lear armaments, as they have planned to do. If the negotiations they are conducting
JP/mtm
(President Mitterrand) lead to agreements consistent »1th the Imperative rales of balance ana verification this will do much to strengthen the security of all.
These questions are, of course, of tremendous importance. But it will be readily understood that, as the head of a European state, ! attach priority to the reduction of the conventional armaments which are stockpiled in Europe, and stockpiled unequally, to the disadvantage of Western Europe. It is my earnest hope that the 35 participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe will take up the substance of these negotiations as soon as possible.
We have been offered an opportunity, unprecedented in the past half century, to ensure the establishment of a stable balance at a lower, sufficient and reasonable level of armaments. Will this balance be achieved? That will depend on the political will of the States involved. But who could assume the responsibility of rejecting this chance out of hand?
The objective is easy to formulates that everyone should be able to defend himself, as is his right, without threatening anyone else. But how shall we go about this? I venture to suggest some elements of an answer.
First, by ensuring that no army and no coalition of armies in the area where East and West are facing each other has the means for the sudden launching of a surprise attack, nor for waging a prolonged war. To that end, it would be desirable to arrange measures in that area for the reduction, withdrawal and déconcentration of troops and equipment - tanks, armoured vehicles, artillery, portable bridges and all other techniques for crossing water barriers - and measures for the limitation of reserves and stockpiles.
Secondly, by preparing procedures for verification and inspection to prevent any violation of treaties.
(President Mitterrand) These new measures of transparency and confidence would usefully supplement the arrangements arrived at in Helsinki.
My country has taken a number of initiatives concerning the definition of the area in which these constraints would be applied) the ratio between new military equipment and foreign equipment, and the ceiling to be set on the fotces of an individual country in relation to the whole. It would also be my wish that at the end of the next two years the status of negotiations should be examined. If nothing had been achieved, there would be nothing to prevent people from exercising their freedom. However, a favourable outcome would open vast new prospects for the future of Europe. All of us, Europeans both in the East and in the West, belong to the same continent and derive our heritage from the same culture. History and geography invite us patiently to overcome, by every possible means, for the security of all, the confrontation of hostile blocs.
As for chemical weapons, whose ravages we have unfortunately observed in the recent past, we must eliminate them as quickly as possible. What President Reagan said last Monday about this subject was quite right. He expressed himself in lofty and urgent terms, which echoed our own concerns, and in a manner that is all the more timely because his country possesses such weapons. I noted with equal interest that the Soviet Union, which also possesses chemical weapons, had supported this proposal.
The proposals put forward by France, which has no chemical weapons, are of three kinds. First of all, my country, the depositary of the Geneva Protocol of 1925, naturally favours a meeting of the 110 signatories to that agreement. The purpose of such a meeting, in our view, would be to solemnly reaffirm the
commitment not to use chemical weapons, to prevent their proliferation, to enoourape ne» accessions to the Protocol, to improve investigative procedures - in short, to indicate a common desire for the success of the work currently being carried out at Geneva within the contest of the Conference on Disarmament.
Secondly, my country wants to increase the role of the United Nations in the struggle against the proliferation and the use of chemical weapons. In 1M2 France was the originator of the resolution enabling the Secretary-General to arrange investigations in those parts of the world where chemical weapons had reportedly been used. This procedure has already confirmed that such weapons have in fact been used. Get us go further: let us create a situation that would make it Impossible for any state to use chemical weapons with Impunity to settle its esternal or internal problems, if any state should use them, I think it would become necessary, among other measures, to impose an embargo on all deliveries of products, technologies and, more generally, weapons to that state, for its part. Prance is ready, after consultation with its partners, to submit a draft resolution to this effect. This would be without prejudice to any sanctions decided upon by the Security Council.
The third and last point is the one I particularly wish to stress: we must prohibit not only the use of chemical weapons but also their manufacture. The risks of the normalization and the proliferation of chemical weapons compel us to accelerate our efforts to bring about the destruction of stockpiles, as well as to maintain close supervision of the means that would make it possible to rebuild them
In signing the convention, each State possessing stockpiles of chemical weapons would undertake to destroy them. In the view of experts, this will take several years, and in the meantime the chemical threat will continue to exist.
This is why I believe that chemical-weapons factories should be closed as soon as the convention enters into force and, like stockpiles, should be subjected to international surveillance before they are dismantled. France declares its readiness, as of this moment, to renounce under the same conditions - that is to say, as soon as the future convention enters into force - any possibility of producing chemical weapons.
Of course, the banning of chemical weapons could not be imposed on some if others, including the nuclear Powers, retained a clear field for themselves and did not persevere in their desire for nuclear disarmament.
In this connection, I recall that in September 1983, speaking from this rostrum, I stated the conditions under which my country would agree to participate, at the proper time, in a nuclear-disarmament conference among the Powers that possess nuclear weapons: a decisive narrowing of the gap between the arsenals of the great Powers and our own*, a halt in the anti-missile, anti-satellite and anti-submarine weapons race-, and correction of the imbalances in conventional armaments. Today I maintain what I said at that time.
I would add that limiting the disarmament effort must be extended to space, the common heritage of mankind. That is why France is opposed to an arms race in space but supports the use of space-borne means of control.
Before the INF treaty, the importance of which is becoming more apparent every day, and the on-site verification for which it provides - a clause the importance of which can never be over-emphasized - disarmament negotiations had stalled over this problem. At the special session of the United Nations last June - the third special session devoted to disarmament - my country advocated control by satellite and by automatic surveillance, as well as the so-called routine or challenge on-site inspections. We can now define, on a case-by-case basis, a contoination of
means o£ control adapted to each disarmament agreement. But nothing can be done without the political will of States.
Coming now to regional conflicts, I can only welcome the developments in the Gulf, what has been initiated in Afghanistan, and what is expected in the Western Sahara, Cambodia and, perhaps, typrus. This is the easier for me because France has always refused to recognize the fait accompli, has ceaselessly condemned terrorist or military intimidation, and has tirelessly pleaded for settlement of conflicts by peaceful means.
Far be it from me to underestimate the scope of the propress made in the past fee months. I have noted, however, that while the rapprochement between the United sutes and the Soviet Union has contributed to the cessation of fighting, it remains insufficient to restore lasting peace, tor the underlying causes persist. In this connection, I have noted that this period of diplomatic calm has not reached several parts of the globe-, the Middle East-, Central America, despite the Arias Plan and the action of the Contadora and Uma Groups, which Prance supports-, and, while there may be some respite now and again, southern Africa, a direct
consequence of the Intolerable policy of apartheid.
It is the responsibility of the international comity to consolidate what has been achieved and help extinguish the last remaining pockets of violence, when weapons have fallen silent, so much will remc.. to be done: agreements to guarantee, wounds to staunch, adversaries to reconcile, economies to be rebuilt.
It will do no good to shower the work and the person of the Secretary-General with praise, if we are going to withhold our support from him tomorrow. For peace has its price: sending armed troops there, organising a referendum here, and elsewhere setting up aid tor reconstruction. All this has to be financed. I would hate to think that after being so lavish in their war efforts. States, particulariy the most powerful, would be tight-fisted when It comes to peace efforts.
. in Afghanistan no one can ever be satisfied with replacing an international conflict by a civil war. The withdrawal of foreign troops should normally open up the way for the restoration of the sovereignty of that country, the return of refugees and economic reconstruction. But this can only come about with extreme vigilance.
It is my wish that the cease-fire between Iraq and Iran will lead, as quickly as possible, to a genuine peace, a settlement of conflicts, the reconstruction of
(President Mitterrand) disaster-stricken areas and the restored freedom of navigation in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz.
Peace is contagious and everyone, the States and the peoples of the region, will reap the benefits. At this time, how can we be unmindful of the fate of a minority which has suffered in a two-fold way, such as the Kurdish people? I hope that renewed conciliation in Western Sahara will prevail. We could believe it today. This will remove an obstacle to the construction of the Greater Maghreb, bringing with it peace and prosperity, a plan of which France approves. Here we count upon the wisdom of leaders.
In the Middle East, the uprising of Palestinian youth and the decision of King Hussein of Jordan have shown once again that the status quo no longer protects those who are subject to it, those who seek to benefit from it, and that it is increasingly deadly for those who are subjected to it.
Let us go back to the basic principles of a lasting settlement, as defined by the United Nations. All members are familiar with them. For my part, I outlined them both in the Knesset in Jerusalem and in the Arab capitals. Israel has the right to exist within safe and recognized borders; the Palestinian people are entitled to aspire to a homeland and to take charge of their own destinies.
In order to arrive at a peace settlement, which would enshrine these rights, there must be dialogue between the parties. Each side, Israelis and Palestinians, must do its share. Each must be willing to accept for the other what it demands for itself, and each must be able to say this in no uncertain terms. I do understand how difficult it is to take the first step.
In order to facilitate dialogue and break down the walls of distrust, the international community must clearly act as an intermediary. A procedure exists: the international conference. It is the only framework within which real partners can meet and establish bilateral contacts between them.
The international conference has become a reference point. Let us make it a r lity. I proposed some time ago that a preparatory committee earnestly go about laying the groundwork. Mr. Gorbachev was in agreement with me on this idea. Now the time has come to revive this. I suggest that a diplomatic arrangement be made among the five permanent Members of the Security Council in conjunction with the Secretary-General. This preparatory work should result in reconmendations on the organization and calendar of the future conference and recommendations about who its participants will be.
France, of whose ties to Lebanon I need not remind the Assembly, will not resign itself to watching that country’s independence and unity disintegrate. We call upon the United Nations as a witness to the obstacles which have been placed in the way of the free exercise of the sovereignty of the people. We appeal to the sense of reason of the neighbours of that country. A peaceful, reconciled Lebanon is no threat to anyone. A Lebanon dismembered and the object of conflict and dispute will remain an area of insecurity for us all. Let us urge the Lebanese to draw upon their national pride and patriotism to summon the strength and courage to have faith in their country. I can assure the General Assembly, in any case, that France will remain at the side of those who, in mutual respect, are fighting for a democratic future for Lebanon, as well as its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Farther away, towards the Far Bast, an end to the sufferings of Cantoodia is in sight. The decision announced by the Government of Viet Nam to end its intervention, the initiatives of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the actions of such leaders as Prince Norodom Sihanouk may bring us closer to the hour of a political settlement.
(President Mitterrand)
My country, which facilitated the initial meeting between the Cambodian partners, will continue to work even harder at this, and soon, I hope. We stand ready, if they so wish, to invite the parties involved to meet in Paris in due course.
At this point in my address, I wish to tell the General Assembly that nothing seems more important to me, whatever the importance of the subjects I have touched upon this morning - disarmament and the settlement of regional conflicts - nothing, I stress, is more important to me than closing the ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries. The causes of this disparity, as the General Assembly knows, are many: political, social, economic, demographic, financial, and so on. They have become so serious that many are tempted to dismiss all remedies as futile.
(President Mitterrand)
That is not the case with France. For seven years no» - ana I am certainly not the only one - 1 have been repeating that it is in the interests of the North
to help the south, that there is no such thin«, as fate, that man can always waster the course of events ana that it is urgently necessary to do so. I see in the persistence of the current imbalances the most damaging cause of tremenaous unhappiness, a misfortune which, more assuredly than any other danger, will drive
the world towards the endless chaos of war, or something even worse.
Nevertheless, international multilateral or bilateral aid is stagnating or receding. France - which, of all the industrially advanced countries, allocates the highest percentage of its gross national product to development aid - believes that it has not yet done its duty. The target of 0.7 per cent remains its ambition. In particular, the debt burden calls for immediate action. A number of very interesting initiatives have been launched by one country or another. For my Part, I suggested to the major industrialised countries at their Toronto meeting this year that they make the terms of repayment considerably easier for the poorest countries. As for France, it has chosen to cancel one third of the debt owed to it by these countries. This significant step is but a beginning.
For other heavily indebted countries, particularly in hatin America and Africa, debt also represents an intolerable burden, and in certain cases a threat to democracy. In the face of this situation the International «»unity must sho. that it can be more realistic and more imaginative. All debts incurred must be «paid, but the cost of this can be reduced without passing on the burden to the taxpayers of creditor countries.
Thus, last year the United States, in a bold move, guaranteed a proportion of the principal of Mexico's commercial loans. Several countries and many experts have thought of creating a multilateral fund which would lower the cost by
(President Mitterrand) guaranteeing interest payments. Various methods of financing this fund have been put forward.
In the view of France, the best technique would be to create a fund in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to guarantee the payment of interest charged on certain commercial loans converted into bonds. This fund would lower significantly the finance charges payable by debtor countries and would involve them more actively in world trade.
In order to finance this, the developed countries would set aside their share of a new issue of special drawing rights for use by the developing countries. I realize that the implementation of this project would represent a significant legal and financial innovation. It would require lengthy preparatory work and many consultations among creditors and with their debtors. However, this alone would seem to be equal to the challenge.
But development requires many other things. I would mention the following: stabilizing the export earnings of countries in the southern hemisphere and diversifying and increasing the value of their production - and the Uruguay Round must take these into account; environmental protection, which only a short time ago was endangered by industrial wastes from the North being disposed of in the South -and the international community will have to agree to regulations and the necessary precautions; a massive transfer of technology and know-how from the North to the South - and I would like in this regard to suggest a new approach, modelled on what is known as Europe's EUREKA project, in which Government stimulus, together with initiatives freely undertaken by companies and universities, leads to co-operation on an equal footing. I continue my brief list: launching major programmes of universal interest which can mobilize our energies to bring help to regions facing catastrophes due to natural causes or the folly of men. I cite as an example the
(President Mitterrand) stabilization of the rivers that have been flooding Bangladesh, the cause of a terrible catastrophe, as an appropriate beginning for a project of this kind. France, for its part, is ready to contribute.
Two centuries ago France began a revolution that changed the course of history throughout the universe. In doing so, France took a position in the battle which has yet to be won, and is still necessary, for a greater measure of freedom, equality and brotherhood. As we prepare to celebrate this bicentenary, let us defend human rights more fiercely than ever before, from the earliest recognized to the latest: human rights, the rights of peoples, the rights of mankind. Today, in certain emergency situations, in situations of distress or extreme injustice, we should affirm the right of humanitarian assistance.
Economic and social progress is the only solid foundation on which to build democracy; the moral weight of public opinion and unflagging vigilance will be its best guarantee.
So many people are still being denied their most elementary rights and for so many men, women and children poverty is the only world they know, and the absence of rights is their only horizon.
Surely the time has come to acknowledge that rights of mankind exist and should be defined. I am thinking of the protection of our natural environment in the face of the sometimes irresponsible requiremerts of our economy. I was happy to hear the representative of the Soviet Union asking for a plan to be worked out before 1992 on this subject. I am also thinking of the protection of the human species, the ravages of drugs, and the extraordinary possibilities of science, in particular genetics.
The conference of Nobel Prize-winners which I convened in 1988 in Paris elerted us to the dangers of this. It is not knowledge in itself that is
dangerous» it is rather the applications of science that must be controlled, that we must master. Since we are accountable in proportion to the power we now possess in transmitting a natural and genetically intact heritage to our descendants, we
must lay the foundations for the ethics of the third millennium.
I must stop here. Since, with you, I have been looking at the future, I dream of the day when Europe, as it is trying to take shape, will be able to speak here with a single voice, using, as I have just done, the language of peace among nations and confidence in the destiny of humanity.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)-. On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the French Republic for the important statement he has just made.
!î!ù-î£î2æ!12!i««£™U^£«He«^^
the General Assembly Hall.
ADDRESS BY MR. PAUL BIYA, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now hear an address by the President of the Republic of Cameroon.
--■■ paul Biya,-President of the Republic of Cameroon, was escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
The PRES ID ENT (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United Nations General Assembly the President of the Republic of Cameroon, His Excellency, Mr. Paul Biya, and to invite him to address the General Assembly.
President BIYA (interpretation from French): I thank you for the kind words you have just said as you bade me welcome to the Assentoly.
Allow me to congratulate you on your well-deserved election to the presidency of this session and to express the hope that, under your guidance, its work will be successful.
It gives me great pleasure also to extend my warm greetings to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, whom we had the pleasure of welcoming to Cameroon at the beginning of this year. As you are well aware, Cameroon owes its existence to the United Nations. It is therefore deeply attached to this Organization, which played a decisive role in its accession to independence.
I would like to express our sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his devotion to the service of our Organization. I take this opportunity also to reiterate our support for the considerable efforts he is making to promote peace and co-operation in the world in spite of the prevailing economic difficulties.
I also wish to extend my congratulations to the United Nations peace-keeping forces, which have just been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
!MB/
We are on the eve of mankind. We will, also be millennium.
(President Biya) the year 2000, a turning point in the history of responsible for the smooth or faulty take-off of this
new
The duty of each
and everyone of us is to
ensure the future of generations
come in the best possible circumstances.
to
(President Biya)
If we take a quick look at the world today the words that keep coining up are: crisis; conflicts; poverty; ignorance; disease; disasters; and injustice. Yet never before have science and technology offered the opportunities they offer today for us to overcome poverty and disease and never before have the various means of communication offered such tremendous possibilities for abolishing distances; but never before has a political and economic crisis reached the extent of today's crisis.
The United Nations, it must be recognized, is doing what it can to improve international relations from both the political and the economic points of view. All these efforts notwithstanding, much still remains to be done. Every conflict stands in the way of progress. Progress depends inevitably on entente, consultation and mutual respect.
Because of their unavoidable interdependence, States should regard the United Nations as a neutral forum wherein they harmonize their positions and settle their disputes in a peaceful and mutually beneficial manner - and this is possible. Politically, the new climate between the Soviet Union and the United States is an example. The commitment of those two great nations to report to the international community, in particular to the Conference on Disarmament, on the progress and results of their negotiations is a decisive step towards peace.
The determination of the major Powers to work more closely together leads us to expect other encouraging results. In Afghanistan, the partial withdrawal of Soviet troops holds out hope for new developments. In the Western Sahara, the peace plan proposed by Mr. Perez de Cuellar has been accepted. The Chad-Libya border conflict appears to be moving towards a negotiated settlement. Many leading African Presidents have made ceaseless efforts to achieve a peaceful settle it. Such a settlement would certainly constitute a great victory for them and for the
pkb/ap
(President Biya) whole of Africa. The situation in the Horn of Africa also allows us to be hopeful. Efforts to normalize relations between Ethiopia and Somalia should be encouraged and supported. In Angola the peace talks between the parties concerned are continuing in Brazzaville. Following the cease-fire agreement in August, the talks between Iran and Iraq begun in Geneva are to be resumed.
However, the odious system of apartheid is still thriving in South Africa and, to date, in spite of United Nations Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 601 (1987) Namibia continues to be deprived of its independence. A solution to this conflict would also enable the independent States of the subregion to continue, in an atmosphere of peace and security, the work of nation-building which has been undermined by the attacks and acts of economic sabotage perpetrated by the rebels armed by racist South Africa. We will continue to support a people fighting for a just cause, namely human dignity.
Our present economic difficulties should not prevent us from honouring our commitments to the Special Fund of the Co-ordinating Committee for the Liberation of Africa and to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund. We should also continue to help the freedom-fighters of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC) and the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC), as well as the front-line States.
Once more I call on all forces of peace, on all nations, to exert pressure and to adopt comprehensive and mandatory economic sanctions against the racist regime of Pretoria.
The situation in the Middle East remains disturbing. Cameroon, which maintains relations of friendship and co-operation with all States of the region, condemns the escalation of violence. I sincerely hope that dialogue will replace
PKB/AP
(President Biya) such violence and enable all parties concerned to seek a just and lasting peace. It is high time for the international community to find an appropriate solution.
Numerous hotbeds of tension still persist also in Latin America and Asia, and we must commit ourselves to restoring calm.
Th. encouraging remits achlwwd i„ the Sahara, in Afghanistan, in Angola and In Chad are proof that it is always possible to find an appropriate solutions what is needed is to demonstrate seriousness and good faith.
Unwavering determination must be applied to resolving the severe economic crisis afflicting the third world. Consultation designed to find solutions to the poverty in which three fourths of mankind is living is as necessary and as important as the quest for solutions to conflicts. The economic picture of the past few years has been appalling. Imbalances are worsening. Rich countries are enjoying growing prosperity, whereas the natural resources of developing countries no longer suffice even to meet the basic needs of their peoples. The African countries have now come to realise that they must first count on themselves and on their own efforts.
Confronted with this very serious situation we have taken measures aimed at stabilizing our economy and, in the long term, bringing about its recovery. We no longer want to be dependants. We have either abandoned or reconsidered certain development projects and we have cut down on State expenditure.
'	(President Biya)
Certain companies have been obliged either to close down or to lay off staff, we are all aware of the gravity of the situation.
The special session of the united Nations General Asserfcly unanimously adopted the Plan of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development. However, within the context of the world crisis it is not enough to constitute subregional bodies or to define short-term priorities to stimulate our growth and reduce the vulnerability of our economies.
The prices of our basic products have reached the lowest level in the past 50 years. Our export earnings have dropped alarmingly, while the prices of the capital goods and finished products we import are continue ly rising. As if that were not enough, our manufactured goods meet with the protectionist policies of the industrialized North.
The result is that our balance of payments is registering a serious deficit. That deficit is further aggravated by the burden of our external debt and by monetary disorders, it is true that we want to settle our debt, but we do not have the means to do so. It is therefore logical and Imperative that we examine with our creditors those solutions that will allo, us to replay our debts and still save our economies from total collapse.
Everything that has been done to contain this situation has come up against a hostile international environment, we are working more, we are managing better, we are producing more, yet the sharp drop in the prices of raw materials, the reduction of financial aid for development, the enormous debt burden, inflation and fluctuating exchange rates, the lack of dialogue, which is crucial to bringing about a more just economic order - all those elements constitute impediments to the progress of the African continent and threaten the future of the world.
AS we are well aware, world stability concerns both developed and developing countries, we are waiting for the international community to make greater efforts
(President Biya) and to adopt concrete measures. Decisions taken by a certain nuntoer of developed countries, such as Canada and France, and those taken at the summit meeting of the Seven in Toronto, constitute the beginning of positive action.
We ate not asking for charity, we are seeking help in order to resolve the serious problems that concern us all. Every one of us has a stake in this - it is not a one-way street. Assisting developing countries out of the crisis means opening up new markets to industrialized countries, new markets for their products. The solutions exist, and all we need is to seek them whole-heartedly.
Politically, the major Powers have demonstrated that when they want something it can be achieved. That applies to the economic crisis as well. We need only have the 'Will.
For us, the United Nations represents a forum for consultation and for seeking solutions. The United Nations reflects the common determination of nations to work together. The United Nations is an assembly. It is a force to reckon with, a powerful tool for development. Let us learn to use it together.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Cameroon for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. Paul Biya, President of the Republic of Cameroon, was escorted from the General Assembly Hall.
AGENDA ITEM 9 (continued GENERAL DEBATE
Mr. WACHUKWU (Nigeria). On behalf of the Nigerian delegation, sir, I wish to congratulate you on your election an President o£ the General Asseebly at this session. I an particularly pleased to see you occupying this high office because of the very friendly relations between our two countries. I an sure that this session of the hsseebly will benefit from th. sterling qualities that you will undoubtedly bring to bear on your duties as President. May I assure you of my --operation and support and that of Nigeria during your tenure of office.
This session is taking place at a time of considerable improvement in the international political climate. The United nations has proved its value as an effective and indispensable Instrument in the painstaking process of negotiating the tern« of settlement of most regional problems. This augurs well for the future of the united Nations and of mankind. At this point, may I congratulate the Secretary-General on the leadership role be has played in the cause of world peace and the strengthening of the United Nations.
The award a few hours ago of the Nobel Peace Prize for 1988 to the United Nations peace-keeping forces is the greatest tribute that could be paid at this time to our Organization, but it is also a challenge to the United Nations to strive even harder to progress from peace-keeping to peace-making. As Chairman of the united Nations Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, Nigeria is proud to be associated with the peace-keeping operations of the Uhited Nations.
The international economic envircnment remains extremely unfavourable for the developing countries. The indices of this situation include the continuing decline in the prices of primary commodities, the general worsening of the terms of trade, the problem of rising protectionism, the increasing debt burden and net capital outflow from these countries. The political will needed to address these issues,
(Mr. Nwachukwu, Nigeria) in particular the debt problem, has not been sufficiently demonstrated by the developed countries. Indeed, the debt burden has become a major impediment to our economic growth and social development. The North-South c blogue has lost momentum, and with it the desire to look critically at the operations of the international economic system.
Nowhere has this worsening economic situation facing the developing countries been exemplified more vividly than in Africa. The economic situation of the continent remains critical. In our determination to improve our economic situation, we have embarked on major reforms of our national economies. Many of us have courageously undertaken fundamental structural adjustments aimed at reviving our economies, stimulating growth and promoting development.
The reform measures have included drastic devaluation of our currencies, reduction or elimination of subsidies, privatization of publicly owned enterprises and the streamlining of our bureaucracies. These measures entail considerable political risks, and social costs arising from the sacrifices which our peoples have been called upon to make. They certainly demonstrate our willingness to do everything possible towards the development of self-reliant economies.*
The mid-term review and appraisal of the United Nations Prograrane of Action for African Recovery and Development 1986-1990 has demonstrated that the serious economic difficulties faced by African countries remain largely unsolved and in most cases have worsened. The contributions of the international community to the implementation of the Programme have fallen short of the expectations of African countries. Yet, when the Programme was adopted at the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly, two years ago, it was widely acclaimed as a positive
*Mr. Essy (Cote d'Ivoire), Vice-President, took the Chair.
'	(Mr. Nwachukwu, Nigeria)
response by the international community to the serious economic problems of the African continent.
Hi9.ru perceives the Program as a compact between Mt lean countries ana the international community. He in Africa ore fulfilling our own side of the pact, we expect the international community to fulfil its cosmitment. Jointly, we must find solutions to the most serious economic problems facing African countries through debt relief, an Increase in official development assistance and support for agreements to stabilize the prices of primary commodities, on which the economies of most African countries depend.
The Nigerian Government is facing Che challenges of the overall development of our national economy with a courage and dedication unequalled in our history. The focus of the strategy is the modernisation and transformation of our national economy. To this end we have adopted a structural adjustment programme designed to improve the performance of our economy. The Implementation of this prograde has opened up opportunities for our citizen, and improved the climate for foreign investment in our countrye
Two years of its implementation have brought into bold relief the obstacles that hamper our development. These include, principally, the lack of an adequate supply of external financing and the high cost of imported manufactured products and machinery. These problems have been made more acute by our crushing debt burden and debt-service obligations, as well as by huge losses in export earnings e ult of the sharp and continuing decline in the prices of our primary commodities, including oil. Thus the economic development of Nigeria, like that of most other developing countries, continues to be constrained by an adverse international economic environment.
We believe that the economic problems of African and other developing countries are issues that can no longer be swept under the carpet. The phenomenon
(Mr. Nwachukwu, Nigeria) of a world in which one fifth of the population lives in luxury and affluence and four fifths live in abject poverty and squalor cannot guarantee peace and security for mankind. Such a world would have little chance of saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war, nor would it promote fundamental human rights and the dignity and worth of the human person.
We believe that, unless the international community takes more seriously its obligations and commitment to establish conditions in which justice and respect for human dignity prevail, the primary purpose of our Organization, which is the maintenance of international peace and security, will continue to be in jeopardy.
In a few weeks we shall be celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Since its adoption the world has witnessed tremendous progress in the field of human rights, globally, regionally and nationally. The one exception to the universal advancement of the rights of the individual is South Africa, where a white minority continues to trample upon the rights of the black majority.
When we in Africa discuss the issue of human dignity, we do so with the conviction that our African culture recognizes the sanctity of life and liberty as universal. We believe that when any man’s dignity is trampled upon anywhere in the world, all mankind suffers a little. That is why we denounce apartheid as morally outrageous and indefensible and politically unacceptable to the civilized world. The pernicious apartheid system continues to be an affront to the international community. Worse still, the racist regime continues to destabilize the front-line States of southern Africa.
It is not only unfortunate but outrightly unacceptable that this evil regime in Pretoria should continue to pursue its obnoxious policies with the active support of important Members of this world Organization. Though we are told with sanctimonious piety that sanctions do not work, the same countries that make the claim are quick to impose sanctions on other States with which they disagree. We call on all Member States to rise above pecuniary considerations and impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions on that evil regime.
The Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on southern Africa, of which Nigeria is a member, has produced incontrovertible evidence to attest that sanctions indeed do work. I know that South Africa has been feeling the effect of the limited sanctions imposed on it by some Members of the United Nations. We are most disheartened to know not only that a nunber of countries are continuing unashamedly to trade with South Africa while proclaiming their abhorrence of the evil system of apartheid, but that some of them are benefiting from the limited sanctions imposed on that State. This must stop.
We call on all those who give the racists succour and support to join the civilized world in ostracizing that pariah state until a non-racial re'gime comes to power in South Africa. Nigeria will continue to support progressive forces within
(Mg, Nwachukwu, Nigeria) and outside South Africa that are committed to the dismantling of apartheid. This is a oomitment that is shared by our people and our Government. Nigerians see the denial of basic human rights to black people in South Africa as a slur on mankind. That is why as far back as 1976, for example, individual Nigerians voluntarily contributed 315 million to support the peoples of southern Africa in their just struggle to be free.
Africans are a generous and forgiving people. When right triumphs over wrong in South Africa, when freedom overcomes tyranny, when harmony replaces discord and dissension, the Boers will not be victims of reverse racism, as many of them fear? rather they, along with all God's children on the African continent, will march forward in freedom and harmony for the good of the human race. This is the thrust of the Lusaka Manifesto adopted by the Organization of African Unity in 1969.
We call on this Assembly to convene a special session in 1989 devoted to apartheid in South Africa and the destructive consequerces of South African aggression against the front-line and neighbouring countries. We hope that the special session will formulate new strategies for the early liquidation of the apartheid system.
We welcome the ongoing negotiations on Angola and Namibia. We believe Angola should be left to develop along its chosen line. It is also the sovereign prerogative of Angola to secure its independence. The recent withdrawal of South African forces from Angola is only a return to sanity, legality and international decorum. Ten years ago the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 435 (1978). The continued illegal occupation of Namibia constitutes not only an affront to the United Nations but a deliberate challenge to the Security Council. . South Africa must withdraw forthwith from Namibia.
It is to us an irony of our times that any group of countries, fully aware of the grave dangers posed to lives and the environment, would either condone the dumping of toxic and radioactive waste or actively encourage their export to other countries. The international community must accept, as my Government has actively canvassed, that dumping of toxic and radioactive waste is a moral equivalent of war.
The Nigerian Government has made its position clear on this matter, and followed this up with a call on the international community, at the subregional and regional levels, to enact laws to discourage this callous and unacceptable assault on lives and the environment.
At the levels of the Organization of African Unity and the Economic Community of West African States, firm resolutions have been adopted to discourage the importation of these hazardous wastes into our continent and to penalize any persons or private organizations which collaborate with outside interests to turn Africa into the garbage dump for toxic and radioactive waste. At the meeting in July, in Rio de Janeiro, of the countries of the South Atlantic, bold new steps were taken to strike back at this menace before it becomes truly unmanageable.
Recently also, the Nicosia meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement adopted a Declaration which strongly condemned the dumping of hazardous waste. With the establishment of a "Dump watch”, my country is currently collaborating with many Members of this Organization in the dissemination of precise information on the extent and location of toxic waste vessels now roaming the high seas. We have co-operated with and will continue to count on the excellent support of non-governmental organizations which have devoted their time and other resources to the protection of the environment.
Nigeria was a victim of this despicable practice. Between August 1987 and May 1988, toxic wastes were secretly dumped in the Koko Port area of my country. By this act, the people and the environment of Koko were put at very grave risk. In addition, the economic life of the area was dislocated. The Nigerian Government moved with despatch to have the waste removed. It also enacted appropriate national legislation against the dumping of toxic and radioactive waste.
My delegation is gratified to of this debate and in other forums
(Mr. Nwachukwu, Nigeria) note that several delegations have in the course condemned this act and expressed their
willingness to crusade effectively against It. As a starting point, we have called on all Member states to curb the activities of those involved in the transboundary movement of waste. We call also on all Manter states and non-governmental
organizations to adopt the "Dump Watch".
Just as we are worried about the dangerous effects of toxic and radioactive wastes on the environment, we are also concerned about the possible hostile use of these wastes. We are equally happy that the International Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-second session, last month, condemned all practices of nuclear-waste dumping and requested the Director General to establish a wortlng group of experts to draw up a code for international transactions Involving nuclear wrote. We call upon the present session of the General Assembly to give the Conference on Disarmament the mandate of commencing negotiations on a draft convention on the prohibition of the dumping of radioactive and toxic waste for hostile purposes.
In the Middle East, after four decades of endemic cycles of violence and needless loss of life, the United Nations has finally outlined a peace process which, if faithfully Implemented, has a credible chance of bringing durable peace to that area. Nigeria supports a United Nations-sponsored international conference on the Middle East.
Another area where a solution compatible with the Charter of the Organisation is urgent is Kampuchea. Nigeria will continue to wort within the United Nations, particularly through the Committee on Kampuchea, in pursuit of an acceptable solution to this problem.
The ongoing withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan has demonstrated what is possible when there is political will, it is our hope that the Geneva accords on Afghanistan will be adhered to by all the parties concerned.
Similarly, we commend the peace initiatives of the Latin American and Central American countries. We call' on the entire international community to support the ongoing process for a lasting peace in Central America.
I had the opportunity at the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, to congratulate the two super-Powers on the conclusion and ratification of the Treaty on intermediate~range nuclear forces. That agreement is historic as the first true nuclear disarmament measure eliminating an entire category of nuclear weapons. The joint declaration by President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought has given great relief to a world dangerously threatene j by the possibility of self-destruction.
My delegation, like others that worked hard for the successful outcome of the special session devoted to disarmament, is naturally disappointed at the failure to agree on a concluding document. However, we believe that the international community cannot afford to be totally discouraged by such periodic reverses. We appeal to the super-Powers to see multilateral involvement by the United Nations in disarmament as a useful and necessary complement to bilateral and regional efforts. An urgent area for multilateral action is the negotiation of a convention on chemical weapons.
The achievements of the Organization in the four decades of its existence have been quite impressive. The United Nations has contributed substantially to the decolonization process. But For t-s 'raanizaUor we •-'■'d	without
instruments and frameworks of, accountability such as the codes, conventions, norms and principles that at present regulate international relations.
We are encouraged by the resurgence of hope and faith in are further encouraged by the increasing desire to use it for of advancing international peace and security.
our Organization. We
the primary purpose
The United Nations is indispensable to all the countries of the world. The presence of all of us here is a reaffirmation of that fact. My country, Nigeria remains firmly committed to the United Nations Charter.
Mr.„MOCUMBI (Mozambique): It is with great pleasure and satisfaction that I have the honour of congratulating Mr. Dante Caputo on his election to the presidency of this session. His vast experience in international relations and diplomacy gives legitimacy to our expectations that our deliberations will be successful. I should like to assure him of my delegation’s determination to work closely with him as he discharges the responsibilities unanimously entrusted to him. I take this opportunity to recall the recent visit President Chissano made to his beautiful country, Argentina, during which we had an opportunity to explore ways for strengthening further the friendly bilateral relations of our countries.
Similarly, I should like to salute the outgoing President, His Excellency Mr. Peter Florin, Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic Republic, for the efficient and commendable way in which he presided over the deliberations of the forty-second session and the special session devoted to disarmament.
I take this opportunity also to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, on his commitment and devotion to the search for solutions to international problems as well as the promotion of better
understanding and co-operation among nations.
(Mr. Mocumbi, Mozambique)
We have learned with great satisfaction this morning of the decision to award the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces. That fact represents a singular recognition of the outstanding, indeed unique, role played by the United Nations in promoting peace.
The situation in Mozambique continues to be characterized, on the one hand, by war imposed on us from outside and, on the other, by our firm determination to defend our independence and promote peace and progress.
When addressing the last session of the General Assentoly, in this Hall, His Excellency President Joaquim Alberto Chissano of the People’s Republic of Mozambique referred to the massacres, the widespread destruction of social and economic infrastructures and the extremely large number of displaced Mozambicans, both inside and outside the country. In general terms, that situation still prevails today. The criminal acts of the armed terrorists continue to spread sorrow, pain, famine, insecurity and homelessness to many Mozambicans.
But that is just one side of the coin. The other gives rise to increased optimism in our people as a result of the victories we have scored on the military, economic and diplomatic fronts.
On the military front, our armed forces have been able to restore peace and tranquillity to various parts of our country previously affected by the criminal acts of the armed terrorists. In this endeavour, the support and participation of the front-line States, notably Zimbabwe and Tanzania, continue to be important and greatly appreciated. Equally worth mentioning is the contribution of the Malawian forces in the protection of the Nacala railway.
The Mozambican Government is aware that these efforts intended to eliminate terrorism must be complemented by the adoption of other measures designed to integrate into Mozambican society the terrorists who have repented. As a result, our People's Assembly approved in December 1987 an important law - the law of amnesty. This law forgives those who have committed crimes, massacres and other abominable acts perpetrated against our people and the State. As a result of the application of this law, many terrorists have been granted amnesty and have returned to normal life.
The birth of the law of amnesty translates the deep-rooted nature of the humanitarian policy of clemency adopted by FRELIMO since the times of the armed liberation struggle for our motherland.
At the proclamation of our independence in 1975 a situation arose in which some Mozambicans were found to have committed, at the incitation of colonialism, heinous crimes against their own people or to have been <x’laborators with the colonial repression system. All these individuals were integrated into our society, and today they are working as valid citizens with other Mozambicans in national reconstruction.
The law of amnesty constitutes an integral part of our efforts to bring about reconciliation, unity and the rehabilitation of those Mozanfoicans who were brutalized through crime and terrorism and were turned into tools of our enemy. We are ready to welcome them in to our midst and to help them regain their dignity,
(Me. Mocumbi, Mozambique) rights and duties as citizens of a free, independent, sovereign, non-aligned and democratic State.
This process is taking place at a time when the Mozanbizan people are engaged in the preparations for the Fifth Congress of the FRELIMO Party and are involved in the revision of the Constitution. These two processes constitute an example of the exercise of democracy in our country. They will strengthen democracy there and reinforce the fundamental freedoms of our citizens.
We are aware that our project and our dream of building a peaceful and happy society are shared by all peoples of the world and that they enjoy the sympathy of .the international community at large.
One manifestation of such feeling is the visit of His Holiness Pope John Paul II to Mozambique. He was welcomed enthusiastically by the whole people, regardless of their religious belief, in a massive demonstration of national unity, we hope that his message of solidarity with, and wishes of peace to, the Mozambican people will find an echo in every corner of our globe.
- Those efforts go hand in hand with the economic and social recovery measures we have embarked upon. As we have repeatedly stated in the past, the war of aggression against Mozambique by armed terrorists is responsible for the overall retrogression of our development, not only because it entails the diversion of efforts and means away from other endeavours to the defence of our motherland, but also because economic sabotage and the destruction of socio-economic infrastructures were the most favoured policy of our enemy in such a war.
Those who conceived the strategy of destroying our country first set out to destroy our economic base. During the last few years they have embarked upon wanton massacres, which have received widespread international condemnation. As a result of such a strategy, education and health care, which experienced considerable advances during the first seven years of our independence, are now
confronted with serious and numerous difficulties, as can be seen from the following figures-. 2,269 primary schools destroyed, affecting half a million pupils and 700 teachers; 400 teachers murdered, kidnapped or mutilated;
22 secondary schools destroyed, affecting 80,000 students; and 36 boarding schools
and 4 teacher training centres destroyed.
As I pointed out earlier, terrorism does not affect only the economy, education and health. It also affects the Mozambican man and woman, the Mozantoican child, the Mozambican youth and the Mozambican family, as the following figures illustrates 1.1 million people have been displaced from their usual places of work and residences, and 800,000 of them are in neighbouring countries; 3.3 million citizens are seriously affected; 5.9 million citizens are in a difficult situation, affected by severe shortages, in both rural and urban areas; and 200,000 children are in a difficult situation - fundamentally they are orphans, abandoned children and children who had been utilized by the terrorists to carry out their criminal acts. In addition, there are a large number of mutilated citizens and citizens with physical disabilities.
It was in this dismal scenario of socio-economic conditions that we introduced the economic recovery programme and the emergency programme. As a result of the implementation of the former, it was possible to reverse the downward trend of the
economy which had been taking place in the last few years.
To illustrate this, the data available for the first six months of 1988 suggest overall economic growth of 5 per cent. This percentage is higher than that registered in 1987, when the gross domestic product experienced a 4 per cent growth. This growth is primarily due to the positive evolution in the agricultural
sector.
Despite this positive trend, our country’s economic and financial situation remains difficult. Foreign debt still constitutes an enormous burden to our
(Mr. Mocumbi, Mozambique) economy, negatively conditioning its growth. Although there has been some significant progress in the debt-rescheduling process, there has been no
generalized application of the more favourable conditions we have been seeking.
This situation leads to a net outflow of resources and thus prevents the allocation of finances required for the development of the productive sectors of the economy. Therefore, we hope that the consensus reached at the Toronto summit meeting regarding the provision of debt relief measures for low-income African countries will be vigorously and expeditiously implemented by all creditors. We call upon our development partners for renewed efforts aimed at an effective reduction of the stock of debt and debt-servicing obligations. In turn, in spite of its difficulties, our country will continue to do its utmost to honour its foreign debt obligations.
It is with high expectations that we look forward to the forthcoming second meeting of donor countries in support of our economic recovery programme, to be held In Parl3 next November. It te oor hope that this meeting win mobilize adequate resouroes that will enable us to move to the seoond these of our programme for economic recovery, which contemplates the rehabilitation of infrastructures.
In order to cope with the emergency situation, our government has had to mobilise both teternal and external resources. In April this year the Second International Conference on Humanitarian Assistance to Mozambique was held in Maputo, with satisfactory results.
we were particularly encouraged by the fact that the International community has recognized that it is imperative to supply the affected people with the means of production and building materials and other means required for the recovery of the infrastructures destroyed or damaged by the criminal acts of the armed terrorists, so as to enable the affected people to resume their normal way of life and production and become self-sustaining.
I would like to seize the opportunity to express our gratitude once again to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, to-donor Governments, to organizations and agencies of- the united Nations system, to governmental and non-governmental organizations, and to humanitarian and religious institutions, for the support they have been rendering to our people.
Let me turn my attention to the situation in southern Africa. Only a few weeks ago the President of the People's Republic of Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. Joaquim Chissano, described the situation in the region as follows:
"Southern Africa is experiencing contradictory processes. One such process is the conflict which is rooted in the colonial past, in the persistence of the ambitions of domination, in the survival of apartheid, a political system based on inequalities of man and on racial discrimination. The other is that of solidarity amongst the peoples and States that pool their efforts together and combine their resources to promote social and economic development."
The state of affairs in southern Africa could not be better characterized. Indeed, the front-line States realized at a very early stage that their fate is intertwined by roots which can be traced back to a common history of domination, colonialism and exploitation. Thus, they have found that pooling together their resources and potentials is a definite way out of servitude to alien interests.
The moral, political, diplomatic, material and military support that the front-line States are rendering to the People’s Republic of Mozambique is a manifestation of this solidarity, when the blood of soldiers from the brotherly countries of Zimbabwe and Tanzania mixes with that of our f: <~lers to safeguard sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, this solidarity acquires an historic dimension.
Mozambique, in its turn, made its modest contribution to the liberation
struggle of other countries and peoples, conditions, it has offered its territory Namibia's independence, as did Tanzania,
(Mr. Mocumbi, Mozambique) Although Angola is experiencing difficult as a rear base in the struggle for Zambia and others.
The Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference
(SADCC) constitutes
one manifestation of this common objective, as well
as the affirmation of the
unanimous »ill of the countries i„ our region to free themselves from oppression and eoonomlo domination through the integration of their eoonomio potential on the
basis of solidarity and co-operation, the establishment and preservation of
The People's Republic of Mozambique Southern Africa will owe its future and solidarity.
is
of
This solidarity is an important factor in peace, stability and security in the region, proud to be part of such solidarity, peace and prosperity to this unity, cohesion
In such an endeavour, however,
we come across negative and destructive
factors, which must be urgently eliminated. Hore speoifioally, we are referring to persistence of values that are both as anachronic and as abominable as only apartheid can be. In South Africa these factors manifest themselves through the institutionaliration of inequality, racial discrimination, injustice, division.
depersonalisation, repression, oppression and refusal to recognise rights of the majority of the people.
the fundamental
In Namibia, colonialism still persists and represents a source of violence and conflict, in other words, colonialism constitutes a serious obstacle to peace and development.
Peace initiatives aimed at bringing about a negotiated solution to these problems are now taking place. ». quadripartite negotiations involving Angola, Cuba, south Africa and the United states of America are developments in line with the wishes of the region and of the world. It is our duty to encourage the parties
(Mr. Mocumbi, Mozambique) concerned to proceed, with seriousness and responsibility, in the negotiation process so as to ensure success and implementation. We also commend the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General in order to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
In the framework of the peace initiatives in the region, a summit meeting between the People's Republic of Mozambique and South Africa was held in Songo. Its objective is to ensure the implementation, in letter and in spirit, of commitments entered into at Nkomati. These developments cannot, and must not, in any way be used as a pretext for certain members of the international community not to fulfil their duties and responsibilities to contribute to the eradication of the apartheid system.
We are aware that these efforts can bring about peace and stability only if South Africa honours its obligations., For this reason, the international community is called upon to intensify its pressure on South Africa to abolish its policy of apartheid and engage in the process of negotiations leading to the establishment of a democratic society in South Africa.
A just and lasting peace in South Africa demands that an end be put to the state of emergency, repression and violence, as well as to other measures adopted by the South African regime with a view to silencing the voice of justice and reason. It also demands the release of Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners, with whom the regime must entertain a dialogue in order to find a just and equitable solution to South Africa's problems. Refusal to have dialogue with tlie legitimate and genuine representatives of South Africa's majority people can only delay further the solution of the problem and will certainly result in a greater heightening of tension in South Africa and in the region as a whole.
The People's Republic of Mozambique reiterates its support for the African
National Congress (ANC) ana the Sooth West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO) -the aothentio representatives of the peoples of South Africa ana of Namibia respectively.
The People’s Republic of Mozambique further reiterates its readiness to
contribute to the process of negotiations currently under way in As we review the international situation we cannot help but satisfaction at the positive trend we have witnessed in the last
southern Africa.
express our
climate of dialogue between the two
few years. The
hope for the future of international relations, we recourse to the provisions envisaged in our Charter conflicts. They ¿¿re peaceful alternatives based on governing relations between nations.
major nuclear Powers undoubtedly brings renewed
are increas ingly wi tness ing in the search for solutions to the most elementary norms
In this context, we can cite such delicate conflicts as the Iran-Iraq war and those in western Sahara and in south-west Asia as examples of the important role that the United Nations, given the opportunity, can play in the maintenance and the preservation of peace. We hope that the commitment undertaken by the parties concerned will be honoured and that peace	j .
peace, stability and security will prevail in those regions.
South East Asia, there is a willingness to embark on dialogue, we hope
that such willingness will materialize so that, sooner rather bear fruits that will contribute to the «auction of tensions
than later, it can
in the
ana Libya have given an example of political maturity as peaceful means to solve the conflict between them.
Central America also aspires to peace ana stability realisea only when there is respect for the principle of
they
choose
- objectives
region. Chad
to try
that can be
non-interference in the
internal affairs of the countries in the region. The alalogue now taking place
(Mr. Mocumbi, Mozambique) must be encouraged. We would like to reiterate our appreciation of the efforts being undertaken by the Nicaraguan Government in order to find a peaceful solution to the problems of the region.
As I salute this positive trend in international relations, I cannot help but point out that other challenges still await us.
The Palestinian question, which is the core of the Middle East problem, must find a rapid and immediate solution so that the Palestinian nation can be established in peace, freedom and independence in its own territory. We consider that an international conference on peace in the Middle East would contribute to the solution of those problems. Therefore, we want to stress that such a conference should be convened with urgency.*
*The President returned to the Chair.
Similarly, an urgent solution must be found to where foreign forces have invaded and occupied that
(Mr. Mocumbi, Mozambique)
the conflict in East Timor,
territory. We sincerely hope that the Secretary-General »ill be able to reactivate the process leading to
self-determination and independence for the people of Bast Timor in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
The reunification of the Korean nation has not yet taken place despite various initiatives and repeated efforts in that direction, which we support. We hope that the day »ill oome „hen a unified Korea will be admitted to our family of nations.
We expect that the consensus reached at the M Hoc Committee on the Indian ocean establishing 1MO as the date for the convening of the Colombo Conference »ill be respected, we must therefore start acting no» „¡th vigour so as to ensure its success.
The sacrifices our people have made in order to defend our freedom and independence are truly enormous. Despite the generalized campaigns of terror and the crimes committed against our people, despite the destruction of social and economic infrastructures, the Mozanbican people remain undeterred in the defence of their motherland and in the building of a future of peace, progress and happiness. It is in the search for attaining such goals, which are wch cherished not only by our people but also by the »bole world, that »e have been treading on such a hard and difficult path for about a quarter of a century.
we want peace. It is only with peace that «e can rebuild our fatherland, use all available resources in our country, extend education and health care to everyone, eradicate famine, remedy the lark	j
y ack of clothing and overcome misery and un der dev elopmen t.
we should like to reiterate our appeal to the international community to continue providing its multifarious assistance and support to our people so that they can as soon as possible ease their suffering and attain a lasting peace.
The struggle continues.
Mr. ANDREOTTI (Italy) (interpretation from French)*. Mr. President, on behalf of the Italian Government I should like to congratulate you most warmly on your election. We are pleased that this honour should have been conferred on the representative of a country to which we are bound by long-standing ties of friendship, personified by the presence of a large Italian community in Argentina. Your abilities and your experience will guarantee the successful fulfilment of this mandate, a mandate that has been rendered particularly delicate by developments in international affairs which offer hopes that cannot be allowed to die.
May I also be allowed to express my appreciation to the outgoing President who, in performing the task entrusted to him by the General Assembly last year, met the challenges posed to our Organization during that period with dedication and skill.
Lastly, the Secretary-General has the gratitude of the Italian Government and my personal appreciation. As a worthy heir to the Latin American juridical tradition, he has succeeded in handling with extraordinary political vision, commitment and negotiating skills situations from which others would have emerged the loser. In the efforts he has generously devoted to the pursuit of peace and security, in his quest for negotiated solutions, and in his firm defence of the principles of the Charter, the Secretary-General has had, and continues to have, the unconditional support of the Italian Government.
The winds of history seem, today, to be blowing in the right direction. This is confirmed by the trust and sincerity of the ongoing dialogue between the United States and the Soviet Union, and the incisive role assumed by the United Nations in regional crises and conflicts. Italy is contributing to these developments the whole-hearted co-operation of a country fully aware of its international responsibilities.
In view of the advances made by the two major Powers in the field of disarmament, we must recognize that many things have changed over the past 12 months. Positive changes have opened up new prospects for stability, particularly in Europe. The Italian Government, acting individually and in the framework of the Atlantic Alliance and the European Community, has made its own contribution to promoting these prospects.
The conclusion of the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles has particular significance. Above all, it suggests a new way of dealing with disarmament problems because, for the first time in the history of mankind, massive quantities of weapons are being destroyed, not through wartime military operations but, on the contrary, as a consequence of negotiations. And here I should like to emphasize that this Treaty, together with the detailed verification procedures it provides for, should serve as a model to be followed and, accordingly, extended to other agreements as soon as possible.
We all cherish the well-founded hope that the agreement on a 50-per-cent cut in the strategic arsenals of the two major Powers will also be formally concluded at an early date. We would call attention both to President Reagan's consistent commitment to promoting the dialogue at the highest level with the Soviet Union and to the dynamic and courageous approach taken by General Secretary Gorbachev, also in his international policies.
It is chiefly in the area of disarmament that the community of nations must play a role if bilateral agreements are to be gradually extended to cover all types of weapons existing on Earth.
Today, in the light of the results achieved, our objective must be to eliminate the risks of a sudden change of course. This is an endeavour incunbent on all nations, and should be self-evident in the case oi. an Organization that
believes in the strength of its
universality and the need to take the utmost
aavantage of all possibilities afforded by a ^e serene international climate, unfortunately, the agreements between the two major Powers have not yet been matted by any appreciable results in the various multilateral forums.
The proceedings of the third special
to disrmament did not produce
. session of the General Assembly devoted
any specific conclusion. Of course, we do not
unaerestlrate the contribution ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ ^^ -e .«.cu„ mechanisms £or ^ transparency Qf mllitety budgets, ^^ ,
deeper analysis of the principles
governing verification of arms control
agreements, and particularly towards increased effectlvenes
initiatives in activities directly or These deliberative contributions
s for United Nations
indirectly linked to disarmament.
are by no means
consist solely in stating and illustrating positions-,
minor. But our task does not it requires us to work
coherently for the realisation of the good Intentions and the egually receptive attitudes that exist.
« the conference table in Geneva no progress has been recorded for some time
in almost any of the areas under discussion
from the cessation of all nuclear-test
explosions to the prevention of an erne race In outer space or fro» th k ■ bpace, or from the banning of
radiological weapons to the comprehensive programme of disarmament.
Only in the field of chemical these are moving too slowly.
weapons are negotiations moving ahead, but even
At one time we had hoped they might be completed this year. In fact that was the hope that, together with Foreign Minister Genscher, I personally expressed in Geneva last February. That has not happened, although the use of this terrible instrument of mass destruction is again of current concern to Governments and public opinion.
We do not, of course, underestimate the technical difficulties of applying adequate verification procedures in this field. For that very reason we sponsored an international symposium last May in Rome, attended by eminent scientists. Information and conclusions emerged regarding the possibility of conducting experiments to verify that there are no diversions for military purposes in industrial production processes. We shall bring the results of the proceedings to the attention of Governments.
Regionally, the imbalances in conventional weapons existing in Europe are another dangerous source of insecurity. We must therefore make every effort to secure prompt results that will permit the achievement of greater stability at lower levels of forces and armaments. Here, in the context of the informal Vienna talks on the elaboration of a mandate for future negotiations, there are signs of a significant convergence of views on questions of substance.
We intend to continue to work, in every possible way, towards the speediest possible completion of a satisfactory final document.
I should like at this point to reaffirm the validity of the Helsinki Final Act, an irreplaceable instrument in international relations which has indissolubly linked the United States and Canada to the future of the countries and peoples of the Old World.
. (Mr. Andreotti, Italy)
In this context let me express the hope that Albania will also play a part in the overall European framework. I mould interpret as a positive step in this
direction the very recent Albanian decision to resume active participation in the inter-Parliamentary Union, which will be celebrating its centenary next year.
In a final reference to the topic of disarmament in Europe, I would mention that Italy, as part of a drastic reduction in armaments, is giving priority to the
elimination of assymetries in the most destabilizing offensive-weapon categories. This elimination should be followed by a restructuring of military deployments in a defensive posture.
It will be recalled that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons itself provides that all the signatories, including the nuclear-weapon Powers, should pursue negotiations for the conclusion, as expressly stipulated in article VI, of "a treaty on genoral and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control". (resolution 2373 (XXII), annex)
The representative of the country currently holding the presidency of the Council of the European Communities has already stated the common position of the member States on the various more delicate aspects of international activities. The statement made by my colleague from Greece has testified to the work done by the Twelve towards harmonizing their respective foreign policies, a harmonization we Italians hope will become increasingly visible and extensive. We are indeed convinced that we must build a more united and mutually supportive Europe capable of progressively asserting, primarily on the basis of the Single European Act, an identity of its own and its own role in shaping a free world responsive to the demands of the various peoples. This identity and this role fully accord with the aims attributed by the Charter of fh»	.
J vnaccer or me united Nations to regional arrangements.
The United Nations has recently achieved encouraging results in endeavours to resolve some of the most acute and difficult international crises of the past decade. The advances made constitute real successes for the Organization and its Secretary-General, to whose perseverance and skill as a negotiator they are largely due.
I refer, first of all, to the good offices which led to the Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan.
In the case of Iran and Iraq, a cease-fire was achieved and a direct negotiating process between the parties has finally been launched. We fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General to consolidate, through implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), the results obtained thus far.
In the Security Council and at the bilateral level, we shall continue to work for the restoration, between the two countries concerned and in the Gulf, of the conditions of security and stability which are the prerequisite for peace and are indispensable for the commencement of reconstruction.
On the question of typrus and in the dispute over Western Sahara, the patient quest for points of contact also seems to hold out prospects of change.
We are thus at a point in history when the United Nations is offered increasing opportunities, either directly - as in the cases I have just mentioned -or indirectly, to consolidate and bring to fruition the agreements reached at the regional level. This is happening in the case of southern Africa, where in Angola and in Namibia the United Nations may be called upon to facilitate and guarantee the withdrawal of foreign troops, the restoration of domestic peace and the completion of one of the last great decolonization processes in history.
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy)
The role of our Organization is undoubtedly becoming more incisive. We have seen the increasingly favourable reception accorded to offers of mediation by United Nations bodies and the new opportunities for action that are constantly opening up.
The new possibilities and the prospects I have mentioned are, without doubt, due to the changed climate in relations between the two major Powers and the
overall Improvement in international relations wrought by that change.
For the first time since 1945 - that is, since the approval of the Charter at San Francisco - the United Nations now finds itself operating within an international context not unlike the one envisioned by the founding countries, a context in which international collaboration, a tendency to engage in dialogue, the negotiated solution of problems, in short multilateralism and the rule of law, should take precedence over arbitrary approaches and the use of force.
The present convergence of positive elements could enable the united Nations to make greater use of all the Instruments available under its Charter. Here we have a great opportunity, but also a great question mark. Once the differences between East and West have been reduced and, we hope, eliminated, it remains to be seen whether those uninvolved in that tension, and those who were loud In their denunciation of the inherent threats to international progress and stability, will also shoulder their responsibilities. There must be a broadening of narrow regional outlooks, less rhetoric and a greater focus on action, a feeling of participation in a common design. There is a need for a spirit of dialogue, which we must all patiently seek to make more effective.
The successes I have mentioned would not have been possible without the mediation efforts, I say again, of the Secretary-General and his associates, with the contribution of the Security Council - an important context for its function
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy) and the problems confronting it, but a limited one, and, I would say, certainly inadequate in the light of the great potential of our Organization.
The time has come to test the potential of all the organs of the United Nations, including the General Assembly. We must overcome the conflicts between groups, which have been a frequent feature of the past few years. This is a necessary development if the system is to pursue the role assigned to it by the Charter, keep pace with developments in international relations, and thus preserve its credibility.
One thing is certain. If the dialogue between the United states and the Soviet Union is pursued in depth and results in a strengthening of the cause of peace and the necessary conditions for security, there will no longer be any excuse for those countries or groups of countries that have thus far, more or less deliberately, tried to shirk their historical responsibilities.
Special attention should be given to unresolved conflicts.
The Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories, which began last Decenber, clearly reflects the distress of a population compelled for decades, and without any political prospects, to live in a state of occupation. The disagreements between Arabs and Israelis and the Palestinian problem are back in the limelight, serving as a drastic and, indeed, a daily reminder to the international community of the existence in a sensitive area of an open wound that requires healing.
We ace all aware of the complexity of the problem confronting us. Everyone, including the parties involved, is locking tor a way out of the situation, and it is also generally recognised that repressive measures against a movement that is widespread and spontaneous are of no avail. Israel is a member of this Assenfcly, •s it is entitle to be. This must be fully recognised, and so must the corresponding right to security, without offensive charges of racism, similarly, Palestinians and Israelis, particularly those of the younger generation, must be ^a^P®^ out of the vicious circle of hatred and confrontation and encouraged to enter into dialogue and co-operation that can open up new prospects for development throughout the Middle East.
There is a growing conviction, shared by a very broad section of the community of nations, that an international peace conference, subject to rules and procedures that are imaginative and innovative, could help overcome the problems and obstacles in the way of a global, just and lasting solution to the conflict»
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy)
We welcomed the acceptance in principle by the United States of! the idea of an international peace conference, and we appreciate the aims underlying the personal and generous commitment demonstrated by Secretary of State Shultz in presenting his peace plan.
I am convinced that solution of the problem confronting us - which, in essence, concerns the possibility for all the countries of the area, including Israel, to live within secure and recognized borders, and the right of the Palestinians to a homeland - is not always facilitated by those who take up purely declaratory positions which remain without effect. I believe that a serious, positive effort must be made by all of us to reduce existing differences.
In the Middle East context we also view developments in Lebanon with concern, for its institutional difficulties are all the more alarming in that they could jeopardize not only the coexistence of Christians and Muslims, but the very unity of the State.
In Central America, after encouraging progress in the dialogue following the Esquipulas agreements, we note with concern disturbing symptoms of intransigence that will make it harder to achieve the general reconciliation we hoped for and, hence, that "happy peace for all" to which the Presidents of the Central American countries referred last year when agreeing, inter alia, on the promising idea of a common Central American parliament.
Italy is an active participant in the political dialogue instituted between the States of the region and the countries of the European Community. The latter countries are continually and actively following the regional peace efforts and hope that all parties will show that genuine political will necessary to give tliose efforts a constructive thrust and renewed momentum.
The Horn of Africa region also deserves the attention of the Assembly because of the tensions still existing there. These tensions, and some major natural disasters, have unfortunately made living conditions unacceptable for hundreds of thousands of human beings. Realism and a genuine spirit of conciliation are the components needed to consolidate promising agreements and translate into reality the political solutions that would restore peace to that area, as an essential prerequisite for its social and economic progress. For years Italy has been giving the highest priority to its co-operation in the development of this region. We are prepared to strengthen this co-operation further if conditions permit. In this context, Italy is devoting special attention to the situation in Eritrea, where its co-operation and humanitarian assistance efforts are encountering particular obstacles, which are having a negative impact on the normal development of those efforts.
Another crisis, that in Kampuchea, shows signs of positive developments, provided that the parties are able to maintain the commitments already undertaken and the conditions are achieved for the formation of the broadest possible domestic coalition.
The history of our planet is becoming increasingly a closely shared experience in which peoples, nations and different economic and social systems are participating. This is not, at this juncture, an empty statement. On the contrary, it has a particular meaning for a world that has become more aware of the dangers of collective destruction caused by misguided developments in science and technology and is consequently intent, above all, on rediscovering the values of solidarity and justice.
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy)
The deliberations of the forty-third session of the General Assembly cannot fail to take account of the new climate of increasing openness to mutual understanding and of willingness to search more actively for common ground.
Italy has always been a supporter of the role of the United Nations in the pursuit of international peace and security. Our very presence in the Security Council reflects those concerns and proceeds from the assumption that the role of the Secretary-General should be enhanced and that parties to a dispute should be constantly persuaded to take a peaceful view of their own interests.
The successes the United Nations is scoring today confirm the validity of multilateralism and show that we must all have faith in a system of agreements that promotes the rule of law and increasingly restricts recourse to violent means.
In this connection we affirm our belief in the principle of universality as a fundamental principle that must be reinforced and extended, where the proper conditions exist, by consistent conduct on the part of United Nations bodies and Member States. We hope, in this context, that contacts between the two Koreas will be resumed and yield positive results, so that the principle of universality may also become a reality for them.
We must also ensure that the United Nations is in a position to over.ume its present budgetary crisis and that there is a sound financial basis for its peace-keeping operations, which we all wish to see extended and consolidated, so as to infuse new life into the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Our Organization cannot confine itself to reacting to events. It must take preventive action and look ahead if it is to understand and satisfy the far-reaching demands of our peoples and redress the glaring imbalances which are still poisoning relations between nations. We must, in other words, take full
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy) advantage of the opportunities available for bringing about a world order guaranteed by the rule of law and considerations of justice.
The path is now strewn with obstacles, difficulties and burdensome restrictions. The efforts of the entire international community are required to overcome them. Our peoples feel ever more acutely the need for an improved quality of life, a healthier and better protected environment and true freedom from the enemies of society and civilization, such as the heavy indebtedness of some countries, recurrent food crises, pollution of the atmosphere and the oceans, the effects of excessive urbanization and the production and use of drugs.
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy)
In actual fact little has been done to combat these evils. I am thinking, in particular, of the terrible dimensions of the drug phenomenon, which is undermining the very foundations of our society and destroying our young people, who are our hope for the future.
We must attack drug production by carrying out adequate programmes to assist economic and social development and to substitute other crops for drugs in the producing countries. We must attack trafficking by means of increased co-operation between judicial and police authorities and by introducing, through international agreements, financial controls that will make it possible to freeze and confiscate the proceeds of drug traffickers. Lastly, and perhaps above all, we must strike a blow at illicit drug use by putting into effect all appropriate preventive measures, educating and sensitizing public opinion, harnessing for this purpose the power of the major communications media, using appropriate school and leisure facilities and instituting programmes for the treatment, recovery and rehabilitation of drug addicts.
International co-operation to combat drug use is particularly necessary now that it is affecting all States, albeit to a different extent, so that no country can really consider itself immune. It is a terrible evil which we all share, from East to West, North to South, and we all have a duty to take forceful determined action to combat it.
The economic, social, health and environmental effects of urbanization also need careful consideration. It has been estimated that, after the the year 2000, some 50 per cent of the world's population will be living in megalopolises, and that this phenomenon will affect the emerging countries particularly.
While it is easy to imagine the kind of effects produced by the concentration of populations in cities, it seems more difficult at the present level of our knowledge to identify suitable remedies to reduce - at least partially - the
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy) resulting anomalies. Perhaps, in this particular area too, help will come from co-operation between scientists, in a setting in which science is growing more open, rising above ideological barriers to become a vehicle of universal progress and not an instrument of competition.
There are certainly many opportunities, even in this area of the quality of life, for encouraging and developing international co-operation. The United Nations, precisely because of its universal character, cannot evade these new ' challenges and, indeed, should be ready to provide convincing and eloquent responses to them.
I am not at present in a position to suggest the courses to be taken. Perhaps, and particularly with a view to preparing fu or, if possible, preventing major natural disasters — I have in mind disasters of the Sahel type — we might consider setting up a collective emergency force to be placed at the disposal of the Secretary-General. The establishment of such a force would complement certain activities which, to some extent, are already being carried out, and would confirm the universal role of the United Nations, viewed as a catalyst for human solidarity.
It would be over-ambitious of me to delineate the exact contours of our future, and predict the structure of our society at the planetary level.
However, there is one element in the thinking of the authors of the San Francisco Charter that remains particularly valid - the idea that the United Nations and its machinery should be a profoundly innovative factor in relations between States. Besides, the mere fact of achieving harmony between peoples with such diverse cultures and systems through a process that precludes suspicion and mistrust in the interests of promoting co-operation, must inevitably result in something original and unique.
Now xs the time to embark on this venture, precisely because we must realize that the principles and purposes set forth in the Charter could not have been properly affirmed in an atmosphere, such as we have experienced in the past, characterized by serious tensions between the two major Powers. Is it possible, then, to attain these objectives in the framework of the process of revision taking Place in relations between the United States and the Soviet Union? If we tried to give a definite affirmative answer to that question I think we would be venturing onto the unsafe ground of prophecy. We will merely note that there now exist favourable conditions for change and that the requirements linked to this change are coming to light, even if they are not always perceived fully and with total
clarity
More than any other design, that of a more balanced order, an order that is informed, above all, with the principles of justice, appears the most likely eventuality as we approach the year 2000, if only because, as Plato said, every individual or State that is unjust contains within itself the seeds of its own destruction. And this is still valid for all mankind.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/43/PV.38
1 November 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-third session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REOORD OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 27 October 1988, at 10 a.m.
President:
Mr. MOUSHOUTAS (Vice-President)
(Cyprus)
-	Report of the Economic and Social Council: [12) (continued)
s ä^ ^xsxw “•—-■“• o^“^
-	Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency [14)
-SESäSEs“
r«. 0C2-750, 2 United M.tlenn Ptez.^nTte^^V^^^
88-64354/A 7655V (E)
lL^he absence of the President, Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 12 (continued)
REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCILS
(a)	OBSERVANCE OF THE FORTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (b) REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART II) (A/43/750/Add.1)
The PRESIDENT; In accordance with the decision taken at its 3rd plenary meeting, the Assembly this morning will devote this meeting to the observance of the fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization, which is considered under item 12. It will also consider under item 12, part II of the report of the Second Committee concerning the prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).	.
Forty years in the life of an organization is a milestone. When that organization happens to be one .of the important specialized agencies of the United Nations family dealing with health, these 40 years represent a number of concrete achievements, progress and benefits to the human society.
The roots of the World Health Organization (WHO) go back to the year 1851, when the first International Sanitary Conference was held in Paris. Later, in the year 1902, the International Sanitary Bureau was established. International co-operation in health matters was further consolidated when the Health Organization of the League of Nations was created in 1923 - which lasted until 1948 when the World Health Organization came into existence. During the past 40 years, WHO has provided leadership in international health co-operation, working with sister bodies of the United Nations system like the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
(The President)
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
the United Nations Relief and Works
East (UNRWA) and others.
«sponsible for launching a movement for Improvement of health all
It has been
a movement that baa been popularly known The world !„ iM8 dld „* ^^ *
over the world.
as Health for All by the Tear 2000.
healthy scene. Communicable and other diseases took a heavv toll in
1 in life, plague, malaria, tuberculosis, smallpox and other diseases were responsible for millions of deaths and disabilities. Malnutrition was widesnroad .	. .
• n developing countries there was an unacceptably
high level of infant low. it was in such
commenced its work.
technical expertise,
mortality. The average expectancy of life a£ter birth was a obelion,!», environnent that the »rU Health Organization It bro.»^ bear on these formidable problems scientific and
fostering international
other resources and slowly but steadily health scene.
co-operation, mobilizing human and
progressing towards improving
the world
foremost is
We all know
.................. «■‘-‘»"«"9 achievements to its credit. On. of the the coyest of smallpox and its total elimination from this planet, what a terrible disease small»«
smallpox »as. it literally affected millions. Millions succumbed year after year and many others wer.	.
y omers were disfigured for life. WHO, in «^ration with its member states, launched its camp.!,, against smallpox in the di	10 ye”S ** CmEB1’" "^ in total tei“"Ph "ith »««cation of
the disease for ever. The world -
ne world knows how cost-effective this effort was.
I understand that WHO'q	.
,	total e"°rU to Oleate smallpox cost some
SOS 330 million, an average cost of	.
0 cost of just about SOS 25 million per year. The savings to the countries of the	.
, owever, have been more than $US 1 billion each year in financial terms alone. The Savinas
,	savings, of course, in terms of human
suffering and misery can never be calculated.
(The President)
Equally important, though less spectacular, has been WHO's initiative in conceptualizing and disseminating the primary health care approach: that is, to bring affordable health care to where people live and work. This concept, which holds true for both developed and developing countries, is leading to a virtual health revolution by emphasizing individual and community responsibility in relying more on health care and trained health workers of all categories, on essential «frogs, on nutrition, on adoption of proper life styles — in short, on the preventive and promotive aspects of health rather than the curative approach.
There have been many more important programmes in other fields as well. It is gratifying to know, for example, that 50 per cent of the world's children have been immunized and that the goal of universal immunization for all is likely to be attained by 1990. WHO and UNICEF, which are working hand in hand with member States, deserve our congratulations in this regard.
On behalf of all members here, let me warmly congratulate WHO, through Doctor Nakajima, for its good work and ask him to convey to the World Health Assembly our hope that it will continue to espouse the cause of health vigorously and to face with determination not only the present but also the future challenges confronting mankind in the field of health and disease.
(The President)
One of the challenges which has emerged in recent years is the question of AIDS. It will be recalled that this subject was discussed by the General Assembly last year, when it adopted resolution 42/8 and invited the Director-General of the World Health Organization to submit a report on the programme's achievements. It is of the utmost concern that this terrible disease continues unabated, as there is no vaccine or efficient drug for its prevention or cure at this time. In the short period of only one year international co-operation has been mobilized under the leadership of the World Health Organization, and we shall soon have an opportunity to hear more on the present situation regarding this epidemic informally from the Director-General of the World Health Organization.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Since its establishment 40 years ago the World Health Organization (WHO) has made an outstanding contribution to human welfare. Its long list of achievements includes promulgating healtl regulations which new constitute a universal health code, eradicating smallpox from the face of the earth and developing an expanded programme of immunization which attacks the leading killer diseases, saving a million lives every year. I should like to congratulate the World Health Organization, through its Director-General, Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, who is with us today. I wish him all success in his new responsibilities.
WHO's impressive record is a cause for hope that we shall eventually find a way to deal effectively with the deadly disease of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). It is a disease with increasingly serious economic, social, legal and humanitarian implications, as well as its more obvious health aspects.
Last year the General Assembly decided that WHO should continue to direct and co-ordinate the urgent global battle against AIDS and requested me to ensure a co-ordinated response by the United Nations system. Accordingly, I have taken the
necessary steps to establish a co-ordinating structure within which the many different ongoing and planned activities of various departments and agencies can be related to the global strategy against AIDS. The organizations of the United Nations system are also developing new plans of action in support of the global strategy within the machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination (ACC).
But with each minute that passes another person is infected. We must therefore intensify our efforts to find ways to control and eventually conquer this terrible disease.
There are four areas where I believe the United Nations itself has a particularly crucial role to play in guiding the world's response to the AIDS pandemic.
The first is our responsibility to be a voice for those who may not otherwise be heard: the poor, the weak, the vulnerable - whether nations or individual persons. This is particularly the case with respect to the vast international efforts in research and development for the public health aspects of AIDS. The second area of responsibility for the United Nations is to look beyond the immediate tragedy of the situation, to help countries assess the likely impact of AIDS in terms of its effect on societies as a whole and to use our analytical and conceptual tools to work out possible scenarios and appropriate policy alternatives. Our third area of responsibility involves the need to preserve the human rights of the victims of AIDS. The fourth area relates to the dependence of AIDS prevention and care upon progress in development for all countries and communities, which is a fundamental endeavour of the United Nations system.
We know that health is not just a medical matter. It concerns all sectors of society. AIDS has shown us clearly that threats to global health are also threats to societies and cultures. But AIDS has shown us more than this. It has shown us Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library

a side o£ humanity which is seldom revealed, in countries and communities throughout the world - despite, and often in defiance of, the baser Instincts of ignorance and fear - people have joined together in extraordinarily innovative ways to respond to this crisis. Medical scientists have co-operated to an unprecedented degree. Governmental and non-governmental organizations have undertaken tremendous efforts for public education. People in every walk of life have developed self-reliant organizations, services and campaigns. They have educated; they have provided care; and they have offered comfort. Often they are those who are themselves infected with AIDS or the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Often they are members of high-risk groups. But they are also people motivated only by a simple instinct of decency and community. Those who serve on the front lines of this global struggle deserve our utmost respect, support and solidarity.
As we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization let us pledge our determination to solve the AIDS pandemic.
We have a responsibility to respond to the collective call for action by the international community and to join in the world-wide struggle against this new and different threat to our health and the health of our societies.
The PRESIDENT: As members are aware, Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, the new Director-General of the World Health Organization, has generously offered to brief the Assembly on the current situation regarding AIDS. Accordingly, I shall suspend the meeting so that the briefing may take place.
May I now invite Dr. Nakajima to come to the rostrum and brief the delegations on the question of AIDS.
The meeting was suspended at 10.50 a.m. and resumed at 11.15 a.m.
The PRESIDEqT: I call on the Rapporteur of the Second Committee, Mr. Walter of Czechoslovakia, to introduce Part II of the report of that Committee (A/43/750/Add.l).
M£i W^LTER (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur of the Second Committee (interpretation from Spanish); I have the honour to submit to the Assembly the report of the Second Committee (Part II) (A/43/750/Add.l), on item 12, "Report of the Economic and Social Council".
The report deals solely with the Committee's consideration of the resolution entitled "Prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)". As soon as consideration of item 12 as a whole is concluded, other parts of the Second Committee's report will be issued in documents A/43/750 and Add.2.
Paragraph 1 of the report is introductory in nature. Paragraphs 2 through 5 give an account of the Committee's consideration of draft resolution A/C.2/43/L.10, entitled Prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)", introduced by the United Kingdom delegation on behalf of a group of sponsors. As a result of informal consultations on the text of the draft resolution the Vice-Chairman of the Second Committee, Mr. Fernandez, introduced a new draft resolution (A/C.2/43/L.12), with the same title. At its 20th meeting the Second Committee adopted, without a vote, draft resolution A/C.2/43/L.12, as orally revised by the Vice-Chairman.
In paragraph 6 of the report, the Second Committee recommends the adoption by the General Assembly of the draft resolution entitled "Prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)", the text of which is reproduced therein.
AP/SY
MJ. CLARKE (United Kingdom).- I am honoured to address the General
• Assembly in this important debate during the fortieth Anni
9 me fortieth anniversary year of the World
Health Organization (WHO).
and
We hope that at the end of the debate the Assembly will be able to adopt the draft reaction on the prevention and control of squired i»unodeticiency syndrone (AIDS) ^ch has been pot forward by the United Kingdom others.
My country is proud of its long association with
the World Health Organization
and,
to ratify the constitution setting uo WHO	.
ng up WHO. We have felt privileged to assist with its development over the past 40 years and
y and proud that many of our leading lights in the field of health have been able to contribute
indeed, of the fact that the United Kingdom
was one of the first two members
to its work.
invidious on an occasion like this to single out Individuals, should like to pay a tribute to previous Directors-General for
It would be Nevertheless, I the enormous
contribution which they have made Dr. Nakajima. We certainly pledge this challenging role.
to the work of WHO, and to wish every success to our continuing support to him as he takes over
(Mr. Clarke, United Kingdom)
I understand that It is unusual for the United Nations General Assembly to debate health subjects, and it is a clear measure of th, seriousness of th. ATOS issue that this distinguished Assembly is discussing it for the second successive year.
Last year my predecessor, Mr. John Moore, spoke
about the United Kingdom's
approach to the threat posed by AIDS and urged the need for international oo-operatlon and debate. I am pleased to demonstrate by my presence today my Government's continuing ccmmltment to encouraging that International effort.
A gnod deal has happened in the last year, and this debate represents valuable opportunity to take stock, not only of the spread of the pandemic * th. advances that have been made in the international fight against it.
a
but also
As we
all know, the picture remains very serious indeed. AIDS continues to spread, and a. ». have just heard, the «>tld Nealth Organisation WK) new estimates that between 5 minion md 10 million ^ „„^^ ^ be ^^ ^ immonodeflclency virus (HIV), while over 300,000 people have AIDS itself.
Nor is there any sign that a cure or vaccine will be available in the near future, some vaccine trials are now under way, but I understand that many scientists throughout the world feel that the scientific problems are even more complex than was first thought. So probably the best we can hop. for, at Last in
the short term of infection.
, is the further development of drugs which could limit the progress
In the face of this, we in the United Kingdom are more
convinced of the vital importance of information and education. They our best «..pons to hand at th. moment in fighting th. pandemic.
than ever
are surely
But no less important in slowing the spread of AIDS is the need for international co-operation. Th. United Kingdom was ther.for. particularly proud to hav. th. opportunity to join with WHO in sponsoring the world Summit of Ministers
(Mr. Clarke, United Kingdom) of Health on Programmes for aids Prevention. The summit meeting took place in london earlier this year, and we were delighted that it attracted such a distinguished and representative audience. One hundred and forty-eight countries attended, of which more than three quarters were represented by Ministers. I believe that that summit meeting established a vital political consensus on the need for urgent national and international action. The concrete expression of that consensus came in the adoption of the "London Declaration" on AIDS prevention.
That important Declaration, which I am pleased to say is cited in the draft resolution before us today, sets out a broad framework for future action, in which public education and information are given the central emphasis. The Declaration also underlines an important general message. Tt is that stigmatizing persons who are infected with HIV or who have AIDS - and discriminating against them - is not only socially and morally wrong but also counterproductive in health terms, driving the disease underground and undermining efforts to contain the spread of infection.
The United Kingdom Government feels strongly about the need to encourac ^en debate and exchange of information about AIDS and is taking every opportunity u promote this view. Apart from hosting the World Summit which I have mentioned, we have co-sponsored resolutions on AIDS at the last two World Health Assemblies and at this year’s meeting of the Economic and Social Council, as well as in this General Assembly. We believe that these various resolutions have played a valuable part in keeping the AIDS issue at the forefront of international attention. The United Kingdom has also played an active role in discussion of the problem in other international arenas such as the European Community, the Council of Europe and the Commonwealth.
Tn many ways, I ».id suggeat, the pioture today ls foIsaMtely „^ on8 o£ to!» than of total giooa. He ar. no. inch better aware than we were this tine last
year of the full magnitude of the AIDS problem. As a result, the global response
to it is growing in strength as the international oonnunity increases the extent
and pace of its actions. I think it is no exaggeration to say that the past year »as seen an unprecedented amount of international co-operation in response to this major health problem, as well as the development of a probably unique global consensus on the principles which should guide both national and international action.
A key role in all this has been played by WK), its Global Programme on aids has achieved an impressive amount in a short space of time. Working with over 150 countries throughout the world, WH3 has developed a Global Strategy for AIDS prevention and control and is helping those countries to develop and strengthen their own national programmes. The Global Program has the full support of the United Kingdom Government, and we are giving nearly $8 million to it this year from our Overseas Aid Progranme.
bet me now turn to the future. He shall all have another important opportunity to promote the message of AIDS prevention on 1 December, which is the "»-sponsored Hsrld MDS Dey. I„ the United Kingdom we shall be marking the Day with a wide range of national and local events. I have been enormously encouraged by the good response we hav. had fro. our health authorities and voluntary organisations. I have every expectation that World AIDS Day will be a success not only in my own country but throughout the world.
It is an especially important Day, in my view, because its theme once again underlines the importance of education, information and open communication. They have made possible the progress achieved so far in limiting the spread of the disease. I firmly believe they represent the best hope for the future.
Sadly, I have to say that the adoption of worthwhile principles at international gatherings may not always be translated into action within individual
countries. For example, t M ueU aw„. ^ u ^ c0„„trie3 ^ have bMn call, foe th. creation of ne. criminal offences related to the transmission of th. virus and for legal retribution against those persons infected with it. Such measures may w.n prove very damaging in th. long run because they ar. likely to drive those infected with th. disease underground, discouraging them from coming forward for counselling and help.
That is why ». m th. Baited Kingdom hav. stress.d co-operation rather than coercion. He have set up a programme whereby anyone can come forward for counselling and, if they wish, a free and confidential HIV test. Such testing is «one on a wholly voluntary basis because we believe it is th. only way to avoid turning away th. very people we want * .ducat., particularly those whose own behaviour puts them at high risk of contracting HIV infection.
our belief in the importance of counselling has also led us recently to
■ introduce proposals which, if our Parliament passes them into low, would restrict the sal. Of testing kits which can be sold to individuals to test theme«!«.. He consider that expert counselling is needed before a test is carried out in order to explain a nwber of crucial things: for enable, exactly what th. t.st will d.t.r.ine, what th. result might mean, what changes in personal behaviour may be necessary in the light of it and what ar. th. ..rioua medical and social consequences of a positive result.
Medical evidence now indicates that HIV infection win probably lead in the majority of cases to the development of AIDS ,„d subsequently to death, so a test Which produces a positive result in an individual case can have a very sever.
psychological .ffect on th. parson concerned, as well as leading to social and
economic discrimination. Therefore it is much better that, where practical, individuals should be given advice before «dergoing testing at all so that they
(Mr. Clarke, United Kingdom) can make an informed decision about whether to go ahead with the test and can also be ready to receive the proper support should the result prove positive.
looking further ahead, there are a number of things I should like to see happen. Some of them are mentioned in the draft resolution before us today. First, I should like to see continuing support for the efforts of WHO in tackling AIDS.
I should also like to see all countries launching sustained education campaigns which reflect local circumstances and cultures. I have stressed our view that public education remains our best defence against the spread of HIV infection and AIDS. That is why the United Kingdom Government remains firmly committed to a long term effort to give our people, and especially those groups most at risk, the information they need and the encouragement to act upon it. The next phase of our national campaign will be launched in a month’s time.
(Mr. Clarke, United Kingdom)
Büt .. are also ..„. of the great Importance of local educational and
preventive activities, the mass media. So we based schemes aimed at behaviour, and to help
particularly for those groups who are hard to reach through intend to complement our national campaign with locally encouraging people to modify their sexual and other them sustain such changes.
There is some recent evidence that th. rat. of Incr.ase of Arcs cases 1„ homosexuals is slowing ^ in ^ ^ KingdOT ^ ^ ^^
But there
other countries.
these who
is, I am afraid, no evidence th*«-	a.u
vioence that this is the case for heterosexuals
injecting
inject drugs, equipnent are
or
for the transmission of I should therefore
In fact in many being seen as an the infection.
like to see much
to fight drug misuse across the world, publicity warning misusers of the danger
where misusers can syringes for clean
syringes have been forward for help.
countries drug misusers
who share infected
increasingly important group responsible
more provision, both financial and social
In the United Kingdom, in addition to s they face, we have set up special schemes
both receive counselling and exchange their used needles tod equlpaent. Early evaluation shoes that, .here needles and in short supply, such schemes may encourage misusers to come
reinforce our programme of advice
We have just announced a further 35.25 million
programme to
treatment and care to prevent the spread of human immunodeficiency virus <„w i„f.ction ^ „^
*toe .ill be further Publicity »„ ^ mt«d ^ ^ ^^
are already giving publicly about
the dangers of injecting.
Finally, I bio-medical and
some programmes.
«¡UM Ilk. to see more i„teMltaal co-operation In both
•~i.l tol.no. research, where m „,, its.„ ^^
In the United Kingdom
programme on the medical and scientific our Medical Research Council. A number
we have a large-scale directed research aspects of AIDS and HIV, co-ordinated by of important sociological and behavioural
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Clarke, United Kingdom) research programmes are also under way. They Include evaluation of the needle exchange schemes, to which I referred a few moments ago, research into sexual behaviour and attitudes, costing various types of care for those with AIDS and continuing evaluation of our public health education campaign. Our Economic and Social Research Council has set aside $2.6 million over the next three years tor
research in these fields, we will be pleased research programmes with other countries.
I have sought today to look at AIDS with when we talk of the number of cases worldwide
to share our experience from these
an international perspective. But and even of the problems we face in
our own countries, it is Very easy to lose sight of the fact that we are talking about real people trying to come to terms with very real and frightening health problems. Our efforts are directed at human beings with families and friends into whose lives has come a devastating disease. So I hope that, above all, we will remember this when we return to our various countries and I hope that it is uppermost in our minds when we consider what action to take in our continuing fight against AIDS.
in conclusion, I should like to say ho. grateful my delegation has been for the co-operation of the other delegations from all the regional groups in drafting the draft resolution before us today, we have been greatly encouraged by the wide measure of agreement that has been possible. The struggle against AIDS is one in Which the onited Nations must play its full part. The draft resolution before us
gives a further impetus to the valuable political declaration adoption by this Assembly.
Mr, 2EP0S (Greece):
work of the United Nations system and represents a by the Member States, we look forward to its
On behalf of the member States of the European
Community, I welcome this opportunity to refer to the celebration of the fortieth
bhs/plj
anniversary of the World Health Organization
(WHO) and, in particular
our concern over the continuing aog.Hred iraMnode£ieloncy I should lite first to express oyr appreclation
, to emphasize
syndrome (AIDS) pandemic, to Dr. H. Mahler,
Sector-General of m u„tii July of this ^ ^ ^ ^^
eeforts in proving and achieving the Actives of the Organisation. At the sacs ne, we congratulate the new Director-General, Dr. Nakajima, for his assignment
wish him success in his important and difficult task ahead.
forty years ago, in . war-weary and „.ease-ridden world, a fledgling „orId Health Organisation began tackling the enormous „allonge of finding solutions to the nuirons health problems afflicting mankind, Today, four decades later, we can loch back with great satisfaction at the achievements of international cooperation in the «eld of public health. Onder the guiding and coordinating role of we have been able to take great steps forward in combating and eradicating many deadly diseases, like smallpox.
We are resolve and response to
convinced that, i„ the coming decades, W8D will demonstrate the same
efficiency in achieving international health threats that might arise.
health and mounting an effective
The AIDS pandemic is a which has been named by WHO
and Co-operation the organization
on AIDS, I
case In point. Especially today, in the year 19SS, as the year of National end International Communication wish to pay a special tribute to the prompt reaction of
of more than 140
and its leading role in co-ordinating and streamlining the efforts
countries in our common fight for
AIDS, we hope that the holding
controlling and preventing
1 December
1988, which has been
deserves.
of important events will give to the day of set as the World AIDS Day, the significance it
There
scientific
IS no need to repeat the gravity of the AIDS problem, which is not only and epidemological, but also involves a c^pJex rang, of humanitarian.
I
BHS/PLJ
political, economic, social, cultural, educational ana other factors. It is really worth noting that, although mankind has made spectacular breakthroughs in many fields of science, it still lacks the knowledge to penetrate all the mysteries of the human organism and find antidotes to many diseases which have so far been incurable, of course we do not underestimate the brilliant work already
accomplished by doctors and researchers, developed an understanding of th® complex virtually unknown 10 years ago. still it
In a very short time scientists have nature of the disease, which was is evident that it will take more time
and such effort before we can hope to control »IDS through medical techniques. Being a global problem, Alos calls for a global effort based on a common
strategy. The disease does not distinguish between its victims on the brain of their culture, material wealth or origin. The AIDS pandemic knows no borders, nor can it distinguish the nationality of people. Our strategy to fight the disease has to include leadership, co-ordination, education, information and the
e-.abor.tion of guideline, at the global level. It can only succeed if national
programmes are strong and complete. Bilateral rad multilateral collaboration should be further developed.
^^* ZcppSf Greece)
The member states of the European Community fully support who's guiding and co-ordinating role with respect to the global struggle against UM. r„ this
contest ». would like to mention that we welcome and endorse General Assembly resolution 41/8 „f 2« October 1987 on the prevention and control of UM, the report of th. Director-General of WHO on global strategy and Economic and Social Council resolution lgss/55 on the prevention and control of UM. We further welcome the recent WHO/»nited Nations Development Programme (UNDP) alliance to combat AIDS, and the contributions, of th. Onited Nations Children's Fund (DNÎCEF) and the »sited Nations Fund for Population Activities (Mm., „ a pragmatic expression « the growing awareness of the need to pool forces within the »nited Nation, system. We also welcome resolution 41.24 of the World Health Assembly of 13 Nay 1983 on the avoidance of discrimination in relation to HW-infected people and people with AIDS.
We also wish to express World Summit of Ministers of
our strong support for the conclusions reached at the
Health held in London this year.
It was emphasised that information and education
During that meeting
programmes, which took full
account of social and cultural patterns, should be aimed at the general public. The need for the necessary human and financial resources was agreed upon by all participants. Further, the member sûtes of the European Community firmly Supported the latest initiative on the prevention and control of AIDS, oonUined in document A/C. 2/43/U12. sponsored by several delegations of all groups. We hope that thio draft resolution, adopted by consensus in the Second Committee on
21 October, will help better to
combat
the disease.
implement and co-ordinate the global strategy to
I now wish to elaborate on the efforts of the European Community and its -ember Stotes In the same field. At a Health Ministers meeting held on 31 May this Fear, it was noted with satisfaction that all member states are pursuing
homogeneous policies in their fight against AIDS, in accordance with the common
approach outlined in their conclusions of IS May 1987. They noted in particular that all member States are ensuring complete freedom of movement of persons and equal treatment, as laid down in the treaties, and they reaffirmed their comitment to the following principles, especially the followings since AIDS is a public health problem, the fight against the disease must be based on national health policy, in combating AIDS, absolute priority Is to be given to prevention through health information and education, in terms of prevention, any policy of systematic
and compulsory screening is ineffective, any discrimination against or
stigmatisation of persons infected by Hlv, particularly « regards employment, must be avoided.
AIDS is more than a disease, it is a threat to the socio-economic development of mankind and imperils the stability of our societies by generating fear, ignorance and intolerance. We should make every effort not only to defeat the virus scientifically but also to reduce the social impact of this terrible pandemic.
Before concluding, allow me to assure the Assembly of the strong and continuing support of the member States of the European Community in order to achieve positive results in our common struggle.
Mt. MORTENSEN (Denmark): The year 1988 marks the fortieth anniversary of the world Health Organization, and on behalf of the Nordic countries I should like to express my sincere congratulations to the World Health Organization on thxs occasion and to pay a tribute to its important and widely varied contributions to better health for all. in this context, the Nordic countries would also like to welcome the newly elected Director-General, Dr. Nakajima. We wish him the best of success in his future work.
The World Health Organization has certainly proved its importance during its 40 years of existence. Suffice it to mention the fight against smallpox, which
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Mortensen, Denmark) finally resulted in the complete eradication of this horrible disease - an excellent example of what can be done when all nations of the world pull together in a venture that will benefit not only our generation but that of our children and our children’s children. Now the international effort which made that achievement possible is harnessed to bring about "Health for All by the year 2000". We fully support this inspiring and ambitious "Health for All" strategy, which has given health administrations all over the world a valuable framework for their health policies. The Nordic countries are convinced that the World Health Organization in the years to come will continue to be the guiding organization in the field of health with as much energy and enthusiasm as shown in the first 40 years of the organization’s life.
The year 1988 has been one of celebration for the World Health Organization -not only with respect to its fortieth anniversary but also with respect to the tenth anniversary of the International Conference on Primary Health Care held in Alma Ata. It was a major historic breakthrough and laid the foundation of a collective framework for primary health care. The Nordic countries welcome the reaffirmation of the Alma Ata Declaration by the World Health Organization experts at a meeting in Riga earlier this year.
The World Health Organization has always been an organization with strong principles, and the Nordic countries would like to stress some of the principles to which we attach particular importance: health as a concept is not limited to the absence of disease or infirmity, emphasis should be given to preventive activities, to preserving health rather than focusing too narrowly on curing diseases; health services should be provided on an egalitarian basis, and accordingly should not increase the gap between the haves and the have-nots; emphasis should also be given to measures to improve environmental and social conditions making better health
(Mr. Mortensen, Denmark) possibles the establishment and strengthening of a sustainable primary health-care system is vital.
I will also take this opportunity to address the issue of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Last year the Director General of the World Health Organization, Dr. Mahler, addressed the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly on the threatening disease of AIDS - a disease affecting all regions of the world. Unfortunately, the gloomy prospects with respect to the dissemination of the disease have been confirmed and more than ever we must join forces to combat this pandemic. Especially in this context it is with great pleasure that the Nordic countries endorse the initiative in this session of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of AIDS.
(Mc. Mortensen, Denmark)
As stated on earlier occasions, th. Nordic countries support the World Health Organization ds th® in nation	.
co-ordinating agency with respect to the global struggle against AIDS. The World Health Organisation enjoys the competence and Morld-wld. respect that is imperative if w ere to deal effectively with the problem.
The world Health Organisation is facing considerable challenges with respect to implementation of th. national AI0S programmes. Th. Nordic countries strongly
support th. establish.«« of th. «.ria Health Organis.tlon/Onited
Nations
oev.lop.mnt Program.» alliance Md its emphasis on a multisectoral approach. This la an exa^e of co-operation between multilateral progrades which we hop. win be .mulated, end «. trust that th. alliance will contribute to a successful implementation of th. national „os program..., Oi.semin.tion of information on AIDS and on measures to avoid thi. disease is of paramount importance.
As we h.,. stated on previous occasions, however, it is necessary not to panic to continue working solidly and tirelessly towards eradicating not only Alos but also the many other diseases that threaten mankind.
The world Health Organisation is an ambitions organisation and the Nordic countri« would like to pay tribute to it for that characteristic, w. think that
it
to
in
of
1. nec.ss.ry « value«. £ot . organisation lit. the World Health Organisation have vision, goals and strategies.
Th. »arid Health Organisation plays the leading role in formulating standard, th. medical field ., well ., ln hMlth development. Its work i. foc th. benefit an and should receive adequate financial support from all Member states.
Over th. lest 40 years th. Nordic countries hav. b..n strong supporters of th.
world Health Organisation, morally ,s well as financially.
We have in our
voluntary contributions - for
for example, to the programmes of essential drugs, human
«productiv. health, tropical dl.MSM research _ 8uppocted
an overall health
(Mr. Mortensen, Denmark) development based on primary health care. The Nordic countries attach great importance to the continuation of programmes based on these principles. At the same time we support a development in which regular contribution to the World Health Organization will be assured to the extent that the organization can consider a gradual incorporation of the special programmes into the regular budget of the World Health Organization.
On behalf of the Nordic countries, let me conclude by repeating our sincere congratulations on the anniversary of the World Health Organization and expressing our trust in its will and ability to continue and intensify its valuable work for better health throughout the world.
PE* KO°P (United States of America): As Surgeon General I regard it as both a privilege and a great personal pleasure to represent my country at today's events honouring the World Health Organization (WHO).
For most of my career I have been involved in international health work. But it has only been in the past eight years, during my tenure as Surgeon General of the United States Public Health Service, that I have had the opportunity to work closely with the leadership and the staff of the world Health Organization.
The experience has reinforced many times over my belief that WHO is not only an agency whose existence is essential to world health but also an organization whose accomplishments over the past 40 years have even exceeded the great hopes that attended its birth.
WHO was founded in the aftermath of the Second World War in a time of great economic and social upheaval. The health systems of many nations were devastated or non-existent. Communicable diseases took a heavy toll: smallpox, tuberculosis, malaria and other diseases were so prevalent that few countries were spared; many millions of infants and children died each year before the age of five.
The need for an international health organization was appallingly evident.
(Dr. Koop, united States)
And now we know that the organization that emerged during that period has surpassed our greatest expectations, it had a powerful concept -that health, good or ill, could never again be purely a national phenomenon-. That concept has stimulated and guided the World Health Organization.
The health status of all the people of the world, whether they live in developed or developing countries, affects everyone. It was therefore in the interest of all nations to work together to address the totality of world health problems. No vehicle was better suited to the task than WHO.
As we look at our world today we see that enormous progress has been made in the four decades during which WHO evolved from a technical assistance agency, primarily concerned with communicable diseases control, to a partner of all nations in the support of national goals for health for all.
We have improved our health car- systems and made health services available to a degree unknown 40 years ago. we have made great strides in dealing with communicable diseases, especially malaria, diarrheal diseases and diseases that can be prevented by vaccination. Life expectancy has risen from a world-wide average of 41 years in 1950 to 61 years today. And while far too many children still die before the age of five, the world is certainly a safer place for children. The number of infants and children who die before the age of five is many millions less today than the number who died during the 1950s, even though the total child population of the world has substantially increased.
While this progress could not have been made without a genuine commitment on the part of national Governments, the leadership, guidance, assistance and inspiration provided by WHO were essential ingredients in our collective success.
Today, thanks to a very active and successful WHO expanded programme on immunization, there is excellent vaccination coverage against poliomyelitis, diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, measles and tuberculosis. At the request of
QZE^JtooEtJJnitedjsta^
•enter nations, wdo has no. launched a spacial effort to eliminate polio everywhere. Polio may wU become th. sTO„d disease to be eradicated through the efforts of mankind.
The success story of that first eradication effort against smallpox has been record m«y times, and vhy noti The bean race had never before been able to achieve such a medical oir.de as the elimination of a specific disease from onr planet.
Th. eradication of smallpox under MHO leadership .m for evet ^ „ testitony to th. hind of achievements that can be realised when the nations of the world work together towards a common goal.
Oral rehydration therapy is well on its way to becoming .„other success
•tory. It Is becoming ao effective that the Uvea of
children <s being spared. The therapy,
countless infants and
of course, is based upon a simple solution
of water, sugar and salts,
a formula devised by WHO scientists.
(Dr. Koop, United States)
Th. work on «lari. ,i.o continues to hold promise test this aise.se, too, »ill on. day be conquered. Prom its creation WHO ha. targeted this disease, and despite th. difficulties of malaria control we can rerain optimistic about the future.
«KPS special program for research and training i„ tropical disease has already shown that concerted scientific efforts can produce remarkable achievements in developing method, ano tools for reducing or eliminating communicable diseases, including malaria. Th. Tropical Diseases Research Programme uniquely ««amplifies th. acMraements that can com. about when diff.r.„t groups, era. thus. .1th divers, philosophies, join hands and work together.
With urging ana guidance fto, ^ „ ^ ,13o ^ ^^ ^^ ^ ^* manpower utilization and a courageous reorientation of medical education towards primary health care, to provide a more realistic approach to the health needs of large populations.
These success stories are impressive, but stimulus to us to do better. They must not be "a know all too well that victory over disease appearance of new threats and new diseases.
if anything they should serve as a used ar an excuse for complacency, is often counterbalanced by the
W. ar. new experiencing thl. with acquirud lnmuncd.flci.ncy syndrom. (AIDS,.
AIDS threaten, ev.ry nation rad presents an unpr.ced.nted challenge to international public health. Bach affected country that confront, thl. ne. health problem ray discover it ray „rad to reap™ .1th resource, of so great a magnitude that it could devastate
system it is trying to strengthen. This threat exists for developed and developing rations alike. But, as T stated a year •go in thl. srae Assembly, »ms 1. potentially mor. destructive to developing nations than to the developed or industrialised .orld.
(Dr. Koop, united States)
»IDS tends to impact most often on the most productive meters of society, th.
breadwinners in th. prim. of their llves, bance a^^ „^ hR by ^ could 1«. .„ irreplaceable generation o£ engineers, hMlth wotketSi Bachers , Tcv«™« officials, .. well as workers ln wlculture( ibdUstry ^ ttade. j has the potential to devastate a country's plans tor development.
and
AIDS
A y.ar ago, in my remarks here, I called upon HID and the nations of the «rid to give a high priority to making the .orld's blood supply safe for transfusion. ! excess«! the hope that by uorking together w might do this by mi. * sa£e blood supply is import«.t every^ere - that goes ulthout saying - but in the developing «rid it has particular significance for tourism, for business and for foreign investment.
Over the past year, the screening of blood donors tor the human immunodeficiency virus (NIU) has been initiated in ««.y countries, In some countries it is no. mandatory and I understand that all African countries may be able to do complete HIV screening of blood donors by the end of this year. Appropriate policies to ensure safe blood donors have been implemented in most countries and the need to limit transfusions to the nuAer absolutely necessary is another strategy being pursued. H» is co-ordinating a global blood supply initiative, supported by several organisations, including who's global program» on and the W» laboratory testing unit, the league of Had Cross and led Crescent Societies, the International Society for Blood Transfusion and th. Onited Nations Development Progranme.
Thes. beginnings must b. sustainud and supported by all Member nations. Becaus. th. united stat., has th. larg.st exp.ri.nc. with AIDS, we ar. able to shar. our national .xp.ri.nc. tor th. benefit of other nations.
AIDS is a risk to all society and not just to one or more narrow groups. Alos is still spring i„ me united states, both geographically and numerically, and
we must still consider it a risk to all of society. Hence States «.anted the largest, most comprehensive educational of public health to tell the public the facts about AIDS.
(Dr. Koop, United States) in 1987 the United
campaign in the history
It is difficult to
»easure the behavioural changes that take place after education.
The homosexual population has indeed heard us, and the tact that changed their behaviour is evidenced	n
evidenced by the decline not only in other transmitted diseases among homosexual men but also in the actual drop
they have
sexually in the
incidence of ne. cases of aids among this group. But ve are concerned that all of our young people receive and understand that educational message and the challenge tor us is to find Innovative and creative »ays of getting the message across so that these young people do not experience a decade of self-destruction.
The global fight against AIDS
political and health leaders make difficult decisions, to the consistency and unity of against this global threat.
will take many years and it will require
alike to have the strength of commitment necessary to
stand
firm against unreasonable fear and to maintain
action that are absolutely vital for a global fight
No country can fight Alos on its o»„. The leadership necessary to coordinate
rts can come only from the World Health Organization. WHO is the holding together onr individual efforts and guiding then into a genuinely global attack on AIDS.
linchpin
unified
I commend WH3 for its efforts under its new Director-General, Dr
against AIDS thus far. I am confident
that
. Hiroshi Nakajima, WHO will continue to provide
US with the leadership and guidance that will some day bring „s victory.
After all, only united action by all countries can bring about real and lasting improvements in the health of all the Grid's people. And that Includes united action against AIDS, the greatest potential catastrophe on today's ho-ison of health.
Mrs. darling (Australia): At the forty-second session of the General Assembly, last year, Australia took the opportunity to introduce the first ever General Assembly resolution on the prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). As an early and active supporter of the necessity for an effective global strategy to combat AIDS, Australia had earlier in
1987 co-sponsored World Health Assembly resolution 40/26 on the AIDS virus. Having achieved through this resolution the commitment of policy- and decision-makers in
health ministries around the world to the concerted, to combat AIDS, we, together with many other States,
co-operative action necessary wished to see this commitment
reaffirmed also at the international, political level.
The consensus adaption of General Assembly resolution 42/8 demonstrated the serious concern felt by all Member states about the threat posed by the Alos pandemic, and the crucial need tor International cooperation and co-ordination, through the Global strategy established by the Her Id Health Organisation, to contain the spread of AIDS.
»day, almost one year later, while continuing to be deeply concerned about the seriousness of the situation, Australia welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm our oomnitment to continued co-ordinated international efforts to combat this disease by expressing our support for the draft resolution which Is before us now.
tn supporting this text, we wish also to place on the record our thanks to the Onited Kingdom for proposing th. draft resolution on AIDS this year and thereby continuing the momentum of activity on this vital issue. .
As the proposer of last year’s AIDS resolution, we have been gratified by the »ay in which the international community and Member States have responded over the past year to the World Health Organization's Global strategy on AIDS. Certainly, I have been impressed and encouraged by the positive contributions made by representatives of Member States in this forum today.
It is clear that Member states have risen to th. challenge posed by th, pandemic and that efforts to contain the spread of AIDS have benefited greatly from the international consensus and co-operation which have developed on this issue. Political leaders, and indeed the whole international community, are now very meh alert to the implications of AIDS and have placed their support firmly behind health-care agencies and health workers in their efforts to contain the disease.
In striving to maintain this impetus, Australia is not blinkered in regard to other major health threats to the global community, particularly in areas where health care is not readily accessible. In this context, we support Dr. Nakajima’s pertinent statement on the burden of disease borne by a large portion of the world’s population, particularly the poor. We believe that AIDS should be kept high on the international agenda, because disease is no respecter of persons. AIDS should be in the forefront of our thinking and our planning as one of the major threats to all peoples.
For the fight to control AIDS is by no means over. As we are all aware, the number of cases of AIDS worldwide continues to increase and there is a« yet no prospect of a cure. Given these circumstances, Australia continues to believe that AIDS remains a global issue requiring urgent and concerted attention by all Menber States and by the wider multilateral system.
In that context, Australia wishes to reaffirm its support for the excellent work of the World Health Organisation (WTO) over the past year in its role as the central co-ordinating authority in the global battle against AIDS. On this, the fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization, we wish to congratulate it on the prompt and effective way in which it has responded to the threat to world health posed by the AIDS pandemic, without the strong leadership shown by WHO in the development of the Global Strategy, and through its work in developing and implementing national plans in many Member States, it is unlikely that the global battle against AIDS would have come this far.
Australia’s commitment to international co-operation in combating the AIDS virus is reflected in the Australian Government’s support for the Global Programme on AIDS, in addition to the widespread programme of public education initiated to foster an informed understanding of the disease within our own nation, Australia
will contribute 2 million Australian dollars to WHO by 1990-1991 for national plans for AIDS prevention and management in the Asia-Pacific region.
In the absence of a vaccine or cure for AIDS, behavioural change represents the only effective way in which the spread of this disease can be contained. Public information and education of our citizens therefore have become our most important weapons. This is not to say that medical research on AIDS is not of the utmost importance. It is. But, concurrently, people in all countries must be given the advantage of the most up-to-date information on modes of transmission of the disease, to enable them to modify behavioural patterns.
In that regard, WHJ's Global Programme on AIDS plays a crucial role in encouraging the effective communication of information about Member States' initiatives, as well as highlighting significant developments in research and other technical aspects of the disease. The ready accessibility of this information is, in Australia's view, a key factor in improving community understanding of the nature of the AIDS virus, its effects on both individuals and nations, and the various options available for its effective management.
In Australia, the education of our citizens to the threat posed by the spread of AIDS is seen as the most effective first line of defence in dealing with the virus. Knowledge of what is taking place in other countries has reinforced our belief in that approach. Australia therefore commends the world Health Organization on its initiative for World AIDS Day, which is to take place on 1 December, with the assistance of all sections of the world media, World AIDS Day has the potential to convey to the widest possible audience the facts about the AIDS pandemic and efforts to overcome it. We believe that this is an absolutely essential base for coming to grips with this disease and its ramifications. We cannot afford to become complacent. An expression of goodwill towards and support
(Mrs. Darling, Australia)
tor world MDS Day by the General Assembly would be a cleat indication that control
of
AIDS remains a high priority for all Member States.
In addition to education and public information, Australia wishes to commend the Assembly an equally important initiative which warrants the urgent attention all Member states! the development of a safe global blood supply, with the
to
of
development of a safe global blood supply, we would	i
supply, we would effectively remove a primary risk factor in the spread of AIDS throughout the world. In addition, there would be complementary spin-offs for the fight against other major infectious diseases, such as hepatitis B. Australia considers that the establishment and management of safe national blood supplies is possible with a relatively modest allocation of resources, particularly when compared with the significant social and economic
costs inherent in the
continued spread of the AIDS virus, m this context.
Australia has already provided bilateral assistance to Papua New Guinea and the
Philippines to assist
in the establishment of safe blood supplies in those therefore comme ds to all Member States the global blood
countries. Australia
safety initiative launched by w» and urges Governments to give priority attention to the development of safe national blood supplies.
As a co-sponsor of this year’s draft resolution on the AIDS pandemic, Australia looks forward to the consensus adoption of this text by the General Assembly as a clear signal „, the resolve of Member states to continue to forge ahead in the global fight against AIDS.
Wjp«
!!L^W!I (Japan): it is a great pleasure to speak on behalf of my Government in celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization (W®), a specialized agency of the United Nations responsible mainly for providing technical assistance and for co-ordinating and gliding activities undertaker at various levels in the field of health and sanitation.
During the four decades since its establishment, WHO has made a tremendous contribution to human health and well-being.
I believe it is appropriate on this occasion to take a brief look at the M.tory of the «.rid Health Organisation ao that we my truly appreciate its remarkable accomplishments and adequately assess the tasks thut lie aheaci.
In 1948, when the international community was still deling from the effects of the Second World War, the Member states of the United Nations declared, in the Ccngtitution of the World Health Organization, that it is a fundamental right of •very human being, regardless of race, religion, political philosophy or socio-economic system, to enjoy the highest attainable standard of health. WHO immsdiately set to work to build up health care systems in war-torn areas and to combat epidemic diseases that were threatening the health and lives of people all over the globe. Providing sanitation facilities and securing clean water sources were given priority in this effort.
In its second decade, starting from 1958, WHO concentrated chiefly on extending emergency assistance to newly independent African States. The prevention •nd treatment of tuberculosis, which was said to infect almost 60 per cent of the world's population, was another major focus of WHO efforts at that time.
In its third decade, W® pursued a programme totally to eradicate smallpox - a goal that in 1979 was certified as having been achieved, saving more than 100 .1111«, people fro. thia dread disease. further, Hro continued itc fight against tueh tropical diseases as lularia and leprosy, uhile at the sane tine
^. Kagami, Japan)
continuing, in co-operation with other United	4
united Nations agencies, special programmes in such fields as family planning.
in 1976, the World Health Organization adopted its Upended Prograde on
Immunization, which aims at ensuring that bv 199n an	.
mat by 1990 all children in the world will access to immunization services against the six diseases of diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, tuberculosis, polio and measles. The United Nations
< CBF), individual governments and nongovernmental organizations joined this immunization programme, ehich has already saved the lives of
Children's
of children, particularly in developing regions.
In 1977, just before embarking on its fourth decade organization, under its program popularly referred to ,
eventually
millions
the World Health
year 2000", emphasized that the
as "Health for all by the
as those of individual
primary social target of its own efforts, as well
that will permit people everywhere to lead
govern^nu, should be the attainment of heelth steudstas
1ives.
economically and socially productive
Towards that end, m 1978 the World Health Organization, with the
co-sponsorship of ™tœP ana the pertioipetion of . number of Governments,
non-governmental organizations and ^ relevint
International Conference at Alma-Ata
United Nations agencies, held an
, in the Soviet Union, reaffirming the
foportance of providin, the essential elements for primary health care. Subsequently, i„ 1,31, W1IO adopted . ^ ^^ ^ goal.
Today, the World Health Organization touches
its programmes in such fields
the lives of all of us through
child health
as disease prevention, family planning, maternal and
care, procurement of essential drugs
assistance, and health and hygiene services
technical and emergency
, as well as through its
resestch efforts, information services end publications. These ore
study and
all crucial
elements in its efforts to realize its targe” of	í „ u
9 - t Health for all by the year 2000".
The vital role WHO is playing has as reflected in its membership roster.
(Mr. Kagami, Japan) gained world-wide recognition and support, which now includes 166 States.
Its considerable schleeements ere directly attributable to the commitment, wisdom and idealism which its esecutive officers and staff members have brought to their tasks.
Permit me to note in this regard that the »rid Health Organization has this year appointed or. Hiroshi Nakajima as its ne» Director General. ! „ confident that, under his leadership, «m win continue its vigorous efforts to raise th. health standards of all the world’s citizens.
I wish also to take this opportunity to comment briefly on Jap:; s relationship with the World Health Organization. Since becoming a mentoer in 1951, my Government has steadily expanded its financial and technical co-operation with WHO. In addition to its assessed contributions, Japan has increased its voluntary contributions each year, in 1988 alone, its contributions for certain specific programmes amount to approximately $US 4.6 million. My Government also maintains, in co-operation with WH), a fellowship programme under which it invites every year about 100 fellows from all over the world to engage in research activities at Japanese hospitals, universities and other institutions.
Experts and consultants from Japan also take part in WHO technical assistance projects, and the Government of Japan has hosted international conferences and workshops to provide administrators and experts from various countries with the opportunity to exchange views and information in health-related fields.
While paying tribute to WHO's achievements over the past four decades, we must bear in mind that much remains to be done. The international oo^nunity is still confronted with numerous health and sanitation problems, some of which crn8s national borders. Recurrent natural disasters, infectious diseases and food shortages continue to take their tragic toll, particularly among children. These
(Mr. Kagami, Japan) problems seem to be most prevalent in developing regions, where almost three fourths of the world's population resides. Thus we must sadly conclude that the need far efforts by the World Health Organization in the various fields of human health will be ongoing for many years to come.
A particularly serious problem, and one which will be the focus of increased attention at this session, is acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), for which there is as yet no adequate means of treatment. He must tackle this dreadful disease at the national, regional and international levels with every intellectual, scientific and medical resource available before it truly explodes. It is anticipated that at this session the General Assembly will reaffirm, subsequent to the resolution it adopted last year, that international efforts, and particularly those of WH3, for dealing with AIDS must be strengthened.
(Mr. Kagami, Japan)
It is encouraging in this regard that last January the World Summit of Ministers of Health adopted the tendon Declaration on AIDS Prevention and that WTO has recently designated 1 December this year World AIDS Day. Both these measures will give an added impetus to the fight against AIDS. Further, w® is continuing to develop and implement its global programme for the prevention and control of AIDS. In support of these efforts, the Government of Japan is determined to continue to extend financial and technical assistance to WHO. Last year, as a demonstration of that determination and to share Japan’s latest technology and experiences, my Government, jointly with WHO, convened in Tokyo a Conference on an Integrated Strategy for the control of AIDS and other Human Retroviral Infections and Hepatitis B.
I strongly urge that all appropriate organizations, both governmental and non-governmental, join WHO in the global struggle against AIDS, in this regard, I welcome the establishment of regional and national programmes in the past year to combat AIDS around the world. Japan, for its part, established last year the Ministerial Committee on AIDS to ensure close communication and co-ordination among the Government agencies concerned and to promote various measures to coirbat the disease. At its first meeting the Committee adopted a national plan for AIDS control, which identified the five following major areas in which measures would be taken. First, dissemination of accurate knowledge on AIDS» secondly, strengthening of the surveillance system» thirdly, strengthening of primary and secondary prevention measures and of counselling services» fourthly, promotion of international co-operation in research» and lastly, provision of appropriate legislative arrangements.
In closing, I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate that Japan will continue to make every effort to raise health and social welfare standards by
(Mr. Kagami, Japan) providing both bilateral and multilateral assistance, and in particular, by co-operating vigorously with the World Health Organization.
Mr. TEEHANKEE (Philippines)s On behalf of the Republic of the	'
Philippines, i take great pleasure in joining in the celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the world Health Organization (WHO).
Th. world Health Org.nix.tlon 1. on. of tn. ,«.«>„. »„y „ nMd the ^^ Nation«. Prior to th. r«.„t po.ltiv. develop...« in th. lntern.tlon.l polltlc.1 •na ..curlty «.Ida, th. united Kat.lon8 ^ otten ^ m£altly crltlclMa ,„„ maligned tor alleged Inaction. Such an unfair judgement Ignored the good work undertaken by much aub.ldlary organa a. WHO, which have per.ev.red throughout all th. year, of medeet budget and llttl. recognition to bring forward the al™ .nd ohj.otlv.. of the united Natl««. *. « o.i.br.t. today, lr.port.nt mil« tone, I would recall briefly acme of the achievements of WHO.
»on. of u. need be remind«! of th. work done In eradicating «allpox, con.ld.r.d not too long ago to b. the .courge of th. Barth. Through Innovative effort., WHO h.. check« th8 8ptMa o£ 8„ch „étagions di8888e8 M y8,8r n81ari8 and cholera. It. imminltatlon campaign againat th. ao-called children', killer dl..,w. - polio, „.„!.., diphtheria, looping cough, tetanua and tubercule.!. -ha. been, on th. whol., .uccessful. In fact, WHO expect, to eradicate polio by the year 2000. It ha. embark«! on programme, to improve nutrition, l>ou.lng and ..citation, and working condition, and other «.pact, of environmental hygiene m underdeveloped and developing countries, with encouraging results.
* lesser-known but equally Iqurtant WHO initiative is a special programme on tropical dl.ee« research, which it manage, in collaboration with the world Bank and th. united Nation. 0ev.lop.ent Prograde. Thi. i. a v.cy l^ortant project in my country. Th. ..«It. of 10 year, of recruitemnt and international scientific
A/43/PV.38
S3
(Mr. Teehankee, Philippines) network development are now bearing fruit. Vaccines, drugs, diagnostic tests and other disease-control tools are baginning to appear. More scientists from tropical countries are being trained by WHO to increase self-reliance in the affected countries.
The world Health Organisation is also involved in combating diarrhoea-related deaths among our children. Some 4 million children under five years of age die from diarrhoeal diseases each year in developing countries, in collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), WHO is developing new technology to reduce this number. These two agencies have collaborated with member countries in the introduction of oral rehydration salts, a new procedure developed in this field, it is estimated that this new procedure has already prevented about half a million deaths. We understand that through WHO more than 112 countries now have plans for national diarrhoeal control programmes and most of them are operational.
The World Health Organisation has made significant contributions in the field of food safety, in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, it has established a food standards programs that has developed almost 200 international safety standards for food commodities.
Acute respiratory infections continue to be a major cause of death among children in developing countries. The World Health Organization has developed a simple procedure to detect bacterial pnev.^nia, the major culprit in respiratory-infection-related deaths. This new procedure has proved its effectiveness in countries where the disease has been prevalent.
On tuberculosis control, WHO has worked out a strategy that could be used by health workers in all countries, poor and rich. The mortality has gone down and there is growing confidence that the fi^ease will finally be conquered.
(Mr. Teehankee, Philippines) These are but a few examples of what WHO, with the support of the international community, has accomplished and has undertaken to alleviate mankind's suffering in the last 40 years.
The World Health Organization in spite of its many achievements cannot afford to rest on its laurels. . The campaign against disease and the enhancement of health are a continuing effort. The World Health Organization has already joined the battle against that most dreaded disease, the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
With the Director-General's briefing earlier this morning, and the other fine reports that have been given by previous speakers, I will confine my remarks to noting that the Second Committee has proposed the adoption by the General Assembly of a consensus resolution on AIDS which would, among other things, reaffirm the . leadership of WEO in the prevention and control of AIDS. My delegation has the honour of being a sponsor of this draft resolution. We anticipate unanimous endorsement of that draft resolution and hope that it will provide an added impetus to the campaign against this latest scourge of the Earth.
(Mr. Teehankee, Philippines)
Allow me to congratulate Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, the new Director-General of WHO. He joins a distinguished line of Directors-General. Dr. Nakajima is well known and highly respected in my country. Before his elevation to his present position he served for nine years as Regional Director of WHO for the Western Pacific, with Headquarters in Manila. I am confident that the dedication, discipline and professional competence he displayed in his former post will serve him and the organization well.
Finally, let me also express my country’s appreciation to Dr. Mahler for his selfless and dedicated service for the welfare of mankind during his tenure as Director-General of WHO. *
MT. FORTIER (Canada)s A year ago this Assembly for the first time adopted a resolution on the prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), it was a bold and timely step, signalling a genuine commitment by the Uhited Nations to acknowledging the AIDS pandemic, commending the World Health Organization (WK)) for its efforts towards global AIDS prevention and inviting the appropriate organizations of the Uhited Nations system, bilateral and multilateral agencies and non-governmental organizations to support the world-wide struggle against AIDS.
Now, in this fortieth year of WTO, we can further comend the co-ordinated efforts of the United Nations and its Member States to combat such deadly diseases as AIDS. Indeed a central theme underlying many of the presentations made at this session of the General Assembly has been that the growing interdependence of nation States in the contemporary international setting increasingly demands integrated, multilateral solutions to the issues which shape our destiny - be they political, economic or environmental. Member States have been virtually unanimous in welcoming the recent improvements that have taken place in the international political atmosphere, rightfully drawing the conclusion that, where nations join together in a spirit of constructive co-operation to address common concerns, real
<Mr« Fortier, Canada) progress Is possible. Perhaps no single development could have come as a more convincing illustration of our mutual interdependence than the rise and spread of the MDS pandemic around the world. This disease recognises no class distinctions or racial barriers, nor any national borders. Unheard of just a short decade ago, this fatal disease has now spread at an alarming rate to virtually every corner of our Planet, with potentially catastrophic consequences for mankind. I£ the threat is great, however, so too is our collective potential to rise to this challenge. The growing death toll and the truly global nature of the MDS phenomenon demand an urgent, sustained and co-ordinated international response, and it is to this task that we, as Member states of the United Nations, must remain dedicated.
«e in Canada are well acquainted with the tragic consequences of this terrible aisease. indeed, Canada faces one of the highest rates of MDS infections in the world. The first cases were reported in my country in 1982. As of the beginning of this month, there have been some 2,030 diagnosed cases of MDS and over 1,100 AIDS-related deaths. By the end of 1991 there may be as many as 6,700 MDS cases, furthermore, despite our relatively small population base, it is estimated that between 90,000 and 100,000 Canadians are now carrying the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that causes Mds - many of them unaware of the fact. Norld-wide, »HO reports approximately 117,000 MDS cases, and estimates of the number of people that have already been exposed to the virus run into the millions, while these figures alone cannot convey the true enormity of the human suffering that AIDS has already Inflicted, they do highlight the magnitude of the human, social and economic disruption that will occur In our societies if this pandemic is not brought under control.
for our part, Canada has not backed away from the need to respond to the AIDS menace. Between 1932 and 1986 the Canadian Government spent *2.6 million on AIDS research, in «ay 1986 the Chadian Minister of Health and welfare launched a
(Mr. Fortier, Canada) $39 million five-year programme to combat AIDS. -n June of this year, the Minister announced the intention of the Canadian Government to spend a further 8129 million over the next five years, which will bring our total financial contribution to the effort against AIDS to $168 million through 1993.
Canadian research has concentrated on diagnostic and testing techniques, the dev.lopu.nt of an effective vaccine, studies to determine the extent of progression of AIDS infection, immunological studies of AIDS victims and socio-economic and behavioural studies of the effects of AIDS. Underpinning our national AIDS programme is the recently established federal centre for AIDS, which has harnessed all the AIDS-related scientific and medical expertise within the Federal Government. The centre also performs a co-ordinating function to ensure an integrated and united federal and provincial approach to AIDS, as provincial Governments in Canada have primary delivery responsibility for health and education programmes.
Despite our best efforts, Canada recognizes that a cure for AIDS is a long way off. Perhaps the most unsettling aspect of the AIDS pandemic is that we still do not know the full scope of the disease. Given the exponential growth rate in reported AIDS cases to date, however, we must all recognize that this disease has the potential to wreak havoc on our economic and social fabric, particularly as the virus strikes directly at the most economically productive menders of our societies. Moreover, as the number of AIDS victims mounts, so too does the cost of providing for their care, which imposes increasing economic burdens and strains limited health-care resources. In our effort to combat the spread of this vicious disease, we must not lose sight of other serious health-care problems for which these will be a continuing need for adequate resources.
We must also ensure that the manner in which we respond to thu AIDS crisis is governed by reason and compassion rather than fear and prejudice. Every effort
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Fortier, Canada)
must be made to provide factual data regarding AIDS in order to avoid the rise of groundless fear and panic. Accurate information about AIDS is also essential to equip our citizens with the knowledge they need to minimize the risk of infection. In the absence of both a cure and a vaccine, it is clear that effective public education programmes will remain our best line of defence against the spread of AIDS for the foreseeable future.
(Mr. Fortier, Canada)
Above all, the message I wish to leave today on behalf of my delegation is, that in Canada’s view, the World Health Organization and its global programme on AIDS must remain the focal point of the international community's efforts against AIDS. Time is not on our side in this struggle, and we cannot afford to allow duplication of effort and competing national programmes to dissipate the energy we collectively can muster. Our commitment to a concerted global campaign to rid the world of the AIDS scourge is reflected in our decision to host the fifth international conference on AIDS, in Montreal, in June 1989, as well as in our ongoing financial support for WHO and the Global Programme on AIDS. Canada has been a major contributor to the Global Programme, providing some 816 million to international programmes and scientific initiatives to fight AIDS over the last two years. This explains our decision to sponsor the draft resolution on AIDS at this session, and we urge others to support it as well. We strongly hope that the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus, thereby building on the political momentum initiated in this forum.
Daunting as the present prospects may appear, we are convinced that with the collective resolve and commitment of the international community we will ultimately be able to overcome the AIDS pandemic. We Canadians have a deep and abiding faith in the capacity of the United Nations system to resolve global problems when Member States demonstrate the will to act in concert. When it comes to the global fight against AIDS, we believe that the co-ordinated response of the international community, guided by WHO, represents the last, best hope for mankind.
Miss WILLBERG (New Zealand): One year ago yesterday the Assembly adopted by consensus resolution 42/8, entitled "Prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome", or AIDS, as it has come to be known. In doing so we,
(Miss Willberg, New Zealand) the Members of this Organization, acknowledged the serious threat which the AIDS pandemic poses for all the peoples of the world. We also expressed a commitment to work together to control this scourge and seek the means to eradicate it. Such a commitment is in the finest tradition of the United Nations. I am honoured to be able to reaffirm my country's continued support for this vital work.
The past 12 months have not seen	major progress in	the search for a cure for
AIDS, we know all too well that such	a breakthrough is	likely	to be	some
considerable way in the future. The year has, however,	seen a	major	upsurge in
public understanding of the nature of	the pandemic. No	longer	is it	so common to
hear the wildly exaggerated prejudices and misconceptions about AIDS which were so prevalent even a year or so ago. But much remains to be done. Myths and prejudices still remain. Understanding the causes of AIDS is the best known method of preventing its spread. We are encouraged by the public education work in this area being undertaken at all levels and in all regions of the world.
Within New Zealand considerable efforts are under way in the establishment of a comprehensive national strategy for the prevention and management of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and AIDS. These include initiatives on blood-donor screening, support for programmes of AIDS education and prevention targeted at specific groups within the community, and a needles and syringes exchange scheme.
New Zealand is pleased to be a sponsor of the draft resolution which is before this Assembly today. We see it as an important means of maintaining momentum in the global fight against AIDS. We believe that it represents a balanced assessment of the respective responsibilities of the international community and of individual Member States. And of particular importance is the recognition which it gives to
(Miss Willberg, New Zealand) the leadership role of the World Health Organization (WHO). In this regard, it is most fitting that we are at this session of the Assembly honouring the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the World Health Organization. Its record over this period in the promotion of health for all is one of the finest tributes to the Organization of which it is part. The responsibilities of WHO are many and varied. Today, we are focusing on the AIDS pandemic. It is important to remenber on occasions such as this the other major health threats and the suffering which they cause to millions of men, women and, especially, children. We must use this opportunity to renew our commitment to the goal of the World Health Organization: the attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health.
Mr. KRYZHANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People's Republic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.	.
The fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization (WHO), which we are observing today provides us with an excellent opportunity to refer yet again to its action, the purpose of which is the preservation and improvement of the health and life of man. As a specialized agency of the United Nations, WHO has made a strong contribution in the 40 years of its existent to the development and intensification of international co-operation with regard to public health and medical science, training, the preparation of new medication, the fight against old diseases and the spread of new diseases, and immunization. The record of WHO shows
BBS/Sy
that the joint efforts of member States directed at problems at various levels yield tangible results.
(Mr. Kryzhanovsky, Ukrainian SSR)
the
solution of public health
had taken millions of human lives
The conquest of smallpox, which
, was due precisely to
international
-o^uo.. H» „ co 8M hoB, „„^ the ^ of ^ ^ 1O . th. cooouua o£ th. wotld haïe concenttated aielt e£fotts in
^inst a oe. a„d dtaadful ^ thteata„ing ^^ _ acquiced syndrome (AIDS).
JSMAY
Ä/43/PV. 38
66
(Mr. Kryzhanovsky, Ukrainian SSR) The noble tasks and purposes the organization has set itself in the goal of "Health for All by the Year 2000" were strengthened in its respective programmes and in the Alma Ata Declaration, whose tenth annivesary we are now celebrating, together with the fortieth anniversary of WTO. We are firmly convinced that these objectives can be fulfilled only if peace and security are assured, the disarmament process is intensified and the equitable economic and social development of all countries is guaranteed.
The socialist countries, on whose behalf I am speaking, continue to attach great importance to the work of WHO in organizing broad international co-operation; they have taken an active part in various forms in its work. We will in future continue to co-operate with WHO's efforts to solve the current medical problems facing mankind and to help WHO in the continued fulfilment of its mission.
Mr, DING Yuanhong (China) (interpretation from Chinese); The General Assembly is holding a special meeting today to observe the fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organization (WHO). On behalf of the Chinese Government, please allow me to express our warmest congratulations.
I notice that Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, the new Director-General of WHO, is in the Hall, we have known Dr. Nakajima ever since he served as Regional Director of the Western Pacific Region of WHO. May I warmly congratulate him on his assumption of the important post of Director-General of WHO, and express the hope that under his leadership WHO will be able to solve some of the formidable health problems facing the world today.
In the past 40 years WHO has made significant contributions to, and achieved universally recognized results in, directing and co-ordinating international health efforts, advancing the health development of all countries, promoting the
(Mr. Ding Yuanhong, China) prevention and treatment of all kinds of diseases that threaten mankind and improving the health standard of human society.
The strategic objective of -Health for All by the Year 2000-, adopted by WHO at the thirtieth session of its general conference, was a new and major policy decision in world health work. It has evoked world-wide repercussions and given a powerful impetus to health work in many countries of the world. As a result of its effective work, some diseases, particularly contagious diseases, in many countries, are in general decline.
m 1980, WK) solemnly declared that smallpox had been eliminated from the Earth, thus opening up a bright prospect that contagious diseases can be eliminated. At the forty-first session of the WK) General Conference, held this year, a draft resolution entitled "The elimination of osteomyelitis from the Earth by the year 2000- was adopted. Thus, the elimination of osteomyelitis will, as that of smallpox, become another significant event in world health history.
Co-operation between the Chinese Government and WK) has been successful and fruitful. Over the past 10 years or so, WHO has sent experts to China on nearly 200 occasions for lectures and seminars. It has set up co-operation centres in 53 health research units, providing substantial support in technology and resources and promoting technological exchanges between China and the other member States of WHO, thus playing a positive role in helping the development of China’s medical science and health work. We hope that this excellent relationship of co-operation will continue and expand in the future.
As is known to all, China is a developing country with a vast territory and a large population. Since its founding, the People's Republic of China has maintained the health policy guideline of -prevention first", attached importance to the development of health work at the grass-roots level in both urban and rural areas, and carried out the prevention and treatment of diseases in a planned way,
,	lHr> 212S Yf^nhong, China)
thus achieving significant results in the field of health. However, on the whole, the medical and health work in China has not been able to keep up with the growing needs of the people. Faced with this situation, how will China develop its health undertaking? How will it attain the goal of "Health for All by the Yea; 2000"? The answer to these questions requires that we find a better strategy and approach through deepening reform in the field of public health.
In recent years, WHO has responded resolutely to the challenge of controlling the rapid spread of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) throughout the world in order to ensure the well-being of mankind. It formulated a global plan on AIDS, with emphasis on supporting and strengthening information sharing and international co-operation. These fruitful endeavours have /proved useful to the efforts made by China and other countries in preventing and controlling AIDS. WH3 has already assisted China in formulating its short-term plan on controlling AIDS. Medium-term and long-term plans are now under consideration.
Judging from the present situation, China is one of the countries with a very low rate of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. However, with the increase in international exchange and development of tourism, there is still the possibility of AIDS being brought into China and even spreading in the country. The Chinese Government has already set up a State plan on the prevention of AIDS, which is now being implemented. The Chinese strategy on AIDS prevention emphasizes publicity, education and information sharing, with a view to raising public consciousness for self-protection, as well as development of AIDS monitoring and efforts to reduce the number of AIDS cases and deaths.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to WHO for the many-sided support and technological co-operation it has extended to the Chinese Government.
H£. MORAGA (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): when one analyses the work done by the United Nations in various spheres, one usually concludes that there are many obstacles to the full realization of the objectives the Organization has pursued since its foundation as goals for human coexistence and understanding.
But when we examine the vast amount of work of immense value achieved by a body such as the World Health Organization (WHO), we readily discover that its mere existence would justify the functioning of the entire Organization. The contributions made by the World Health Organization to the human species are so immense and so profound, and its benefits so great in the prevention, detection, treatment and care provided in respect of diseases that have afflicted enormous segments of the world’s population in various parts of the world, that it is in fact difficult to gauge its accomplishments.
The Republic of Chile fully concurs with the internationally endorsed principles which have accorded high priority to health and has, as indicated by the United Nations, organized this sphere of concern, into two basic areas.
The first is the promotion and protection of health, concerning which, through free programmes for the prevention of diseases and through periodic check-ups, we strive principally to reach children and pregnant women. We also have vaccination programmes against various types of diseases, as well as health and nutritional education.
The second area, which we may refer to as the recovery of health, encompasses all care provided for hospital and maternity home patients, including care involving great technical complexity. This care is provided free of charge to the poorer segments of the population not covered by insurance, State or private.
In this context the Government of Chile has modernized the public health structure in substantial ways, giving the Ministry of Health supervisory powers and dec.ntraU.in, th. public health car. system. It has also set up the National
(Mr- Moraga, Chile) Health Fund and extended primary health care through more than 2,500 doctors' offices throughout the country.
With regard to child health care, in 1975 we set up a system to monitor the nutritional status of children up to the age of six, and we have worked to improve and strengthen the national programme for complementary nourishment, by means of which health is decked and food provided to pregnant women and children up to the age of six.
Similarly, as regards environmental health, we have made vast investments in drinking water and sewage systems and brought about great changes. In 1985, 94.5 per cent of the urban population had piped drinking water supplies, compared with 66.5 per cent in 1970. The corresponding figure for sewage systems, 31 per cent in 1970, rose to 74.5 per cent in 1985.
The mortality rate for infants below the age of one year, regarded as the major index of social development, improved from 65.8 per thousand live births in 1973 to 19.4 per thousand in 1986, which places Chile high on the list in this regard.
The rate of malnutrition among children below the age of six was 15.5 per cent in 1975} it had dropped to 9.1 per cent in 1986.
These figures, together with many others too numerous to list here, demonstrate the permanent interest and concern shown by the Government of Chile, which reflect the basic objectives of the organization whose fortieth anniversary we are celebrating today.
We view health as part of the exercise of fundamental human rights, both individually and collectively.
Concern for the well-being of mankind, which the World Health Organization has sought to foster with great success through its dedicated efforts, has earned it the well deserved tribute of my Government and people.
(Mr. Moraga, Chile)
In closing let me share a brief thought. Ke have recently, through the media, been closely following the praiseworthy joint efforts to try to save the lives of three whales that found themselves dramatically trapped in the ice. Very profoundly and sincerely, we should like similar and greater efforts to be made ever more strenuously in the future for the benefit of the human species. We should thus strengthen the fundamental objectives of the World Health Organization.
Mr. MMERLE (France) (interpretation from French); The representative of Greece, speaking on behalf of the countries of the European Economic Community, has set forth our views and common intentions. I am speaking to support everything he said, and I should like to add a few words prompted by France’s experience and plans.
Nearly a year ago my country's representative told the General Assently he was happy that for the first time an item on acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) had been placed on its agenda. Today we can assess how far we have come in mobilizing resources and energy, in raising consciousness on all continents and in facing the dangers of AIDS.	'
First of all, I see eloquent testimony of our collective will in the participation in our debate of Dr. Nakajima, recently elected to head the World Health Organization (WR>). We welcome his presence here and are convinced that under his leadership WHO will meet the many challenges facing it today.
My country is more than ever determined to give the Hör Id Health Organization our support. We have not forgotten that this year marks the fortieth anniversary of WHO, and we should like to pay tribute to that organization for its tireless efforts, in particular the wonderful work done by Dr. Mahler. The challenges
(Mg. Lerner la, France)
already met by WHO, such as the eradication of smallpox, give us hope that further challenges will be met. Even so, despite the rapidity of scientific progress, AIDS continues to spread without our having any new means with which to combat it.
(Mr. Lente tie, France) That is what the French Minister for Foreign Affairs stated when in October 1987, in Paris, he opened an international symposium on AIDS. At that time he recalled the complexity off the problems posed and stressed that
"the situation which has been created internationally by the spread of AIDS goes beyond the limits of scientific research", and that
the problems we are all faced with today more than ever require international thought in an effort to achieve a consensus on balanced measures to be adopted in the areas of co-operation, education, ethics, legislature and economic resources".
That consensus should emerge particularly here in the United Nations.
I shall not return to the complexity and diversity of the problems posed by AIDS. A number of other speakers have dwelt on Jjat subject and our thoughts are proceeding apace. Before specifying how we plan to support international action in this area I should like to remind the Assembly briefly of what France plans to do.
In a few weeks, a new programme of action will be launched in my country to strengthen the means at our disposal to make it possible for our teams to meet national and international needs more effectively. The desire for effectiveness and co-operation and the desire to respect the rights of each and everyone remains our overriding concern. Evaluation of the results achieved, and achieved gradually, should make it possible for ua to reorient our programmes and bring them speedily into line with whatever needs are detected. Mobilization of the scientific community in the public and industrial sectors should make it possible for us to form new teams and retrain research workers in new areas.
(Mr. Lerner le, France)
Turning to the subject of co-operation, in the area of fundamental research we are devoted to the principle of ongoing co-operation with various teams throughout the world, we share the desire of the World Health Organization to intensify research efforts in the areas of virology, immunology, diagnostics and therapeutics.
As regards the subject of respect for the rights of all, information disseminated must be of quality, and there must be progrannes for health co-operation and the protection of ethical considerations in whatever we do, at all stages. We are attached to respect for the dignity of the patient and protection of individual freedoms. Detection must be voluntary and anonymous. Sero-positive patients and other sick persons must not be subject to any kind of exclusion. AIDS, like any other illness, must be combated with strict respect for medical ethics, and the unique relationship between patient and doctor must be carefully preserved. In preparing strategies to educate the public effectively and in a socially acceptable manner, respect for the rights of all must be a constant concern.
On the subject of international co-operation, I might make a preliminary comment. It should be clear that efforts to combat AIDS should not divert Governments from other health priorities. Moreover, the energy devoted to this struggle should make it possible to improve and significantly accelerate the development of health systems. France wishes to stress that as part of its international co-operative effort it plans to continue to respond to other health problems, as, for instance, in the campaign against major epidemics. It must not be forgotten that tens of thousands of men, women and children die every year as a result of illnesses for which there already exist well known and highly effective remedies.
Having made that preliminary observation, I would stress the importance my country attaches to the anti-AIDS efforts of the European Community. The
(Me. Lewer le, France)
««.tentative of «. «.1,. h„ „f„„d to ^ ^ at i<n9th
* -turn to it.
»» regard, Europe, bot ln . different ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ ^ Burop. 1. particularly important, m 1983 tea »arlimantary Assembly of th. Council •¿opted . function on Alos ataca at condemning th. dlacrtain.Mon thia illn.,. had ,lr.ady brought about. As part of it. global atr.tagy, a y..r age th. Council of Europa adoptad a function mad. by th. Ccltta. of Hiniatar. «garata, a Europa« program« aimed at proofing a public health policy, it ha. greatly helped us to overcome our initial hesitations.
as r.g.ra. th. moría Health Organization, „ repeat our firm «a co.peehen.lv. support for the world programme, what does this support really mean? it means a ftatacial contribution to th. program« which wU1 b. 1„c„IMd by M ^ ^ u
.na th.t, ,1th th. coat Of experts supplied by Prance, .m „te .ur effort SI million, seconaiy, .. ,cula lit. to continua to give our activa .uppert to text, on non-aiscrtaination regarding persons affected by ^ „.^ ^
th AIDS. I refer in particular to the reaolutlon adopted at the forty-first *«e«bly of the world Health Organization. Finally, „. plM M ,lye tncCMa,d material support to national programmes and to participate more actively in national evaluation efforts.
My Cavernnent is prepared, .hen countries so request, to send to the. epidemiologists, educators, anthropologist, and administrators, to help carry out concrete actions in the are., of evaluation, training, prevention and health education. France i. particularly anxious to diversify it. capacities in order to improv, th. quality of th... outside Interventions.
in conclusion 1 would remind th. Assembly of the decisive importance of unfailing coordination. locally, coordination betwesn non-governmente! organisation, bilateral assistance and multilateral assistance is oft«, delicate.
(Mr. Lerner le, France)
Once again the efforts of the World Health Organization and the United Nations to co-ordinate to mobilize means and skills can only be welcomed, particularly this year when we must lay special stress on information and co-operation regarding AIDS. May I express the hope that those efforts will be developed further.
BCT/dsg
The PRESIDENT: The Ase.mbly »111 „«, take , decision on ttl d[j[[ «eolation «hich th. Second Conoitte. resends tot adoption in paragraph 6 ot it. report (A/43/750/Add.l).
May I take it that the Assembly adopts that draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 43/15).
The PRESlDfflTs i Wish to announce that a message of congratulations on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the World Health Organisation, Addressed to the President of the General Assembly, has been received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Mongolian People’s Republic.
AGENDA ITB4 14
REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
The PRESIDENT: I should lik. to propose khat the list of speaker, in th. d.bal. on item 14 b. closed today at 4 p.m. I request those representatives »ashing to participate in the debate to inscribe their name on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
It there is no objection, ! shall take it that th. nss.obly agrees to that proposal.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose 1.30 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/43/PV.56
23 November 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-third session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REOORD OF THE FIFTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 18 November 1988, at 3 p.m.
President; la ter:
Mr. HUERTA MONTALU) (Vice-President)	(Ebuador)
Mr. BORG OLIVIER (Vice-President)	(Malta)
~ i!^“1BeO°nOmiC situation in Africa; United Nations Programme of Action for Atrican Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 [39] (continued)
ia) ^^t °f the - ,Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly on the Review and Appraisal of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990
(b)	Report of the Secretary-General
(c)	Draft resolution
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and °f speeches in 016 other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be ^he^£?n^ture of a meniber of the delegation concerned, within one week, ?hCial Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
88-64463/A 8694V (E)
AM/MO
In the absence oj^the President, Mr. Huerta-Montalvo (Ecuador) Vice-President took the Chair.	————————	-------------------------.--------
The meeting was called to order at 3. 30 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 39 (continued)
CRITICAL ECONOMIC SITUATION IN AFRICA: UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR AFRICAN ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND DEVEIOIMENT 1986-1990
(a)	REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE REVIEW AND APPRAISAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR AFRICAN EOON0MIC RECOVERY AND DEVELOEMENT 1986-1990 (A/43/664 and Corr.l)
(b)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/43/500 and Corr.l and Add.l and Add.2)
(c)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/43/664, chapter IV)
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French): My Government fully subscribes to the views expressed by the President of the European Community in his recent statement on the agenda item under consideration.
Two months ago, under the chairmanship of Mr. Tom Vraalsen, Ambassador of Norway, we completed our mid-term review of the United Nations Prograiwne of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development. Two years after the launching of the exercise, we had to determine whether we had embarked on the right course.
(Mr. Blanc, France)
In my Government's view, the mid-term review or stock-taking exercise is very important. France, which remains closely attached to the African peoples, is their principal donor. We are familiar with the major economic difficulties besetting Africa, and my country believes it can provide assistance to overcome them. It would be idle to paraphrase the text of the final document, which is especially enlightening, it would be more desirable to recall the broad lines of the Programme that was drawn up and to form some ideas on the actions to be undertaken in the coming years, during which concrete results should be achieved.
With respect to the measures taken by many African countries, we pay tribute to their efforts in the agricultural field in particular, it would be desirable to pursue such endeavours. They are indispensable to redress the situation in that continent. We must of course ensure that we do not lose sight of the human dimension and should give special protection to the most underprivileged groups. It is also desirable to take better advantage of private initiatives by enhancing the value of human resources, encouraging savings and direct investments, and combating the drain of capital.
In the face of the important decline in the price of conmodities, reduced here and there by the rise in the price of some commodities, we also feel it is imperative that there be diversification of the African economies and increased processing, marketing and distribution operations.
To those efforts to be undertaken by Africans should be added the contribution of the international community.
The improvement of economies and market-oriented development cannot in fact be achieved without considerable financial inputs. Without dwelling on the details of
(Mr. Blanc, France) the final document, we should like to emphasize that it recalls the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product all donor countries should try to achieve, and the need to improve the quality of assistance which is its corollary.
With respect to primary commodities, it is crucial for that continent, as we have often said, that the international community help the African economies to achieve a level of productivity comparable with that of other producing groups. The second aspect of the Common Fund may be an effective instrument to that effect. Stabilization of export earnings in an unstable economic environment is a useful instrunent, more particularly, as stated in the report, through the implementation of programmes such as Stabex and Sysmin.
The group of experts to be established by the Secretary-General should take a new look at the prospects envisaged in the area.
With respect to the debt problems, a cmaitaenv was undertaken in Toronto with respect to the poorer heavily indebted countries which subscribed to certain structural adjustment policies. That commitment was confirmed by the States members of the International Monetary Fund in Berlin, the Paris Club works to implement the measures. Debt problems continue to exist and concern other debtor countries, which is why the President of the French Republic launched a proposal concerning the private debt of me di tea-income countries which was the object of consideration by the coopetent authorities.
In conclusion, I believe that the mid-term review has been carried out energetically by the various partners. The States of Africa must resolutely pursue iheir efforts along the right road, but they cannot do so without the continued and evolving support of the international community, which reflects the necessary and obligatory interdependence of contemporary economies.
Digitized by. Dag Hammarskjöld Library
Mr. LI Luye (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The fact that the General Assembly has once again included on its agenda an item on the critical economic situation in Africa indicates that the economic situation in Africa remains critical and continues to be of serious concern to the international ooninunity. We appreciate the informative report of the Secretary-General on this item and the official document made available by the Organization of African Unity, which are very useful for our consideration of this item.
Over the past year the African countries have made strenuous efforts to attain economic recovery and development. Throuch economic reform and structural adjustment many African countries have taken effective steps to rehabilitate and develop agriculture, promote agro-related industries, combat drought and desertification and ensure effective development and utilization of human resources. They have achieved some degree of success. At the same time, the developed countries and the relevant international organizations have also done considerable work. They have taken action and made certain commitments in terms of increasing official development assistance and other financial flows to African countries and alleviating their debt burden.
Despite all this, it is regrettable that the economic situation in Africa has yet to take a fundamental turn for the better. Africa's grain output has continued to grow at a slower pace than its population, and its per capita income level is still below that of 1980. Therefore, it remains a pressing task for the international community to step up its efforts for African economic recovery and development.
Last September, the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly conducted a mid-term review and appraisal of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Hconomic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. Presided over by Mr. Torn Eric Waalsen, the Ambassador of Norway, the Committee adopted the final Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
(Mr. Li Lu ye, China) report after two weeks of intensive work. Although it leaves much room for improvement, the report gives expression to a realistic approach and a spirit of co-operation of all parties and helps to maintain the momentum for implementing the Programme of Action. It is our hope that this session of the General Assembly will take action on the report and adopt a corresponding resolution to ensure the implementation of the report.
There are only two years left for the implementation of the Prograde of Action. Whether or not we shall achieve success in bringing about African economic recovery and develop ent will depend on what we do during those two years. Time is short, and the task formidable. The African countries have already shown their confidence and determination to overcome the difficulties and revitalize their economy. The international community as a whole, and the developed countries in particular, should demonstrate th. political will, take effective measures and make still greater efforts, especially in alleviating the debt burden, increasing financial assistance and stabilising the prices of primary commodities so that a favourable external environment can be created tor the benefit of African economic recovery and development.
The Chinese Government will, as always, continue to support the African countries in their efforts for economic recovery and development. Wb shall continue to provide economic and technical assistance to African countries to the best of our ability and engage in economic and technical co-operation of various forms with them on the basis of equality, mutual benefit and attainment of common progress.
We hope that with concerted efforts from all sides the economic situation in Africa wiU have considerably improved by the time there is a final review and appraisal of the Programme of Action in 1990.
Mr^JBUMASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic) * Despite the sincere, tireless efforts by the African Governments to reactivate their economies and resume the process of developuent, and despite the recently heightened international concern over the African continent’s economic crisis, Africa’s overall economic situation continues to deteriorate. Indeed, in his report to the General Assembly, the Secretary-General states that, in general terms, the African economic performance is still disappointing.
We all know of the many contradictory explanations of this situation. Some have found it easier to put th. Maw on this or that quarter, regardless of the tremendous complexity and the interrelatedness of the various aspects of the question. But it is only fair and just to put the blame on all those who contribute to the perpetuation or exacerbation of the problem and pay a tribute to all those who have done all they could and made positive contributions.
No one would claim that we could expect African economic recovery and development overnight, even if all sides had sincerely honoured their conmitoents. It is, however, clear that one of the major obstacles to African economic recovery is the low level of the flow of finance from the developed countries to African development. That is why the goal of progress and sufficient growth remains unattainable.
If we review to. situation created by trade terriers, £lnanclal .„., Mnatary systems, indebtedness, commodity prices and the effects of drought and desertification, we shall find that sometimes the dedicated efforts of the African countries to escape this vicious circle appear to be futile. This calls for Merer, efforts on the pert ot the International ».»unity » the broadest possible scale.
(Mg. Abu Ihas an, Kuwait)
For a long tine now the focus has been on the developing countries' debt and its destructive effect on their development and on the «concede and social conditions of their peoples.
My country, Kuwait, has always been concerned over the situation of friendly African countries and other developing countries. Thus, a few weeks ago, from the rostrum of the world Organization, His Highness the Beir of the State of Kuwait announced an important, constructive and generous initiative - namely, the three-point programme of action to solve the problem of indebtedness. In the interest of the world economy in general and ths economies of the third world in particular, that initiative should be taken up and put into effect. That will require the concerted efforts of all. It will greatly benefit the African continent, in its long, arduous economic struggle. All those who heard His Highness the Bair of Riwait agreed that he demonstrated a sincere political will -which, unfortunately, is very rare in cur times - to find an effective, radical solution to a crisis which is worsening, with dire consequences for millions of persons in the developing countries. The solution advocated will, of course, require sacrifice and self-denial.
Almost all African States emphasize the need for self-reliance in facing up to the political and economic challenges of this age. That conviction stems from the individual and collective experience of those countries since the end of the colonial era. That experience has taught them the important lesson that they have to work hard and produce more in order to achieve self-sufficiency, which is the corner-stone of genuine growth and development.
There can be no doubt, moreover, that the African countries are fully convinced that they must act on two levels. First, they must deter any attempt to subjugate them politically or economically and keep them in a continuous state of
ft1« Abu Ih Man, Kuwait)
MM and de^drocy. ai. they can do through K>cUl 3l„df„tn,„. s,00naiyr they muse Increaa. th.lr production and ensure that It haa sound fomdationa. That
ta to aay, they have to build with one hand and defend thenaalvea with the other.
The African and other developing oountriea are now ever, that in order for the« to rise to the challenge and reetore their fraudo. of notion. It la not enough to «.k. declaration, and torneiate plena on paper. They realize that what in
nee<M 1. actual work - not juet plana, in addition, they realize that they have to co-operate with Md> other and, gradually, reach for reallatlc integration. That ia evident in the currant program.. of action of the African Group. This tendency took concrete for« in th. Ugo. Plan of Action, which was supplanted by th. African Program, of Prloritl.. for Konde Kc«.ry end th. united sot Ions
Program of Action for Africa’« Konde hacovery and Develop..«.
Ken we sp.sk of th. tragedy of tain, dch threaten, «inion, of liv.a among th. young and th. old, w. mt r.f.r to th. atrocious paradox of our eg. - na«ely, that uh 11« hundr.d. of thousand, ar. dying dally of taino, there ia a trend toward, racing food production in am part, of th. «rid in order to lighten th. burd.n of food aurpluam and buoy up food prlcm. N. cannot but join th. Novesent of (ton-Aligned Countri., in calling for th. adoption of a special program, of action for financial and food aaalatanc. to neat «aorgancies in the developing countries that suffer frea chronic food shortages.
(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
There is no doubt that the food crisis in Africa has been exacerbated by the persistent drought, creeping desertification, and the recent calamitous locust infestation. In this regard, we call upon the international community, once again, to implement without delay General Assembly resolutions 39/309 and 40/175.
We wish to reiterate that the right to food is one of the most basic of human rights and that it must be upheld. Hence, there should not be any linkage of food assistance to any political conditions of whatever kind. Lest someone should claim that this is the ultimate objective, we hasten to affirm, once again, the absolute indispensable need for consolidating North-South co-operation in developing the capabilities of the African and other developing countries in their striving towards self-sufficiency in food and agriculture. In this context, we welcome the Cyprus initiative against world hunger, and hope that it will gain enough momentum to translate its tenets into reality.
We also urge the Members of the Organization fuUy to support the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), in its major task, we also urge them to support the establishment of an international system of information and early warning within the Food and Agriculture Organization of the toi ted Nations with the objective of dealing with the crisis in Africa, and particularly the poorer countries, in the area of food and agriculture.
It is only natural that speaking of the économie problems of Africa should lead us to call for access to the markets of developed countries, by the products of the African and other developing countries, the stabilization of their commodity prices, the elimination of the protectionist tendencies of the industrialized countries, and ending the unfair competition based on the subsidization by the developed countries of their exports, the domination of the world markets by the transnational corporations and the practice of price-fixing.
»410
Wien we speak of the critical our concern over the large numbers
(Mr. Abulhaaan, Kuwait) economic situation in Africa, we must express of refugees who cross the borders of other
oountrl.. on th. Atrio« ocntln«t und.r thè prese«* of vario« facto and thè «.»Itant .ocl.l «a esondo .traine thl, influx of r.fug... creata, ter th. eountri.. of r.fug., m. l«« « to urge th. internationai comunlty to offlr. ite ooe.ite.nt to th. obiettive, of th. ancona V rnational Center«« for te.latente to tefug... 1„ Afri«, deh va. bela in 1984, and th. internati«.!
confer«« of th. Organization of African unity « th. plight of r.fug... ana displaced persons in Africa.
te th. international «.»unity already knee and an han been «.onetr.tea by the «jorlty of it. «afters in various resolutions, th. policy of dMt.blllz.tice pur.„a by the Sooth African rigi« han very grave .«„de consequences. Thl. ■ake. it imperative for all of us to support the African countries and the liberation aovdnts, whit-, bear th. brunt of th«, aggressive and racist policies. In this regard, my delegation would like to pay tribute to the Southern African Oev.lop.ent Co-ordination Conference and tend th. progress it has achieved in laundtlng important econdc programs, to lessen the dependency of the front-line State, in .outhern Africa. We call on the sobers of th. international community to support those programmes as much as they possibly can.
In conclusion, I should like to confirm to all the friendly peoples of Africa from this rostrum that my country, Kuwait, will continue to honour its commitments with regard to the relief and development of Africa, not only out of its conviction concerning the importance of that continent but also out of an awareness of the importance of the economic recovery of that continent in regard to the peace, security and stability of the world.
»Ao
ME'JMRNBTT (Jamaica): The critical situation affecting the African region was given full recognition by the international community when the General Assembly, at its thirteenth special session in 1986, adopted the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development.
During the past two years of the Programme's implementation, African countries have mads significant efforts to adjust and develop their economies and societies. Priority has been given by many countries in the region to the development of agriculture, the reduction of fiscal imbalances, the improvement of macro-economic management, the rationalization of the public sector, the further encouragement of the private sector, the reduction of population growth, the protection of the environment, and the development of human capacities. In a number of cases these policies are beginning to show results.
Jamaica wishes to pay a tribute to these courageous efforts and achievements of the African people, sometimes in the face of considerable political and social risk and against a backdrop of unfavourable international economic environment and many problems still existing on the continent.
We also note, with appreciation, the efforts made by the international community bo support the implementation of the Programme of Action. Some donors have increased their development assistance to African countries. A number of international and regional financial institutions have taken positive measures to increase flats to Africa. The major developed countries have adopted policies to help relieve the external debt problem of the poorest African countries. The relevant bodies of the United Nations system have also responded positively.
Unfortunately, as the report of the Secretary-General, entitled 'Mid-term review of the Implementation of the United Nations Prog rame of Action for African
IK/ .0
(Mg. Barnettf Jamaica)
Economic Recovery and Development" (A/43/500 end Corr.l and Add.l and 2) highlights, overall economic and social conditions in Africa continue to deteriorate. During the per..~«d under review, increases in the gross domestic pro&ict have been slight, per capita income has fallen. Investment in the education and health sectors, vital for the long-term development of any country* has decreased. Drought, floods and now a major locust infestation threaten agricultural production. The external debt burden has become worrisome. Commodity prices remain depressed. Resource flows in real terms have fallen.
(Mr. Barnett, Jamaica)
The need, therefore, for further concerted efforts both by African countries and, equally important, by the international community is absolutely clear. This, to some extent, has been recognized in the report of the M Hoc Committee of the Whole on the Review and Appraisal of the Uhited Nations Prograrane of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development (A/43/664 and Corr.l), which is before the Assembly today. As the report notes, a number of problems faced by African countries - and this holds true for the developing world as a whole - are related to exogenous factors over which Africa has no control. The international trading system is one of these and, given the heavy dependence of African economies on export earnings and the lack of diversity thereof, positive action by the international community in order to improve the adverse terms of trade is a must. The Ad Hoc Committee recognized the situation but fell short of making specific re commenda ti ons.
The problem of the external debt burden is another area of major concern recognized by the Ad Hue Committee, whose recommendations should be implemented as quickly as possible. Further measures will also need to be taken by the international community to alleviate the debt burden of all affected countries in the continent and thus enable then to utilize scarce resources as far as possible for economic recovery and long-term development.
Since the adoption of the Uhited Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, African countries as a group and indigenous African institutions have intensified their efforts to put forward proposals dealing with some of the problems facing Africa, and this would, inter alia, involve action by the international community. In particular, bodies such as the Organization of African Unity and the African Development Bank have been responding in an extremely constructive manner to a number of issues which African Governments have to confront on a daily basis. The African common position on Africa's Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
external debt crisia, the Khartoum Declaration, and the proposals by the African ««velop.ent Bank on MMta tlK! ma external ^ ^ ^ ^^	* ^^
tels ara.lop.ent, to It to frathet recognition that the primary responsibility fot «flea's economic fntrae lies in th. hands of «rira». This responsibility relatas not only to the implementation of policies and programmes nationally and regionally, but also to th. creative rad intellectual process of devising implementable solutions uhich recognize the particular circumstances of Africa, and »ho better to do this than Africans themselves?
He noted that many of these proposals »ere presented to the M Ite Committee tor future consideration by the International ooraunity. ». „ere deeply disappointed that some appeared to be treated with scant regard. Surely this response falls short of the corn!teent mad. in th. Program, of Action by the international community to
"respond positively to the African caU for
a new era of co-operation based on
a spirit of genuine rad equal partnership, uhich is an essential element fot harmonious rad mutually beneficial economic cooperation in an interdependent world-" (resolution S-13/2, annex I, para. 7)
We wish to urge that in the various
international forums which examine issues
relating to Africa's economic recovery, these proposals emanating from the African continent Itself are seriously considered with a vim, to implementation.
Equally Important to the success of development efforts is a peaceful stable international political environment. In Africa » continue to face
and
the
long-standing issue of racism and white minority domination in South Africa. Significant and scarce resources continue to be deployed by th. front-line states in order to secure their borders against racist aggression. The relentless campaign of aggression and economic sabotage .aged by the Pretoria re-gio. against its neighbours has forced these States to spend large sums on armaments for their
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Barnett, Jamaica) security. Resolution of the South African and Namibia issues, and the consequent easing of tension, would enable alternative use of those resources for development purposes in those countries. We are therefore cautiously encouraged by the results of the last round of negotiations on the independence of South West Africa/Namibia. The international community must ensure that South Africa follows through on its coanitments. However, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the racist policies of South Africa remain in place and that international pressure on that régime must continue until apartheid is abolished.
The report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole on the mid-term review and appraisal recommends that a final review of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development take place at the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly. However, priority attention by the international community must continue beyond this period. During the next few years, the united Nations will be elaborating a new development strategy and will be convening a number of international conferences relating to developmental issues. Special attention must be given to Africa in the context of these.
Africa is too important to be left behind in economic and social development. The dynamics of interdependence require that everything be done to redress the plight of that continent, which has contributed so much to mankind's history and is so rich in human and natural resources. Its potential must be realised.
Mr« FORTlst (Canada) (interpretation from French) : Not so long ago many Of us and our Ministers spent two long and difficult weeks discussing the critical economic situation in Africa and the progress that has been made - and that which has not been made - in implementing the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. The mid-term review was serious and, thanks to the excellent stewardship of the Chairman, Ambassador Vtaalsen and the persistent efforts of the other officers of the
(Mr. Kartier, Canada)
Committee, to vdiich I wish to pay a tribute, a consensus was reached. The problems, the issues and the response to the situation in Africa are coaplex, human and compelling. We all know that recovery and development will take time, commitment and courage. We are meeting today to give official approval to the report of the Ad Hoc Committee and to stress the importance of using the review as a guide for the remaining years of the Program»©.
The United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Itecovery and Development is the road map for a long and difficult journey. The mid-term review was an important milestone. The review will continue to serve an essential role in fuelling the political will needed to continue implementation of the Programas throughout its remaining years. The message of the review is hope.
Canada attaches great importance to the United Nations Programme of Action and to the review. That is why our Minister for External Relations and International Davelopaent, Mrs. Monique Landry, came to New York to participate in the opening debate. Her message was that Africa is a high priority for Canada and will remain a high priority. She Laid clearly that Canada is committed for the long term.
The mid-term review began by recognizing a distressing fact: that despite efforts to date the economic situation in Africa has continued to deteriorate. And behind the numbers, behind the statistics, lies a continuing scene of human misery.
Wjp«/nh
(Mr. Fortier, Canada)
It is this human reality that has touched the Canadian people, as it has so many others, it is this reality that must compel both the international community and African Governments to find every means possible to fulfil the commitments set out in the ttiited Nations Progranrae to the full and to reverse these downward trends. The consensus that emerged in the review was a recognition of this human need and a firm commitment to continue to join forces for the future of Africa.
At the outset it was clear to all concerned that the review was not the time to renegotiate the United Nations Programme of Action, to shift its focus from agriculture, or to detract from the principal role that African Governments must Play. Any attempt to do so would have undermined the integrity of the Progranrae and the momentum it had already generated internationally and in Africa. It is an appropriate Program. It is broad and balanced in tackling the root causes of the economic crisis, and it highlights such critical issues as the environment, hurran-resource developnent, women in developnent, and population, which we must all address in our development plans.
But, most importantly, underpinning the United Nations Progranrae is the concent of sustainable development. Our common goal is to free African countries from dependence on external financial and technical support to sustain their economies. It is for the long term. In our implementation of the Progranrae, donors and African countries should focus together on the long-term viability of the development strategies and economic policies we adopt and on the long-term environmental impact of those policies.
The key issues of the review were th<i human impact of structural adjustment, debt, resource flows and trade and commodity issues. It would be naive to suggest that there was unanimity of view on these issues. There was, however, a frank exchange which allowed us to understand better the concerns of African Governments
(Mr. Portier, Canada) and the constraints and limitations they face in responding to the crisis. We also emphasized the critical role the international community must play to support these efforts. On the basis of this understanding we must do a better job of implementing effective structural adjustment programmes, stimulating needed domestic investment, disbursing funds faster, thinking and acting as constructively as we can about proposals for debt relief, and ensuring that we are all carrying our fair burden.
Our expectations in 1986, when the Programme was adopted, were high. We could not have anticipated the worsening of the international economic climate that made it so difficult for African Governments to implement the necessary structural reforms. We in the international community had high expectations that we could mobilize very quickly the necessary concessional resources. In actual fact, many measures have been put in place by both African Governments and the international community. But we have discovered that the problems and obstacles are enormous and that change occurs only with the utmost effort and very slowly.
The Programme for African recovery was a landmark when it was adopted in 1986. The international community drew together with African countries to map out for the first time a jointly agreed, comprehensive plan for individual and co-operative action in order to address the serious economic problems confronting the region. The United Nations is now enjoying a renaissance in the public view. It has contributed successfully to the resolution of long-standing regional conflicts. The Programme for African recovery, therefore, is a unique opportunity to demonstrate the effectiveness of the United Nations in finding solutions to difficult, yet equally important, economic, social and development challenges.
It is important that our consensus be sustained, together, in the review, we listened to each other's points of view. On the depth of the crisis in Africa
(Mr. Fortier, Canada) there was no disagreement. As to the fact that acre oust be done, there was no disagreement. That we Bust, both African Governments and the international camunity, continue to do our utmost to implement the Progranew was something on which there was no disagreement. Where there were divergences and differences these were on matters such as debt and trade in commodities, which for the most part must be addressed in other, more technical, bodies. But there was no disagreement about the fact that all these matters need to be addressed with urgency, (tar role here is to underline the need and the urgency.
The review was an opportunity for us to renew our commitment to implementing the Programme to the full in its remaining years. For its part, Canada will stay tiie course with Africa.
—• PEJIC (Yugoslavia)» TWo years have elapsed since the General Assembly adopted the Programme of Action for African Bconomic fecovery and Development 1936-1990 as an important instrument for the alleviation of the critical economic situation in Africa. African countries and the international community made a mutual commitment to invest their best efforts to achieve this goal. For African countries this meant, first and foremost, tiiat they were to give priority attention to the necessary economic reform and to adjust their economic policies. For the international community it meant undertaking complementary action through intensified co-operation and substantially increased support.
Wiat has been achieved so far? Bow did the economic situation in African countries evolve? Unfortunately, the picture does not look rosy at all. The economic situation of these countries not only has not improved but has further deteriorated, and in some of them it has assumed crisis proportions. The extant situation does not require elaboration! it is only too well known. What does,
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia) however - and very much so - is inadequate implementation of the Programme of Action and the consequent absence of the expected results.
The African countries have made enormous sacrifices to implement this Programme. We cannot but commend those courageous efforts, particularly since in many countries such measures involve high social and political risks. But the efforts cannot be sustained indefinitely in the face of an adverse external environment and without increased support from the international community, as is rightly stated in the Secretary-General's report.
We cannot be satisfied with the response of the international community concerning the implementation of the Programme of Action, particularly so with financial support from the developed countries and international financial institutions as the necessary pre-condition for ensuring growth and development in Africa. The external constraints, such as low commodity prices, inadequate foreign real resources flews, particularly of concessional aid, deteriorating terms of trade, net transfer of resources and, especially, a significant increase in debt and in the debt-servicing burden, are the major impediments to economic recovery and development in the region.
Wed
Wr. Pejic, Yugoslavia)
Against that background the worthy efforts that have indeed been made to support African c»un tries, including those made by the Governments of some developed countries, seem insufficient in the light of the extreme difficulties facing the African countries. The implementation of the Program of Action is urther impeded by the policy of political and economic destabilization and acts of aggression pursued by the racist re'gime in South Africa against neighbouring front-line States, which not only threatens the countries concerned but also endangers world stability.
we comena the efforts of the Secretary-General in eensititing the international cor,munity to the critical economic situation in Africa in order to ensure the contribution of the United nations system to the implatentatlon of the Programs. There is no doubt that the united Hations system has devoted due attention to this problem and included the activities for the implementation of the programme among Its priorities. Set the results have not been achieved and that calls for additional measures and further action.
The mid-term review and appraisal of the Uhited Nations Program«® of Action for African Economic Recovery and Developnent provided an opportunity for an all-round look at the implementation of the Programme and reassessment of the factors that have impeded its implementation. After long and hard negotiations the Ad_Ifoc Committee of the Whole adopted by consensus conclusions from assessment of the responses and measures to accelerate the implementation of the Program«®. However, apart from some positive effects, the overall results fall short of expectations.
Regarding the assessment of implementation of the Program of Action, we must say that it does not duly recognize the exceptional efforts made by African countries in the implementation of the Program»®, while fulfilment of
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia)
commitments by donors and international institutions is somewhat overemphasized. We are not, of course, minimizing that but, concerning the measures for accelerating the implementation of the Programme of Action, a proper balance should be struck between the obligations of African countries and the commitments of the international community. Noticeably absent are measures for the improvement of the external economic environment, which is one of the basic prerequisites for African efforts to bear fruit. Concerted efforts are needed to create an external environment more promotive of and conducive to the resumption of growth and development in African countries.
In conclusion, let me say a few words about the efforts made by my country to support African countries. The extensive economic co-operation of Jugoslavia with African countries is carried out in accordance with the prograrenes of economic recovery of those countries. We maintain investment co-operation with a large number of African countries on projects that are of vital importance to their development, particularly in the fields of agriculture, processing industries, electrification, transport, irrigation and mining. Although itself constrained by limited resources, Jugoslavia finances those projects mostly by itself exporting equipment and technology.
To its African partners Yugoslavia provides grants and technical assistance, which, coupled with regular and emergency humanitarian assistance, amounts to several million dollars per year. Our contribution to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialisn and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund for the triennial period is $12 million.
Yugoslavia fully supports the justified requests of African countries for support for their development and recovery. To that end we have called on the developed countries and international financial institutions to pledge their
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia) resources for the development of those countries in an even bolder and more concerted way. Yugoslavia, too, is prepared to do so, yet its financial capacities are modest. Nevertheless we shall continue to assist African countries, which are to be counted as ever more important partners in international economic co-operation and relations.
Mr. KAKODKAR (India): My delegation welcomes this opportunity to participate in the discussion on the mid-term review and appraisal of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
It is now widely recognized that the critical economic situation in Africa has worsened since 1986. The continued impact of declining export earnings, increasing debt-service obligations and inadequate resource flows has forced the majority of African countries to re&ce investment and import levels, with detrimental effects on growth and development. Their capacity to implement fuUy their own commitments has been further undermined by natural disasters, desertification and locust infestation in sone areas. In addition, the countries of southern Africa continue to remain the victims of acts of political and economic destabilization by the racist Pretoria regime.
Consistent with their commitments, African countries have undertaken major reforms in several priority areas at the national level. Despite the political, social and economic difficulties involved, the countries of the region have implemented these measures in the expectation that counterpart measures would be forthcoming. However, the recovery programme is hindered by the substantial shortfalls in external resource flows in relation to needs.
(Mg. Kakodkar, India)
The exisis facing African countries, and developing countries in general, is to a large extent the consequence of external forces beyond their control. In fact the international economic environment has become harsh and unfavourable for all developing countries, including those in sub-Saharan Africa. The collapse of commodity prices to historically low levels, deteriorating terms of trade and rising and new forms of protectionism may be recalled here. Added to these are the high real interest rates, misaligned exchange rates, inadequate liquidity and the non-fulfilment of internationally agreed official development assistance targets, as well as the heavy burden of debt and debt-servicing obligations. All these have imposed heavy and unbearable burdens and accentuated the economic crisis in Africa, as indeed in the developing countries in general. Improvement of the external environment and structural reform of the global economic system are therefore essential for tackling the critical economic situation in the African region.
The Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly on the mid-term review and appraisal of the African recovery programme met here from 15 to 23 September 1988. The Ad Hoc Committee, through its two working Groups, undertook a thorough review of the problems and constraints facing the development efforts of African countries and the response of the international community, including the toi ted Nations system, in supporting those efforts. The opportunity offered by the mid-term review exercise was utilised by all parties to reaffirm their comitaent to the Programme. They undertook to take further action to ensure the effective implementation of the Programme during its remaining period.
(Mr. Kakodkar, India)
The mid-term review established that most African countries have adopted significant policy reforms, often at severe social cost and political risk. The international community, in turn, declared its intention to continue to support the efforts of African oountries to implement the Programme of Action. The United Nations system has attached high priority to Africa. In addition to sensitizing the international community to the critical economic situation in Africa, the Uiited Nations system has also been monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the Programme of Action.
It is important to implement without delay the agreements reached at the mid-term review, limited though they were. The developed oountries have a special responsibility in this regard. The policies and measures agreed in the areas of resource flows, trade, commodities and external debt should be implemented as soon as possible. This will contribute to the improvement in the external economic environment and thereby facilitate the long-term recovery and development of the African countries.
In conclusion, I should like to recall the words of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in his message to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly:
"By working together in a spirit of partnership, the international community has a great opportunity and a challenge to contribute towards building a modern and prosperous Africa. An economically strong and dynamic Africa will be an important factor for world peace and stability."
~ TANIOJCHI (Jap^n) 8 Bly delegation wholeheartedly and most warmly welcomes the adoption by consensus by the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the mid-term review and appraisal of the implementation of the united Nations Program» of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 and recommendations for the acceleration of its implementation. This is a remarkable achievement, and is the result of the strenuous and combined efforts of all the delegations which took part in the negotiation, bearing in mind the important need for an effective and urgent response to the continuing critical economic situation in Africa.
I express my sincere appreciation to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the W>ole, Ambassador Item Eric Vraalsen, for his able leadership in guiding the work of the Committee, and to the other members of the Bureau for their valuable contributions. May I also express my profound appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, to the former Ambassador of Canada, Mr. Stephen Lewis, in his capacity as Personal Adviser to the Secretary-General, and to the Steering Committee for their important contributions.
My delegation also welcomes and supports the basic thrust of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee, which is the result of the hard and conscientious negotiations we conducted; we regard the adoption by consensus of the mid-term review and appraisal by the Ad Hoc Committee as a great success. This clearly reflects a recognition by all Member States of the urgent need for more concerted action to alleviate and improve the economic situation in Africa.
The serious negotiations that took place in the course of drafting the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole were sometimes very difficult and, in fact, it was necessary to postpone their closure by one day. This is due both to the inherent difficulty of the negotiations and to the genuine desire and aspiration of «any delegations to contribute to the achievement of our cosmon objective. It is
(Mr. Tanigudii, Japan) the view of ray delegation that the mid-term review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action will certainly make a significant contribution to generating new momentum in the international community to take more effective action.
My delegation is basically optimistic that the final assessment of the implementation of the Programme of Action to be conducted at the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly will be much enhanced by implementation of the newly adopted policies and measures.
My delegation believes that all the participants in the Programme of Action, both developed and developing countries, particularly African countries, the Uhited Nations system, and other international organizations, have all made their best efforts to implement it to the maximum extent their respective circumstances permit, and that the adoption of the mid-term review and appraisal will certainly accelerate their continued efforts for the common objective of bringing about the speedy and fuUest implementation of the Programme of Action. At the same time, it is the hope of my delegation that the adoption of the mid-term review and appraisal of the Programme of Action will contribute further to strengthening the determination of African countries to pursue their self-reliant development efforts, as well as to generate more vigorous international support for those efforts. My delegation also hopes that the review and appraisal of the Programme of Action will further strengthen national and international co-ordination at various levels, so as to facilitate its implementation. In particular, we hope that the activities of the Uhited Nations system will be further strengthened in this regard.
The lesson we have learned from the Ad Hoc Committee is that it is equally important to find ways and means to accelerate implementation of the unfulfilled
(Mr. Taniguchi, Japan) part of the Programme of Action and assess positively within its framework the ««««.nt, to date of the international co™unity as a »hole, including both developed and developing countries, as »ell as international organisations, encouraging then further to pursue their vigorous efforts. R>r its part, Japan »ill continue to strengthen its efforts to help the peoples of Africa overcome their economic difficulties and realise their development objectives on the basis of the mid-term revie» and appraisal and the recommendations adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee.
In particular, Japan will continue to extend medium- and long-term assistance for African countries in a broad range of fields. At the same time, by expanding grant aid, particularly to least developed African countries, and by enhancing technical co-operation, Japan will further improve the quality of its assistance as well, m addition, it will exert its utmost efforts to provide financial contributions to the various international organizations involved in assistance activities in Africa, in this connection, may I also inform the Assembly that the necessary arrangements have been made to launch the project entitled "Jburnalists' Tours to Africa in the Framework of the United Nations Prograw of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development", which is to be financed by my Government, and that a team of journalists from the world's most influential media will visit Senegal and Ghana this month. It is hoped that the tours will heighten world wide public awareness of the critical economic situation in Africa.
¿Wil
(Mr. Taniguchi, Japan) In concluding I wish to express my earnest hope that the mid-term review and appraisal of the Programme of Action will contribute to the peoples of Africa making a speedy recovery from their sufferings and to mobilizing further international assistance for the efforts of African countries to this end. Japan stands firmly committed to doing its part in the renewed joint international efforts to achieve the common objective set forth in the Progranroe of Action.
Sir Crispin TICKELL (Bhited Kingdom): We fully endorse what the representative of Greece has already said on behalf of the member States of the European Community. My delegation was able to make its views on the problems of Africa's recovery very clear during the recent mid-term review of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, and so for that reason I will limit myself to a few, very general remarks.
As the British Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary said during the general debate, we welcome the outcome of the mid-term review. The original agreement on the Programme of Action in 1986 represented a joint commitment by the African and other members of the international community. The reaffirmation of that commitment is heartening. The African countries have agreed to continue their efforts to put in place the economic policies necessary for recovery. We salute their courage and determination in sustaining such policies in spite of the difficult political decisions involved. For their part, other countries have agreed on a range of measures in support of the Programme of Action.
None of us believes that African recovery can be completed overnight. There is a unique combination of natural and man-made hazards, in particular civil war. Change will take time, patience, imagination and effort. Aid can and does help, but cannot solve the problems on its own. We need also to create a more open trading environment and we attach great importance to the »bntre&l mid-term meeting of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) next
(Sir Crispin Tickell. United Kingdom) month. But in the last resort it is for the peoples and Governments of Africa to decide for themselves how best to attempt to solve their complex economic problems. Many have already embarked on far-reaching programmes. Over 20 sub-Saharan African countries have already adopted such programmes with support from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and other multilateral and bilateral donors. It is profoundly encouraging that African agriculture has begun to show signs of recovery in the form of increased food production and higher export earnings.*
These are all matters in which Britain will continue to play a prominent role and in many respects to act as a catalyst. We took the lead in converting loans into grants and have encouraged others to do likewise. We have also sought to relieve the burden of debt on those least able to bear it, so we are all the happier that our initiative on debt relief, launched over a year ago, has since the conclusion of the mid-term review come to fruition. A number of poor, heavily indebted sub-Saharan countries should soon join Mali and Madagascar in benefiting from the arrangements to give effect to the consensus reached in Toronto on debt relief through Paris Club reschedulings, the details of which were endorsed at the autumn meetings of the World Bank and the IMF. For our part we will be reducing interest rates on rescheduled debt by 3. 5 per cent.
This illustrates the very practical character of our approach. It should be the keynote of what we are all doing today.
Mr. SCIAIOJA (Italy): Let me first of all confirm my full support for the opinions already expressed this morning by the representative of Greece, who spoke on behalf of the Biropean Community and its member States.
Italy, too, shares the positive evaluation of the results achieved during the mid-term review of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic
* Mr. Borg Olivier (Malta), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Scialoja, Italy) Recovery and Development 1986-1990 conducted last September in two weeks of very interesting and stimulating work.
My delegation therefore.is very glad to support the draft resolution the General Assembly is going to adopt in order to approve the relevant conclusions and recommendations of the said mid-term review.
The exercise completed in September has been of paramount importance, having permitted all participants to focus properly on the positive results and also the shortcomings that emerged in the first two years of implementation of the Program». The experience of the past is always useful because it makes possible a more positive commitment for the future. In this connection and as far as my country is concerned, Italian development co-operation policy will certainly take into account the conclusions and recommendations agreed upon in September for the tuning-up of our initiatives in Africa.
We are sincerely convinced that the great potential resources of Africa will, sooner or later, permit the continent - with the sustained co-operation of the international community - to achieve concrete and positive results, which we hope will be properly assessed in the course of the final review of the Programme scheduled for 1991. This favourable result will only be possible if the international community continues its unflagging support and if the African countries persist along the path, already taken by most of them, with their courageous action and policies of reactivating the development process.
Only mutually supportive efforts will allow Africa to overcome the present constraints: the debt burden and a still declining trend in commodity prices.
There is no need to mention again the well-known strong commitment of the Italian Government to the African countries. My delegation already quantified this commitment last September in the context of the work of the Ad Hoc Coranittee, and I do not wish to repeat the figures here. The only thing I want to stress here
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
J1*1/11	VMM 56
44-45
(Mr. Sclaloja, Italy) is that Italy is firmly convinced that emergency and humanitarian aid, on the one hand, and long-term development, on the other, are closely connected and that any intervention should be carefully studied with this integrated approach in mind.
There are, it is true, still some painful emergency situations in some African countries and the widespread grasshopper and locust infestation has not yet been put under control, but we think that donors should move progressively from a short-term approach to a long-term development strategy aimed at the prevention of the recurrence of emergencies in the future. The role of the African countries in this process is of primary importance, and my country stands ready to co-operate fully with them for a modern and efficient developnent policy.
M£j DELFECH (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The adoption by consensus of the report of the Ad Hoc Coram it tee of the Whole of the General Assembly on the Review and Appraisal of the United Nations Programs of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development (A/43/664 and Corr.l) shows the importance that the international community attaches to this question. The Programme is undoubtedly a fundamental basis for future co-operation to achieve the economic recovery and development of Africa.
While nuch has been accomplished, it has undoubtedly not been enough to overcome Africa’s development problems. It has been a long, uphill struggle, and the road ahead will be arduous, though full of hope, as the Foreign Minister of Mali said in his statement to the Ad Hoc Committee last September.
Argentina has from the outset supported the 1980 Lagos Plan of Action and the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 . we regard these documents as daring and brave. They contain detailed studies of the needs of the African continent and ways and means of meeting those needs, and the will of Africans to be the architects of their own development is strongly highlighted.
This African decision is proof of the political will of the peoples of Africa and of their commitment to their own development. It shows, moreover, that the peoples of the African continent wish to see a world economy established on the basis of equitable conditions that will make possible regional development while reversing the trend of meagre growth we have witnessed during this decada.
We developing countries support Africa's endeavours and fully appreciate the adjustments the African peoples have made to overcome their social and economic Pr°blems. Argentina's understanding and solidarity are based on its own experience and that of our sister republics of Latin America, with which we share the difficulties inherent in the development process and its complex retinue of
(Hr. Delpech, Argentina) auccesees and failures. Be m ale» familiar with a »hole serie, of external conditions outside our control, »hose impact may either curb or give momentum to tiie development process.
The instability of international economic cycles, the very limited growth of International trade and its barely noticeable impact on moot of our economies, the deterioration in the terms of trade, the growing protectionism of the developed countries, the instability of commodity prices, and the overwhelming external debt burden, aggravated by high interest rates - all have produced a vast transfer of resources from African, latin American and Caribbean countries towards the industrialized countries. Those resources are thus diverted from meeting the basic needs of their peoples and from their own development efforts.
Those negative international conditions have prejudiced the efforts undertaken by African countries and made it necessary to adopt urgent measures, as was recognized at the last summit meeting of industrialized countries in Toronto.
SWo years ago the international community convened a special session of the General Assembly to deal with the critical economic situation in Africa, -today we are endeavouring to support the joint efforts of the African continent and the international community to implement the United Nations Plan of Action adopted in 1986, when the international community became fu ... aware of the desperate situation that prevailed in the African continent and the principal measures that must h adopted if Africa was to overcome its underdevelopment problems. Baphasis was placed on the need to achieve the long-term structural readjustment of their economies, mat adjustment is vital if we are to break the vicious circle of Poverty and underdevelopment and pave the way towards sustained economic development. The Programme also includes inmediate and less-izmediate measures for increasing agricultural productivity and promoting agriculture and afforestation programmes, for the avoidance of droughts and desertification and for planning the
«H AO
Wj«. Delpech, Argentina) use of human resources. These objectives are all reiterated in document A/43/664. They were also mentioned by the foreign Minister of Mali at the Ad Hoc Committee's review in September, when he emphasised the efforts undertaken by Africa in the field of agriculture, husbandry and protection of the environment.
We emphasize these matters because we believe that, in the context of co-operation between developing countries, Argentina can make a valuable contribution to the fulfilment of the Programme of Action. It has assumed the cowitaent assumed by the international community in 1986 vis-à-vis the African continent» we believe that, despite the serious economic difficulties besetting it, it, Argentina must comply with its share of that comsitment, and, to that end, it has initiated a number of programmes with a view to contributing to the objectives of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Ite cover y and Development 1986-1990.
(Mr. Delpech, Argentina)
In the agricultural and animal husbandry sectors, where Argentina has extensive experience, we have carried out a number of undertakings with various African countries. For instance, the National Institute of Agricultural ichnology provided technical training in Argentina to experts from Gabon and Zaire» reconnaissance missions were carried out to determine the needs of the following countries* Angola, Botswana, Cape Verde, Ethiopia, Gabon, Côte d'Ivoire, Mozambique, Nigeria, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe» in April and May 1987 an Argentine-African seminar for agricultural development took place in Argentina with the participation of Angola, Botswana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Swaziland, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe» last October a seminar on agricultural technology was held in Argentina with the participation of the following countries* Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Gabon, Guinea, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Togo and Zaire» and this month another seminar is under way in Argentina on the use and maintenance of agricultural machinery with the participation of* Angola, Cape Verde, Equatorial (hinea, Gbinea-Bissau, Mozambique and Sao -feme and Principe. All of these activities can be inscribed in the agricultural sector in general.
With regard to public health, the Government of Argentina granted post-graduate fellowships on paediatrics to the following countries» Angola, Benin, Cape Verde, Gabon, Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire, Mozambique, Nigeria and the United Republic of Tanzania. The object of those seminars is to contribute to a joint study by offering such services in Argentina while also resorting to the services of sane of the countries I have mentioned which already have experience that they can convey to us.
The development and effective use of African human resources is a basic concern of that continent. For that reason the Government of Argentina has Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Delpech, Argentina) organized a seminar on population techniques, which is to be held in Buenos Aires at the end of this month, with the participation early in December of officials from Angola, Mozambique and Sao Tome and Principe, among others.
Bearing in mind the results of the identification missions which were carried out in 1987, and in the framework of the recent journey of the Foreign Minister of Argentina to the continent, certain projects in the agricultural sector have been drawn up with a number of countries in the region; Angola, on phyto-sanitation, Ghana, on improvement of pastures» Cape Verde, on animal health and the development of an experimental farm» Gabon, on improvement of pastures» the Cote d'Ivoire, on improvement of livestock and the development of an experimental farm» Mozambique, on improvement of cassava and sweet potatoes; Nigeria, on development of the agricultural sector in general» Zaire, on selection and enhancement of sheep breeds» Zambia, on development of soya and sunflower» and Zimbabwe, on improvement of pasture lands. In all such cases our desire was an exchange of experience between Argentina and most of those countries.
All of those projects, whit* were carried out with the co-operation of the United Nations Development Programme, are being undertaken within the context of South-South co-operation and demonstrate my country's firm comnitment to African development within the context of this South-South co-operation.
On the other hand, traditionally Argentina has supported and will continue to support the food aid targets by contributing to the World Food Programme. During the period 1987 to 1988 contributions amounting to more than 20,000 tonnes were made to various countries in the region.	.
Another way in which Argentina supports the economic co-operation machinery established in the African continent is through its participation as a non-regional member of the African Bank for Development since 1985 and its participation in thé African Fund for Development.
(Mr. Delpech, Argentina)
My Government has sought to enhance trade and cultural relations with the African nations, which is a continuing and important part of Argentina's foreign policy. In that connection we should mention that in the course of the past two years economic, scientific and technical co-operation agreements were signed witli : number of brother African countries, establishing that African-Argentine co-operation should be carried out through trade, commercial, technical and industrial joint enterprises, the exchange of experts, official missions and businessmen, and the training of personnel.
Similarly, since 1984 Argentina has opened lines of credit for African countries - which are perhaps not very high but within Argentina's possibilities -amounting to about 3180 million for the purchase of Argentine goods. This granting of lines of credit is reflected in the increase in trade relations exceeding $25 million in 1987 alone.
Finally, since it came to power the democratic Government of Argentina has sought to establish closer relations with the African continent in all fields. Through the 14 existing diplomatic missions, diplomatic ties are maintained with almost all the countries of the continent.
Argentina wishes to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the valiant spirit of the African nations, which are prepared never to yield in their struggle against the heinous policy of apartheid. We are in full solidarity with the cause of the African people - which is the cause of civilized mankind. Because for us racial discrimination is inadmissible, and since we have denounced the repeated acts of aggression of the South African Government against the countries of southern Africa, we also broke diplomatic relations with South Africa in 1986.
We are also aware of the difficulties of the front-line States resulting from the continued acts of aggression of South Africa and, together with the countries
(Mr. Delpech, Argentina)
of the Non-Aligned Movement, we have contributed to the establishment of the AFRICA Bind, which was set up at the last summit meeting In Harare in 198« in response to those attacks.
^'A*	A/43/PV.56
5*
(Mr. Delpech, Argentina)
As we stated earlier, my country fully supports the multilateral economic action of the United Nations and therefore endorses its action on this occasion.
The African nations expect us all to contribute to meeting the challenge of the deep economic crisis. We cannot disappoint them; we must strengthen international co-operation, which is at the very root of our Organization.
The ERESIDENT: The next speaker, the representative of Zimbabwe, will make his statement on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.
Mr- HawADZIRlPi (Zimbabwe): I should like to convey our appreciation to Ambassador Tom Vtaalsen, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, for the able and efficient manner in which he guided the work of that Coanittee. Our appreciation goes also to his colleagues on the Bureau and indeed to all those who participated in the Committee's work; without their dedication, patience and tireless efforts this immense task would not have been successfully accomplished.
The report of the Ad Hoc Committee constitutes a very important statement in implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic recovery and Development 1986-1990. It is significant not only in that it provides us with a review and appraisal of what has been done so far aid what needs to be done in the remaining two years off the Programme, but more importantly in that it above all reaffirms the continuing validity of the mutual commitment between Africa and the international community that the Programme constitutes. The mutuality of this commitment is the central tenet of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Developnent. It is in this regard therefore that we welcome the conclusion by the Ad Hoc Committee that
(Mr. Hamadziripi, Zimbabwe)
"The continuing gravity of the economic situation in Africa requires that all partners take urgent and decisive actions to accelerate and ensure the efrective implementation of the Programme during its remaining period".
(A/43/664, chap. IV, para. 18 (annex, para. 5))
As is evident from the Ad Hoc Committee's report, most African countries have undertaken many significant policy reforms to improve the performance of their economies. They have done so in spite of the severe social and political costs these policy reforms entailed. Such a courageous display of political will and determination needs to be complemented by a proportionately commensurate will and determination by the international community to ensure that the progress made is sustained. It is thus regrettable that in spite of the commendable and courageous efforts of Africa's leaders, the overall performance of their economies remains largely unsatisfactory.
It 1. X». apparent to us that this depressing stat, of affairs has persisted partly because of th. failure of the International eoomunity to match Its stated conaiteents at the required level of resources and policy actions for the effective implementation of the Onited Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Developeent. The Pbreign Ministers of the .ton-Aligned Countries, at their Conference in Nicosia, Cyprus, from 5 to 10 September 1908, also noted with concern that
"two years after the adoption of the United Nations grannie of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, the economic situation of Africa had deteriorated and short-, medium- and long-term prospects remained bleak in spite of the vigorous policy reforms of African countries, which have exacted social and political costs". (^43/667, annex, Final Document, Economic Part, para. 155)
58
(Mr. Hamadz ir ipi, Zimbabwe) The Ministers concluded that
"the developed countries had not provided sufficient support, particularly financial resources for the implementation of the Programme of Action". (ibid, para. 156)
Indeed, the Ad Hoc Comittee notes in its own report that, in real terms, resource flows to Africa were lower in 198 6 and 1987 than in 198 5. It is a tragic irony that while resource flows to Africa from both bilateral and multilateral sources remained stagnant or even decreased in 1986 and 1987, there was a substantial net transfer of resources from Africa to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) during the same period.
It is in that context that we welcome the Ad Hoc Committee's appeal that "Sustained and unfaltering efforts made by African countries must be matched by substantial and urgent efforts by the international community to provide support to them at the required levels and to create an international environment favourable to the process of reform and restructuring". (A/43/664, chap. IV, para. 18 (annex, para. 10))
That message on the need ifor a renewed sense of commitment to and urgency in accomplishing the objectives of the lb i ted Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, particularly by the international community, is most propitious. 3b ignore it, or to do something else, would but constitute a betrayal of the hopes and aspirations and, indeed, the gallant efforts of the African countries themselves in relieving self-sustaining socio-economic growth and development.
We are not oblivious of the important initiatives that the international community has taken to complement and support the African recovery programme. However, we believe that more can be done - indeed, more needs to be done - if the
(Me* Hamadziripi, Zimbabwe) goals of the Programme of Action are to reach fruition. The Ad tec Coranittee rightly notes that "urgent and decisive actions" are required
"to accelerate and ensure the effective implementation of the Progranrae". (A/4 3/664, chap. IV, para. 18, (annex, para. 5) )
Besides substantially increasing the level of resource flows to Africa, the international community must urgently and decisively tackle the problems related to the prevailing external economic environment. The adverse external economic environment, over which Africa and indeed many others in the developing world have no control, poses a major constraint and impediment to Africa's recovery and developnent efforts.
The international community has a responsibility to make that environment more favourable to the achievement of sustainable growth and development in Africa. The need for a comprehensive and durable solution to the interrelated issues of money, trade, finance, external debt and development cannot be overemphasized. It is equally in the interest of the developed countries that these issues be resolved in the interest of balanced growth of the global economy. Failure to solve the debt problem could be catastrophic to the world community, as the persistence of the crisis could lead to a disruption of the international financial system and certainly to the undermining of growth in developing countries - which in turn reduces demand for imports. Consequently, a durable and effective debt strategy should seek to ensure that no developing country should ever have the obligation to meet debt-servicing obligations at the expense of growth.
We have studied very carefully the Ad Hoc Commitee’s reconraendations on the measures required for accelerating the implementation of the united étions Programme of Action for African Esonomic Recovery and Development, in particular those falling within the purview of the international community, we believe that,
(Mr« Hamadas ir ipi, Zimbabwe) if energetically implemented, these measures will significantly contribute to and enhance the process of reform, recovery and development currently under way in Africa. We thus call upcn the international community fully to meet its obligations in that respect.
As regards Africa's external debt burden, the measures contained in paragraph 66 in chapter IV of the Committee's report are a step in the right direction and should be pursued with urgency. The debilitating effect of external indebtedness is not unique to Africa. In view of the interdependence of the prevailing world economy, it may also be appropriate to consider extending, where applicable, sane of these measures to other developing countries similarly burdened by heavy debt repayments. That, in our view, would also ensure that the benefits of any favourable developments in the global economy accrued to all its component parts, in the interests of balanced growth throughout the system.
NR/ed
(Mr. Hamadziripi, Zimbabwe)
Peace and security are a sine qua non of sustainable development and growth. In southern Africa the prevalence of acts of aggression and destabilization perpetrated by the apartheid regime in South Africa against its neighbours has wrought havoc in these countries' economies and frustrated their efforts at achieving sustainable growth and development. The non-aligned countries have long recognized the dire need to provide increased financial support and assistance to the frcnt-line States to enable them better to withstand the nefarious activities of the apartheid regime. We thus welcome the determination and commitment of the international community to contint» and increase its assistance to the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC), the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund and other means of supporting the victims of apartheid, and the front-line States. .
We have reached an important milestone on the long and arduous road towards the recovery of Africa. Much has been done, but much more remains and needs to be done. This is not the moment to despair or falter but indeed the moment to rally to the call for renewed commitment to our cause which the Ad Hoc Connsittee has issued. We have all made a commitment, and that commitment must be fulfilled if we are to be true to ourselves. We in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries reiterate our support for Africa in its determined efforts to achieve self-sustaining socio-economic development and growth.
~ REINO (Portugal) * Early today the representative of Greece spoke on behalf of the European Communis and its member States. Being one of the Twelve, ny country fully endorses what was then stated. Let me, however, add a few words.
For Portugal, history has created a very special relationship with the African continent, it should, therefore, not be surprising that Africa has and will have a very high priority in our policies. Understandably, of that large continent the
(Mr. Reino, Portugal) five countries that use Portuguese as their official language deserve our very particular attention.
In 1986 the special session of the General Assembly approved the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. The review and appraisal of its implementation was concluded by the Adjfoc Committee of the »hole of the General Assembly last Septenfoer. Although we have covered a long path since the launching of the progranne, it is our assessment that much still remains to be done by all the partners involved. The African countries will have to continue their efforts in the adjustment process, but the international community has to sustain and increase its support for these efforts.
In spite of the fact that it is going through a period of adjustment of its own economy, my country is involved in a considerable effort in its bilateral co-operation. Fully aware of the burden of debt and debt service on the African economies, Portugal is searching for new and innovative solutions for the debt problems of its partners in Africa with a case-by^ase approach. These include rescheduling of debt and, in some cases, acceptance of payments in local currencies to be used for specific programmes of co-operation.
We should like to call the attrition of this Assembly to two matters we consider of great importance. One is the very particular attention the least developed countries deserve. Appropriate measures have to be taken to protect those countries from negative consequences resulting from the Uruguay Itound. The other is the specific support that the international community should give to the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference. Through regional co-operation the countries concerned can improve the basis for economic development in order to help in the achievement of political stability and peace in the region.
The PRESIDENT: I have to inform the Assembly that the Secretary-General has reviewed the draft resolution contained in the report and has indicated that he does not foresee at this time any additional budgetary implications.
Thè Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution in paragraph 18 of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee (A/43/664 and Corr.l). May 1 take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt that draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 43/27).
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Now that the General Assembly has concluded its deliberations on the critical situation in Africa, may I express my great satisfaction with the resolution just adopted, together with the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole.
Today Africa and the international community have renewed the unique partnership forged in 1986 for the economic recovery and development of the continent. The report of the Ad Hoc Committee constitutes a demanding work plan for both partners for the next two years, listing the extra efforts within the Programme that all have agreed will be necessary to put Africa truly back on the road to sustainable development by the end of 1990.
I note that there is general agreement that more needs to be done by the Governments and peoples of the continent. The report identifies as of special importance the rationalization by African Governments of public investment policies, the development and effective implementation of appropriate human resource and population policies, industrial development, improvement of international competitiveness, and diversification of production. There is also an important call for intensified efforts towards economic co-operation and integration in accordance with the objectives of the Lagos Plan of Action.



Moreover, the report lays appropriate emphasis on development programming that will give due recognition to the factors critical to increased agricultural production, including the needs of African women farmers for access to extension services, land titles, credit and new technologies. In all of this the United Nations system will make its full contribution. 

There must also be an energetic response to the call in the report for increased co-operation with non-governmental organizations, to which I attach particular importance in all United Nations endeavours. In this regard, I am happy to inform the General Assembly that representatives of non-governmental organizations will now participate in the work of the United Nations Steering Committee for the Programme of Action. 
In many respects, however, it will be the extra effort that the international community must make in the immediate future that will make the crucial difference with regard to successful implementation of the Programme of Action. 
There is no escaping the close connection between external debt; financial flows and trade if Africa's recovery and development is to be placed on a solid footing. With regard to debt; the review has identified a list of urgent steps that the international community should take towards
"lasting, durable and growth-oriented solutions that cover the various categories of debt; various creditors and various debtor countries and that respond to Africa's development needs. " (A/43/664 and Corr. l; para. 66) An encouraging list of agreed steps to increase and expedite the delivery of external financial flows has also been presented. These now require concrete action by donor Governments. 
The amount of attention paid during the review to Africa's trade problems is quite significant. It is Africa's ability to earn its way in the world economy in conditions of equity and stability that will underwrite its long development effort. As I stated in the General Assembly last year, the enhancement of the continent's external purchasing power requires well-adapted and competitive products and access to potential markets. This constitutes one of the major challenges for the design of long-term development strategies. 


In this context, I have begun preliminary consultations for a special study on African commodities and the scope for export diversification. 
The report calls for the further strengthening of co-operation and co-ordination of the United Nations system's contribution to the implementation of the Programme of Action. To follow up on the mid-term review, the Steering Committee and Task Force for the Programme of Action are formulating programmes of work for the next two years, in close consultation with the Economic Commission for Africa and the Organization of African Unity. 
In conclusion, I urge resolute action by all concerned Governments on all the measures outlined above. Without such action Africa will not be able to move forward dynamically and with assurance of success in its painful reforms. The ultimate test of international co-operation is in translating amply perceived need and realistically agreed responses into tangible benefit for the peoples concerned. I pledge my best endeavours in the response to this challenge, and I appeal to the unique partnership forged here in the General Assembly to exert the utmost effort in bringing to the peoples of Africa the full benefits of our joint efforts. 
agenda item 39.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of tem 39.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
UNITES) NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVIS IONAL
A/43/PV.74
23 December 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-third session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY provisional verbatim record of the seventy-fourth meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 8 December 1988, at 9.30 a.m.
Pres ident;
la ter ;
Mr. CAPUTO (President)
Mr. ESSY (Vice-President)
(Argen tina)
(Côte d'Ivoire)
’ ^iS^Ä"”' ‘° ^ ^’-t"«"t “d ^' °* ">« «"«O" of soviet
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Roman Rights URI
(a)	Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Cul“*^«^ ““^ Nati°"S	Scientific and
(h) Draft reslutions
uterus™ onsx%°*!tt; “rof st“^deiivMed “ B1*‘* ^
* “• «SSiaUiSoo^^	^ Hnal *“ «‘11 be printed
sent St^XXS
to the Chief, Official ».«rL^Sn^, “•S^^«^	one_week,
room DC2-750, 2 Uhi ted Itations Pla™ ^nd0!10"' Depar}ment of Conference Services, uni tea Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
8 8-64 5 71/A 95 60V (E)
The meeting was called to order at Mk25-a.m.
EXPRESSION OF SYMPATHY TO THE G3VERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Speaking on behalf of the members of the General Assembly and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our deepest sympathy to the Government and the people of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which has recently been struck by an earthquake, a major natural disaster that has taken a tragic toll in human lives and resulted in extensive material damage.
I should also like to express the full solidarity of the international community with the Government and the peoples of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in these difficult circumstances.
Mr. YAKOVLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): On behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to acknowledge your condolences on the terrible event that has just occurred in the Caucasian part of the Soviet Uh ion.
A very strong earthquake in the Soviet republics of the Caucasus has had tragic consequences. According to preliminary data available, thousands of people have died in the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic. Unfortunately, for understandable reasons, we do not yet have precise figures. There has been a great deal of destruction. It is a tragedy, not only for the Armenian and other peoples in the Caucasus, but also for the entire Soviet people.
The Soviet delegation would like to inform the General Assembly that emergency measures are being taken to assist those who have been stricken, the residents of towns and cities. A special Government commission has been set up, headed by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Ryzhkov, and even though emergency
measures have been taken to deal with Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev and his cut short their official visit to the Moscow. Mikhail Sergeyevich believes to help.
(Mr. Yakovlev, USSR) the tragic consequences, official delegation have been compelled to United States and are now returning to that when there is a problem he must be there
The Soviet delegation would like to acknowledge the condolences and sorrow
expressed by all delegations. We share the spirit of unity which has been expressed and will inform the Soviet Government of the solidarity you, Mr. President, have expressed on behalf of all the Members of the Uhited Nations
AGENDA ITEM 38 (continued)
FORTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(a)
NOTE BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL TRANSMITTING THE REPORT OF THE UNITED NATION EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND (A/43/796)
OF THE
DIRECTOR-GENERAL
CULTURAL ORGANIZATION
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/43/L. 39/Rev.1, A/43/L. 47)
The aemm (interpretation from Spanish): I declare open the commemorative meeting devoted to the observance of the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Forty years ago, in 1948, this essential charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, finally took shape. At that time it was supported by some 58 States. Twenty years later, in 1968, when the so-called Tehran Declaration was adopted, a great many other States ratified the document, bringing the total to 128. on the occasion of this Wan Declaration, this charter of human rights was declared as obligatory, or binding upon all States.
The Universal Declaration has had great influence over the past 40 years -influence in the normative, legislative, legal and constitutional fields. We have gradually seen its ideas and provisions incorporated in the laws governing the domestic affairs of States.
But there is another aspect which is also worth emphasizing and bearing in mind. The Universal Declaration's impact has gone beyond its normative or legal ramifications over the 40 years since it was adopted. It also introduced a new logic into the assessment of political reality, in that the human being is now regarded as the focus and special concern of political activity. Introducing the logic of putting mankind at the centre of political concern meant nothing more nor less than the introduction of wisdom and common sense.
Wien man is at the centre of political activities, then political activities involve wisdom, and over the past two and a half years we have seen this logic of good sense centred on the individual in all aspects of international relations. How otherwise can we explain the staggering progress made in disarmament and with regard to regional conflicts? This great gaitble being made by States, including the super-Powers, this daring demonstration of imagination and courage, can be explained only by the fact that we have recaptured the original concern of political life - man.
We must celebrate these past 40 years by remembering various matters*, first, the constant, continuing achievements of human rights in all our countries; secondly, the inclusion in national legislation and constitutions of those central and inalienable rights; and finally, the fact that we have recovered a human sense of politics, in this regard, this Hall still echoes with the words delivered yesterday by the President of the Soviet Union, who said:
"political problems must be solved by political means only; human problems in a humane way only." (A/43/PV.72, p. 6)
(The President) let us therefore celebrate this renaissance of the human approach to solving mankind's problems. 
I no» Invite mt. Javier Perez de Cuellar, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to address the Assembly. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): In observing Human Rights Day, we are commemorating the proclamation on 10 December 1948 of the universal Declaration of Human Rights, forty years later that Declaration is still a beacon, lighting up for the whole international community the path towards human dignity. 
The Declaration was born our of the devastation and horrible slaughter resulting from the systematic violation of human rights. The far-sighted men and women who framed the document had witnessed the extermination of entire peoples in pursuit of twisted racist ideologies. Like the drafters of the United Nations Charter three years earlier, they were resolved to put an end to such atrocities. They knew that human rights and peace were indivisible and that to safeguard them it was essential to have universal principles of lasting validity. 
Four decades later violations of human rights continue to weigh upon the conscience of mankind. Day after day, hour after hour, in all parts of the world, flagrant abuses are committed. The record of human rights in our age is besmirched by summary executions and arbitrary arrests, disappearances and torture, the killings of defenceless demonstrators and detention for reasons of belief or conscience. We cannot remain indifferent to such outrages against the most fundamental concepts of justice and human dignity. They are attacks against each and every one of us. We must not waver in our solidarity nor give way in our struggle. 
Nevertheless, we may be satisfied with the great progress the Universal Declaration has Introduced into the struggle for human rights. The proclamation of
common standards for all peoples and nations has created an extensive legal regime, which - through more than 50 international instruments, ranging from the two Human Rights Covenants to the recent Convention Against Torture - amply protect those rights. Thanks to those instruments, bodies have been established to consider national practices, special rapporteurs have been designated to investigate national situations or categories of violations, and procedures have been established to receive individual communications. The gradual creation of a complete system for the protection of human rights, ranging from general principles to specific bodies and detailed procedures, is one of the most outstanding achievements of the United Nations. 
The recognition by those who framed the Declaration that peace and human rights are interdependent has now assumed fresh importance. The fortieth anniversary of the Declaration coincides with a critical phase in world history, in which we see new and promising avenues for multilateral action opening up. I am convinced that in preparing to meet these challenges and to take advantage of these opportunities we shall find that genuine attention and devotion to human rights will assist us to achieve our objectives in other spheres. 
Conversely, there can be neither lasting security nor sustained economic and social development without guarantees of human dignity, human rights and human freedoms. Today more than ever we must reaffirm the truth ringing out in the opening words of the Declaration, that "recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world", resolution 217 A (III) The force of the appeal in the Declaration is due to its universal validity. The countries that joined together to proclaim it discovered that it could express values and norms shared by all their cultures and societies, and the nations that


became independent after its proclamation saw that their aspirations were also reflected in the articles of the Declaration. The International Covenants on Human Rights, which the Declaration inspired, also derived their strength from its universal application. 
As we commemorate the adoption of the Declaration, I urge all States Members of the United Nations to accede to the International Covenants on Human Rights and other instruments to the fullest extent possible. There can be no better way to celebrate this anniversary. 
As for the future, our main task is to ensure that practice accords with principles. It is encouraging to note that the special rapporteurs appointed by the human rights bodies are receiving ever-growing co-operation. We must encourage States to strengthen that trend and to promote dialogue even more. 
Similarly, Governments that are striving to finds ways to satisfy the aspirations of their citizens in this area deserve international support. International solidarity makes it incumbent upon us to assist such Governments to strengthen the still-fragile structures of their national human rights institutions. To accommodate those needs the provision of advice and technical assistance services will have a high priority in our programme. 
Human rights will never be guaranteed unless they shape the very political identity of a society. It must be our goal to create a universal culture of human rights. To that end, as in perhaps no other area of international activity, we require information and commnunication, for they are a vital factor of human rights. 
However, few Members of the United Nations are yet aware of the existence of international norms for human rights and still fewer know that there are international bodies to assist them in their struggles against human rights violations. It was therefore highly gratifying to learn of the decision taken by the General Assembly at this session to commemorate this anniversary with the launching of a World Campaign of Public Information on Human Rights. 
In that critical endeavour in the struggle for human rights, non-governmental organizations play a fundamental role, creating awareness throughout the world and providing information without which our intergovernmental bodies and groups of experts would not be able to carry out their tasks. They are truly our allies in, the universal struggle for human rights. I applaud their efforts, and I promise them that we will in future work more closely than ever in pursuit of our common goals. 
The dignity, value and well-being of mankind are the very essence of this experiment in international co-operation that is the United Nations. Our goal is to meet the needs of human beings, not to deal in abstract theories. In promoting
security and disarmament, in working to put an end to cruel regional conflicts and in striving to eradicate hunger and disease we are seeking to ensure the intrinsic rights of men, women and children throughout the world. Our commitment is to respond to their calls, and in particular to the calls of the weakest and most vulnerable, namely, the children, the dispossessed and the homeless, those suffering from AIDS and victims of discrimination and persecution. 
The history of the United Nations and the contemporary struggle for human rights have evolved together. The revolution in understanding and seeking to protect human rights launched 40 years ago by men and women of great vision has also provided convincing evidence in specific actions, of the value and dynamism of the ideals and fundamental principles of the Charter that underlie all the activities of the United Nations. 
Thus, in honouring the memory of the framers of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights we are honouring their principles and their importance to the United Nations as a whole. Let us work together for their universal attainment in order to ensure for our children a humane international community firmly based on these pillars of human rights, justice, dignity and peace. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now proceed to the award ceremony. It may be recalled that in resolutions 2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 and 41/150 of 4 December 19 86 the General Assembly recommended that awards should be presented on the occasion of the celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the universal Declaration of Human Rights to individuals who had made outstanding contributions to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Six individuals have been selected to receive the award. 
Before I announce the name of the first award recipient I would request the indulgence of delegations in reserving their applause until the last award has been presented.
(The President)
I now call to die ^odium his Excellency Mr. Chinmaya Rajaninath Gharekhan, Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations, who will accept an award on behalf of Mr. Baba Murlidhar Advidas Amte.
Mr. Chinmaya Rajan in a th Gharekhan was escorted to the podium by the Assistant Chief of Protocol.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now invite the Secretary-General to present the award honouring Mr. Murlidhar Devidas Amte, also known as Baba Amte, of India, who has devoted his life to the improvement of the situation of the ill, the handicapped and the disadvantaged. A lawyer by profession, he participated in the Freedom Movement with Mahatma Gandhi. Since 1949, he has been a pioneer in the field of leper rehabilitation in India and established centres for the treatment, training and rehabilitation of persons afflicted with leprosy. He has also established educational institutions for rural students, blind children and the physically handicapped. In addition, he has initiated projects for tribal populations. Mr. Amte is the Chairman of the Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Foundation and the National Leprosy Organization of India. An indefatigable warrior for the poor, the handicapped and the underprivileged, Mr. Amte is most deserving of this honour from the United Nations.
The award was presented by the Secretary-General.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next award-winner is Mr. John Humphrey of Canada,.
Mr. Humphrey was escorted to the podium by the Assistant Chief of Protocol.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. Humphrey has been involved for many years in human rights work, both internationally and domestically. As Director of the United Nations Division of Human Rights from 1946 to 1966, he was intimately involved in the preparation of the first draft of
(The President) the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Mr. Humphrey is a highly respected author and lecturer, a member of numerous organizations committed to the promotion of human rights and a recognized authority on the many diverse aspects of that field. He is also Founding President of the Canadian Human Rights Fbundation. A tireless fighter for the ideals of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to whose promulgation he contributed so greatly, Mr. Humphrey is most deserving of this honour made to him today by the United Nations.
The award was presented by the Secretary-General to Mr. Humphrey.
Th* PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I next call to the podium Professor Adam Dopatka.
„ . ^£essor....¿¿aS Popatka was escorted to the podium by the Assistant Chief of
The.PRESroENT (interpretation from Spanish,: I now invite the Secretary-General to present the award to Professor Adam Dopatka of Poland, who is a well-known personality in the United Nations and among international-law specialists dealing with humanitarian and human rights problems. From 1978 to 1983, Professor Lopatka led the Polish delegation to the Conrnission on Human Rights. Since that time he has bien the Chairman of the Commission and has played a prominent role in the Commission's Working Group on a Draft Convention on the Rights of the Child. Professor lopatka is currently First President of the Supreme Court of Poland. An eminent authority on human rights, highly respected in both academia and in the family of international organizations, Professor Dopatka is most deserving of this honour from the United Nations.
Thg_award was presented by the Secretary-General to Professor Lopatka.
th, pbbsident (interpretation £tom spanish)! , no< <all to the ^^ Leonardo Astudlllo, who will accept the posthumous award on behalf of Monsignor ■oonldas Proano. May , request the Deputy chief of Protocol to escort him.
Mr; Leonardo tetudillo_»as escorted to the podium by the Assistant Chief of Protocol.	'	’	'
Si-SSEESS (Interpretation from Spanish). The Secretary-General will present the award honouring the memory of Monsignor Leonidas Proano of Ecuador.
Monsignor Leonidas Proano was known as pastor, teacher and priest for the Peoples of Rlobamba, Ecuador, and was made bishop of that diocese in 1954. He dedicated his life to the struggle for the promotion and defense of the human rights of the Indigenous population. In an area where tradltfonal patterns of land ownership had brought untold suffering, Monsignor Proano became a true messenger of hope to the Indian population not mly of that area but of Ecuador as a who!.. i„ acknowledging his life-long co-itment to founder's indigenous population, the Vatican named him Bishop of the Indians. A brave and fearless soldier in the battle for the fundamental freedoms and human rights of the poor, the exploited and the oppressed, Monsignor Proano is most deserving of this posthumous honour from the Ohited Nations.
The.a«ard was eresen^d by the Secretary-General to Mr. Astudillo
The_PHESinBNT (interpretation from Spanish). The next award has been made to Mr. Nelson Mandela. The individuals who were expected to receive the award on his behalf are not In the Hall today. Ne are all aware of the special
circumstances that prevent Mr. hands of the Secretary-General.
Mandela from receiving the award himself from the
Nelson Mandela is a lawyer by hundreds of Africans charged under others of South Africa founded the
training, m his early years he defended the apartheid laws. At the age of 25, he and Youth League of the African National Council of
(The President)
South Africa. During the "Defiance of Uh just Laws Campaign", Mr. Mandela played a prominent role thousands were detained for their peaceful opposition to the ¿Par^beid laws. From 1952 onwards, Mr. Mandela was subject to repeated banning orders that severely restricted his political activities until, in Decenber 1956, he was arrested, tried for high treason and acquitted. The turbulent events of the Sharp« ville massacre and the declaration of the state of emergency led Nelsen Mandela and the African National Council to review their strategy of peaceful opposition. In August 1962, he was re-arrested and later sentenced to ■H’f® imprisonment. Since then, he has spent more than 25 years in prison. He continues to cherish, in his own words, "the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities”. The towering leader in South Africa and of the crusade for fundamental freedoms and human rights and against the inhuman system of apartheid, in which struggle he has endured untold hardships and made unending sacrifice, Mr. Mandela is most deserving of this honour from the United Nations.
The Secretary-General displayed the award for Mr, Mandela.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next award-winner is in a similar position and unable to be here today. I am referring to Mrs. Winnie Mandela.
Mrs. Mandela also needs little introduction from me. The first African medical social worker in South Africa, Mrs. Mandela served on the National and Provincial Executive of the African National Congress Women's League until the League was banned in 1960. She also served on the National Executive of the Federation of South African Women. In 1959, Mrs. Mandela was arrested and charged under the Terrorism Act. In 1962, she was banned under South African law. She was restricted to Orlando Township, Johannesburg, and as a result had to relinquish her job as a social worker with the Child Welfare Society. Mrs. Mandela remained under banning orders from 1962 to 1975. She has been detained and also placed in
(The President)
solitary confinement.
banning orders against
Mrs.
her.
Mandela has repeatedly defied the apartheid regine's Mrs. Mandela remains today a symbol of resistance to
the inhuman and unjust policies of apartheid.
She has personally borne great
suffering and made great sacrifice 1„ the struggle against apartheid, while also giving invaluable strength and support to Hr. Nelson Mandela. A renowed and indefatigable warrior in the battle for human rights and fundamental freedoms, Mrs. Mandela is most deserving of this honour from the united Nations.
Itl^aEetar^General displayed the award for Mrs. Mandela, The, PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)-. On behalf of the General Asserbly, t should lite warmly and sinoerely to congratulate the recipients of this pr ize.
(The President)
The Assembly will now proceed with the commemorative meeting devoted to the observance of the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In that connection the Assembly has before it two draft resolutions issued in documents A/43/L. 39/Rev.l and A/43/L.47.
I shall first call on the representative of Colombia bo speak in connection with draft resolution A/43/L.39/Rev.l.
Mr. TIRADO MEJIA (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish)«. On behalf of the Government and people of Colombia, my delegation would like to express to the Government and people of the Soviet Union our feelings of deep solidarity in connection with the earthquake which occurred yesterday in the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted 40 years ago as a corrective in the face of the horrors of totalitarianism and war, and it also represented a development on what was enshrined in the Charter of San Francisco. It was a great historic achievement that, for all the States of that time, established the ethical and legal principles which, although proclaimed since the 18th century, had been massively violated with very tragic results. The renaissance of awareness of the need to struggle for full respect for human rights, which developed in the 1960s, is undoubtedly one of the most encouraging signs of our age. Since then there has been a constant increase in the extent of international protection and action against violations of human rights.
The year 1966 was outstanding in the history of the United Nations and in the development of the concept of human rights. The General Assembly adopted the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, its Optional Protocol and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which represent the best means of ensuring full respect for fundamental rights.
(Mr. Tirado Mejia, Colonbia) If the human rights of the first generation, namely, civil and political rights, are to be respected and guaranteed, States and Governments must refrain from interfering with their free exercise, guarantee effective means to protect individuals and communities against their violation, and redress violations committed. The human rights of the second generation compel States to develop economic and social policies ensuring that individuals, families and comunities enjoy fully and in a progressive manner adequate levels of economic, social and cultural security.
The new balance being provided by the emergence of a third generation of human rights such as the right to peace, development and a healthy environment, the conmon heritage of mankind, universal protection against social and physical deterioration resulting from the abuse of narcotics, end the guarantee that mankind will not be destroyed in a nuclear holocaust, implies that States, the United Nations, regional organizations, Governments and the civil community - indeed, all human beings - are working to achieve such rights on the basis of solidarity and cooperation among peoples. Solidarity and co-operation are the foundation of peace.
After proclaiming in the 1960s the right of peoples to self-determination and to a cultural identity, rights which to a considerable extent they themselves achieved in painful struggle against colonial domination, the present situation in the world makes it necessary to proclaim a new instrument on human rights, rooted in solidarity. Despite the pressures to find peaceful and negotiated solutions to conflicts, society is being threatened by scourges which, sonotimes separately and sometimes in an interrelated manner, conbine against our society, drugs and terrorism, which conspire against the right to life, the basis for all other
human rights. As a result of those scourges many face the imlnent danger of the collapse of their
economic
(Mr. Tirado Mejia, Col onto ia) communities in the third world institutions, their States, their
ana Industrial achievements. Indeed, of their national unity.
The Colombian delegation has submitted draft resolution A/43/L.39/Bsv.l, entitled -Human rights based on solidarity- for consideration by the Assembly. Since the matters covered by that draft resolution affect the entire co«nity and •re of tremendous importance, it is not our intention that a hasty decision be taken on the matter. On the contrary, we believe that there should be ample opportunity for discussion, and for that reason us formally reguest teat the
of human rights based on solidarity be included in the provisional agenda of the next session of the General Assembly. under this item the Assembly would consider the draft resolution that we are now presenting.
(Mr. Tirado Mejia, Colombia)
The forty-fourth session of the General Assembly will take place at a time when mankind is joyously commemorating the two hundredth anniversary of the French Revolution. That great event, together with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, provided the fundamental impetus for the cause of human rights. The principles of liberty, equality and fraternity have made great progress, and central to that process have been the instruments formulated by the United Nations. These ideals and their various developments continue to enbody the dream of mankind, which is facing fresh realities and new challenges, including, ig.tftfAlia, that of translating the principle of brotherhood into a new instrument safeguarding the rights based on solidarity.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)«. The representative of Colombia has withdrawn draft resolution A/43/L.39/Rev.l and proposed that the General Assembly place on the provisional agenda of the forty-fourth session an item entitled "Human rights based on solidarity".
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)«. I call on the representative of Canada, who will introduce draft resolution A/43/L. 47.
Mr. FORTIER (Canada) (interpretation from French): First, Mr. President, I wish to associate Canada with the sentiments that you expressed to the Soviet Union, which is at present experiencing a terrible tragedy.
On behalf of the delegations of Argentina, Barbados, Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, France, Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
(Mr. Fortier, Canada)
Morocco, the Netherlands, Samoa, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Uhion of Soviet Socialist Republics, as well as Afghanistan, Australia, Cyprus,
Costa Rica, Greece, Nigeria, Peru, Poland, the Central African ^public, Senegal, Vanuatu and New Zealand, whose names are not to be found in the document, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/43/L.47 on the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it should be noted that Finland has
withdrawn from the list of sponsors.
’’"' years ago the General Assembly adopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, «hlch, conceived of as a common ideal to be attained by all peoples and nations, has been and remains, quite rightly, a basic source of inspiration tor all national and International efforts to protect and promote human rights and basic freedoms. Bvery five years since 1948 the General Assembly has taken time solemnly to commemorate that event. Today we are here to remerber the permanent and basic nature of the Declaration, »hlch was a landmark in man's progress and continues to serve as a guide.
The sponsors of the draft resolution emphasize the progress achieved since the adoption of the Declaration and recall that the international community must remain constantly vigilant in order to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, He believe that a common concept of these rights and freedoms is of the highest importance for the fulfilment of the ideals of the Universal Declaration.
The sponsors firmly believe that all delegations share these aspirations and that the draft resolution »ill be adopted without a vote. This gesture »ould demonstrate the dedication of each and one of us to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the basic principles it entoodies.
—EP0S «^eece) (interpretation from French); I have the honour to address the General Assembly today on behalf of the 12 States mentoers of the European Community.
¿Wil
The Iteslve wish to join all the other States Members of the United Nations in celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Forty years ago, on 10 December 1948, the States Members of the United Nations recognized that the inherent dignity and equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family are the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world and that disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind. Thus Uey proclaimed at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as "a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations."
With the adoption of the Universal Declaration, the historic process of safeguarding human dignity, a process symbolized by such texts as the Magna Carta and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, has become universal. In the wake of the Declaration human rights were no longer an internal matter but a legitimate concern of the international community.
In the 40 years that have elapsed since the adoption of this Declaration, much has been said about its content and implications. But one thing is beyond doubt; as the years have passed the Declaration has not been overtaken by events and rapid Ganges, has but, on the contrary, gained in stature and established itself as the uncon tested universal standard for all States, regardless of their economic, social or political systems. As Dag Hammarskjold put it, "The Declaration has proved a living document".
Since its inception the United Nations has been at the forefront in the struggle to protect human rights. According to the Charter, the protection and promotion of human rights is one of the four corner-stones of the United Nations, along with peace, co-operation and development.
However, since human rights were not enumerated in the Charter, that major task was left to the newly established Conmission on Human Rights. The Comission on Human Rights embarked upon what it defined as its first tasks a declaration of principles. The outcome was a major achievement indeed, given the variety of . seemingly irreconcilable viewpoints, all of which, it is worth mentioning, are in one way or another reflected in the final text.
The universal ttidaration of Human Rights was adopted without any negative vote, it inspired the domestic legislation of a great nunber of States and has been invoked in the major international instruments, both in those of a political nature and in those establishing rights, such as the two International Covenants on human rights and, on a regional basis, the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights, the 1969 American Convention on Human Rights, the 1975 Pinal Act of Helsinki, and the 1981 African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights.
Thus, the Declaration, whose moral authority has always been unassailable, has also acquired a distinct legal dimension.
Respect for human rights is primarily a moral imperative. It is founded on the inherent dignity and worth of all men and women by virtue of their very humanity, and one could venture to say that deviation from generally accepted moral norms is as difficult to justify as the abuse of legal norms.
furthermore, respect for and promotion of human rights is a normative imperative, enshrined in a number of legal and political documents of cardinal importance. States upholding human rights should do so within their own legal systems and be concerned with the human rights situation in other countries. Thia last point is a legitimate concern, indeed a duty, of all States and cannot in any way be construed as a form of interference in the internal affairs of States.
Lastly, respect for human rights is a political imperative. Governments which violate human rights not only run counter to their foremost duty as State authorities, but jeopardize their own survival in the long term. Inevitably, their legitimacy is undermined. Their hold on power can be maintained only through sheer coercion, in other words, further violations of human rights. Furthermore, respect for human rights by governments is a prerequisite for peace.
Conversely, large-scale violations of human rights threaten peace. Human rights abuses lead to internal conflict with international repercussions. Besides, non-democratic governments using coercive measures in their own territory tend to adopt an aggressive posture in their relations with other States. The logic is clear. A State which does not respect its own citizens is not likely to respect other States and peoples.
The IVelve attach the utmost value to respect for and promotion of human rights world-wide. As a result, they have been actively involved in the efforts of the United Nations and other international organizations to realize those rights. The Twelve have, individually and collectively, repeatedly voiced their grave concern over specific human rights abuses.
For the Twelve, the aim of a declaration of human rights should be to protect the individual. Human rights, which are above all individual human rights, must be scrupulously adhered to. In the case of civil and political rights in particular, the IWelve have repeatedly declared that there can be no conceivable justification for not implementing them without delay. Social, economic and cultural rights, on the other hand, lend themselves, by their very nature, to gradual implementation.
The common position of the Twelve on human rights has been stated clearly in a formal document*, the July 1986 Declaration on Human Rights. If we look towards the future, we cannot fail to stress the need for vigilance.
Recent technological developments in computer science, medicine and biotechnology and other fields can pose a formidable threat to respect for human rights, a threat not sufficiently understood. We must examine effective means to counteract that potential threat. We should also like to stress the importance that we attach to the valuable work of the United Nations Advisory Services in the Field ‘of Human Rights and its activities in the area of public information and education, which contribute to the strengthening of respect for human rights and to their promotion world-wide.
Following the establishment of the International Bill of Human Rights and its application under domestic legislation, the overriding task of implementing it should continue through a process of education.
To conclude, it is not often that we can truly compliment ourselves. The United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the various normative documents on human rights have made respect for human rights an international obligation and a matter of international concern. That is one of the greatest achievements of the Uhited Nations.
Unfortunately, human rights violations persist on an alarming scale. Even a cursory look at the state of affairs in the world today would indicate that the gap between commitment and performance still remains wide. But today no State can avoid accountability for the abuse of human rights. Prior to that evening of 10 December 1948 when the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted, this was hardly the case.
Now that human rights norms have been worked out in sufficient detail, the main task for the future in that area is the rapid, full and unrestricted implementation of those norms. The Twelve are fully committed to this task and will continue to do their utmost to ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the world.
Mr. EGGAR (ttiited Kingdom): On behalf of the British Government, I would like to express our sympathy to the people and Government of the Soviet union who have suffered so terribly as a result of the earthquake. We fully understand the decision of General Secretary Gorbachev to return directly to Moscow.
It is a great honour and privilege to address the General Assenfoly on a proud day in the history of the united Nations: this day of the fortieth anniversary of the universal Declaration of Human Rights.
International oo-operation to encourage respect for human rights is one of the central purposes of the united Nations.
Respect for human rights is also, and has long been, a basic concern to the British people. As we have just heard from the representative of Greece, it is a concern which we share with our partners in the European Comnunity.
An anniversary is a time to look back, to take stock, but also to look forward. Human rights are of course no new discovery. Nor are they even a discovery of the United Nations. Although the term itself became widespread this century, the concept has log been known as natural rights or the rights of man.
(Mr. Eggar, United Kingdom)
In the seventeenth century John Locke wrote of the rights to life, liberty and property. The Biglish Bill of Rights, enacted by Parliament in 1689, named the right to trial by jury. It prescribed that courts of law should neither demand excessive bail nor impose excesssive fines or cruel or unusual punishment.
The American revolutionaries, inspired by another famous Englishman, Tom Paine, referred to certain inalienable rights, including the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. The French revolutionaries laid down the rights which they held had been denied by previous regimes, asserting that men were born and remained free and equal. More and more countries have accepted provisions in their legal and constitutional systems to guarantee the rights of the individual. But, although the flow of ideas crossed national boundaries, concern for respect for human rights was primarily a domestic matter.
The twentieth century has seen some of the most cruel acts of barbarism and tyranny by Governments against their own citizens« yet before the founding of the United Nations such issues were hardly on the international agenda. It is one of the central achievements of the United Nations in its relatively short history that human rights abuses wherever they occur, are now established firmly as matters of legitimate international concern.
The Charter and, in particular, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights made the demand by individuals for political, economic and social rights not simply a claim by citizens against their own Governments but a claim against all Governments. I am proud that my countrymen and countrywomen were closely involved in the birth of the Universal Declaration, we have in the British delegation to this celebration, Sir Vincent Evans. Forty years ago he was closely involved in drafting this twentieth century Magna Carta.
(Mr« Eggar, United Kingdom)
Some Governments do not Alcorn criticism either from inside or from outside their territory. We totally reject the assertion, still regrettably sometimes heard, that such concerns, such criticisms, constitute unwarranted interference In Internal affairs. It is Incumbent on Governments to demonstrate to the
International community that their human rights records are in accord with the international obligations to which they have voluntarily subscribed.
Most recently we have seen the adoption of a Convention against torture, a Major achievement for the International ««unity. The legal processes to allow the United Kingdom to ratify that Convention are now complete, a>d I am therefore able to announce that this morning I deposited our instrument of ratification. The United Kingdom will play its part in ensuring that the Committee against Torture works effectively to eliminate torture globally.
Bit in referring to new instruments I must sound a note of caution. I hope that we shall leave this celebration with renewed determination to consolidate the progress of the last 40 years. I see positive signs. I wo«ld point to the work of the Commission on Human Rights» I recognize the responsible approach of very many Governments, I pay a tribute to the contribution of non-governmental organizations, British ones prominent among them» and yet, as we look at reports from around the world we see that human rights continue to be abused. Somewhere in the world, every article of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is being violated. The real violators either have no intention of ratifying such instruments or do not
care whether or not they implement their commitments. New instruments should be adopted only where they are essential and where they will have practical benefit. We must not allow them to distract our attention from the abuses around us.
(Mr. Eggar, United Kingdom) Winston Churchill said of the United Nations in 1946s
"We must make sure that its work is fruitful, that it is a reality and not a sham, that it is a force for action and not merely a f thing of words, that it is a true temple of peace in which the shields of many nations can some day be hung, and not merely a cockpit in the Ibwer of Babel."
Such a vision, as enunciated by Winston Churchill, was present in the 1940s. Such a vision inspired the creation of the Ihited Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Our task, collectively, is to use the Declaration effectively, to encourage and promote respect for human rights and to challenge those who violate them, and thus to fulfil the confidence placed in us by those who drafted this solemn Declaration 40 years ago.
Mrs; ■ AQ9ELLI (Italy)s I should like to express the solidarity of the Italian Government and people with the Government and people of the Soviet Union in the tragic sufferings caused by the earthquake which occurred yesterday.
As the General Assembly is drawing to a close I should like most sincerely to congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Government of Italy, and on my own behalf, for having presided over the forty-third session of the General Assembly with pragmatism and competence and for contributing to the advancement of dialogue and consensus.
Ib praise the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on its fortieth anniversary is a task which is, perhaps, too simple. The long way that we have travelled in these 40 years in our search to broaden and reinforce the protection of the fundamental rights of the individual is visible to all. The credit for those results goes above all to the Declaration, the ethical, political and educational value of which is of the utmost relevance. Moreover, it has provided the
f- - Agnelli, Italy) foundation tor the outstanding work of the United Nations in the establishment of international standards for the protection of human rights.
If we reach back in our minds to the memories of the immediate post-war era, w cannot help but look with satisfaction upon the progress that has been made in the course of those years, yet the system that has been established by the United llatfons is, as are all things of this world, certainly not perfect. The universality which characterises the Declaration did not become throughout the year, universal respect for human rights, but by now all the »eaters of the international community recognise the existence of a minimus common denominator -hlr* can certainly be considered as a universal standard. This indestructible foundation has been gradually expanding.
The Declaration, throughout its 40 years of life, has been a point of reference for numerous states that have established new constitutions. In fact, ’“* states have incorporated the principles of the Declaration Into their respective fundamental laws. A phenomenon of great relevance in this process is th. establishment of regional conventions concerning human rights. Paradoxically, th. regionalisation expressed by the European Convention of 1950, the Inter-American Convention of 1969 and the African Convention of 1981 have given rls. not to a fragmentation but rather to an Increased homogeneity which has favoured the process of universality. Those pacts have in fact accepted and Jeveloped the fundamental guidelines of the Declaration.
It is significant that the principle of non-interference in internal affairs » Invoked less and less often whenever the international community turns its ttention to the human rights situation in a given country. I„ that way nttenational vigilance proves to be me of the most appropriate Instruments for Muring the fulfilment of obligations assumed by the state for the protection of he individual.
(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)
The enduring commitment of the United Nations to human rights seems to have reached a juncture that is perhaps more favourable than ever before. The initiatives for peace which we have witnessed have created great hope for humanity. We must not forget that peace and human rights have been closely linked from the very beginning. Respect for human rights was originally conceived as the principal defence of peace in the aftermath of the tragic conflict that shook the world.
We are currently witnessing an ever-growing interest in the field of humanitarian issues. I may recall the results achieved in establishing humanitarian rules in the conduct of armed conflicts-, but also the efforts to establish new principles in case of natural and man-made disasters and the defence of categories of people who need special protection in the community in which they live.
As stated in the report of the Independent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues, abstractions such as growth, stability and order are not ends in themselves, but have value only if they bring about the greater welfare of the people. And this proceeds from the recognition that each one of us is no more but no less than a human being.
The new humanitarianism may have extremely useful developments if the principles on which it is founded are enhanced, on the one hand, by the growing role of multilateralism, and on the other, by the wider acceptance by States off the need to sacrifice their own sovereignty whenever human interests are at stake.
—-■- BADAWI (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic)« We have learned with great sorrow the sad news about the earthquake in the Soviet Uh ion and of the large number of victims. I should like to express our deepest condolences to the Government and people of the Soviet Union upon this sad occasion.
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
Forty years ago, Paris, the city of light and freedom, witnessed the signing of the first declaration of modern times setting forth human rights and political freedoms. Since that time, the economic, political and social circumstances of the world have changed considerably.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is the expression of an age in which values of freedom prevail over the forces of nazism and fascism. It was also the expression of universal civilizational values and of the concept of a single cultural heritage for mankind. Yet, the third world had not yet set out on its great journey to political and economic independence, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights therefore did not fully represent all of those concepts, principles and values. This in no way belittles the significance of the Declaration, or of the values and principles it enshrines, principles to which we are all committed, as we work for its full implementation, so that it becomes the expression of the symbiosis between the values, cultures, concepts and principles of our world, however complex it may be. We are working for the promotion of human rights, to give expression to the hopes and aspirations of the twenty-first century, now just a few years away.*
The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt participated in all the negotiations that led to the drafting of the Uhited Nations Charter and the signature of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Hence, our constant , concern with the need to adhere to those two instruments, which set out important principles for relations between countries, between peoples and between individuals, which have begun to play a major role in internat Uri a" relations. The ratification of various international instruments on human rights is evidence of
*Mr. Essy (Cote d’Ivoire), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
what I have just said. Allow me to cite a number of their principles. On the political level, the principle of the self-determination of peoples has become a clearly established concept, together with the right to resist dictatorship and tyranny. On the economic level, the concept of the sovereignty of States over their natural resources has become an unchallenged principle.
We have seen increasing stress laid on international solidarity and co-operation in dealing with indebtedness, drought, hunger and natural disasters. In the social sphere, the role of the family as the foundation of society and the' basic nucleus in the community has been asserted in the two International Covenants on human rights and other texts.
On the humanitarian level, efforts to establish a ne» International order will provide a basis for the protection of the rights of the most vulnerable groups such as children, the elderly, the handicapped, women and young people In the near fu ture.
With respect to the assertion of basic human values, apartheid has been condemned as the worst possible form of racial discrimination. Genocide, forced labour and slavery are also condemned, and agreement was reached on the conclusion of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. Egypt was one of the earliest civilized nations and one of the first to apply human rights principles, it is a source of pride for us to be able to say that Bjypt is a party to most of the international conventions and instruments on human rights, including the two International Covenants, the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention against -torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Egyptian experts are participating in various working groups and committees monitoring the implementation of those international instruments.
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
President Mubarak, in October this year, enacted the Charter for the Egyptian Child, which sets forth principles that we will be endeavouring to Implement in the forthcoming decade, 1969-1999, so that children can grow up in a healthy and psychologically and socially sound environment.
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
As we are commemorating the Universal Declaration today, I should say that Egypt is taking part in the working group responsible for preparing an international convention on the rights of the child, which we hope will be adopted during the next session of the General Assenfoly.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation reaffirms the need to work seriously to ensure that our brothers In Palestine, Namibia and South Africa may, like us, enjoy the right to self-determination in their own lands and live under economic, political and social regimes that respect human values. Ideals and basic freedoms, free from such practices as apartheid and racial, religious or political discrimination.
Mr^.TANIGNCHl (Japan)-. I should like first, on behalf of the people and the government of Japan, to express deep sympathy to the people and Government of
the USSR for the casualties caused by the
earthquake that hit the Armenian Soviet
Socialist Republic and surrounding areas yesterday.
I have the honour to speak on
behalf of my Government on this auspicious
occasion, the celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the universal toclaraUon of Numan Nights. The international comity's most fundamental document in the field of human rights, it declares that all human rights and fundamental freedoms must be guaranteed to everyone. It recognises that the inherent dignity and equal and inalienable rights of all mesbers of the human family are the foundation of freedom, justice and peace In the world.
It is clear that the considerable achievements In ensuring universal respect for fundamental human rights is directly attributable to the efforts made by those who have devoted themselves to this cause. We recognise, however, that web remains to be done in this field.
xn this regard, I should like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to the six persons who have received human rights awards, as just announced in this Nall.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mg. Taniguchi, Japan)
Looking back at the history of the United Nations, I am impressed at the importance of the various roles the Organization has played. I believe, in particular, that its achievements in the human rights field are among its most significant and effective. In this regard, from my own experience in the last two sessions of the Commission on Human Rights as head of the Japanese delegation, I can say that the activities of the Commission are among the liveliest and most invigorating in the whole of the Uhited iJations system and have a far-reaching impact on the international coinnunity.
The mechanisms used by the United Nations nowadays for observing and investigating suspected infringements of human rights are important, in order to ensure the effective implementation of existing humanitarian instruments. The United Nations - in particular, the Commission on Human Rights - has served as a centre for these mechanisms. While the mechanisms have functioned well, I wish to stress that it is imperative to pursue the implementation of existing humanitarian instruments in as systematic and co-ordinated a manner as possible.
In this connection, I wish to point out that maximum use should be made of advisory services, which have proved to be useful in helping States parties to comply with reporting obligations through their wide-ranging technical assistance, especially in the training of officials in charge of the promotion and protection of human rights. Japan is pleased to be co-operating in this field.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement, remarkable progress has been made in the human rights field. It is also true, however, that we still face many problems at both the national and the international level. It is therefore of the utmost importance to ensure universal respect for human rights on a de facto rather than merely a de jure basis. Towards this end, we must continue to strive to bridge the gap between standards and reality. It is regrettable that flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms continue in every corner of the
(Mr. Taniguchi, Japan)
Principally ^ tte coucse of MgiOTai ^ ^^ ^^ ^ ^ « aeration of the economic .„a social infrastructure, bring about a arastic *ange in lives ana living stanaaras, vith the result that people are unable to
enjoy basic human rights, In this connection I international relations -
in particular the right to life.
am pleased to note some significant improvements in particularly in Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq, Namibia, and
Western Sahara - that have taken place recently against development of the Easiest relationship, particularly and the USSR.
the background of the
between the United States
In all these areas expectations for the attainment ever before. Therefore, steadfast efforts towards this concerned are essential, and Japan intends to do what it
of peace are higher than
end by all the parties
can to support them.
I believe that, as regards the function of the Uhited
Nations in the promotion
ana protection of respect for human rights, the role of the Cohesion on Human Rights is particularly crucial in focusing public attention on specific human tights situations through a free exchange of sieve, on this point, hevever, the Commission shouia make every effort to avoia politicisation of issues, so as to ensure that its aeliberations are constructive. This democratic process is important in enabling people tc gain a better unaerstanding of the reality ana, above all, 1„ convincing *. ^ernnents ^^ Qf ^ ^ ^ rights and fundamental freedoms.
Bcr/hp
(Mr. Taniguchi, Japan)
In this regard, I believe that unilateral criticism or condemnation of the human rights situations of certain countries will never bring about improvements of such situations. Further, it is of the utmost significance for Member States to cooperate with the united Nations organs concerned, particularly in providing factual information on their human rights situations, while heeding such criticisms as the use of double standards and politicization.
I wish once again to request all Members of the Uhited Nations to review what has been achieved and to have the determination to commit themselves to further progress in this field. As for how we should proceed, it is our belief that although at times the going may be slow we must work steadily and pragmatically to solve the problems that confront us, since that is the only way to realize universal respect for human rights.
The fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is therefore a special occasion, for it reminds us of the original spirit of the Declaration — a spirit which tends to slacken unless we give it our constant attention. In this regard, I am happy to hear that activities for commemorating this fortieth anniversary of the Declaration are being carried out at both the national and the international levels around the world.
Japan, for its part, has striven to highlight the importance of promoting and protecting human rights by means of various activities before and during its Human Rights Week, which runs from 4 to 10 December and the last day of which is also designated as Human Rights toy. For instance, on 3 December a symposium sponsored by the Government for commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the Uhiversal Declaration of Human Rights was held, and the participants in it exchanged views under the theme of "Human Rights and Internationalization of the Society".
In conclusion, I believe that the strengthening has become more necessary than ever before, in order
(Mr. Taniguchi, Japan)
of international co-operation
to ensure universal respect
for human rights, Tb that sa , „ish to reaffirm that the Government of Japan „111 spare no effort In pursuing all possible „ays of solving the problems before us.
— "^C <France> (interpretation from French), I should like to folio» the example of previous speakers and express our delegation's solidarity „ith the
Soviet delegation in regard to the catastrophe that h In this brief statement on the anniversary which
as just struck its country.
we are commemorating here
today, I wish.
principles and
on the one hand, to bear witness to my country's fidelity to
an ideal new shared by all the peoples
other hand, to
we represent and, on the
express the wish that the cause of human rights »ill be enhanced ana
strengthened by new achievements.
The proclamation on 10 Decenber 1948, at the Palais * Chaillot in Paris, of the Universal Oeclaration of Human Rights „as an event „ithout precedent In the history of nations, for the first time those nations, all toother, emitted theses to building . „orld ln ^ ^ ^ of ^ ^^ ^^ ^ resources of the human being „o„id be acknowledged by individuals, enshrined in lavs, defendad by institutions, w should not be sparing In our expressions of gratitude to all those men and „omen „ho worked to ensure that these values „ould from that day for„ard become our most valuable common heritage. A long struggle thus came to an end - a struggle that began almost 200 years ago „Ith the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen.
forty years after the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human laohts, „e are entitled to express our pride at „hat has been done by our

(Mr. Blanc, France) Organization as a result of the Declaration. An impressive body of normative texts no/ exists, enriching international law and the law of States. There are now many organizations and initiatives throughout the world whose aim is to defend the rights of millions of men and women. Each day there is a sharper awareness of the stakes and precise requirements - all of them moving toward the same goals guaranteeing for human beings, without any kind of distinction, full enjoyment of their inalienable rights and protection against any violations of those rights. This is a juridical, a political, a moral endeavour, and the achievements of the United Nations in this sphere are among the greatest examples of progress made by the international community in the second half of this century.
Our pride is certainly legitimate, but it should not make us less clear-headed or vigilant. Our world is far from offering a picture of universal harmony and agreement. The adherence by nations to the text of the Universal Declaration has not spared all peoples the scourges of violence, intolerance and high-handedness, or the ravages of dire poverty, isolation and abandcnment.
Moreover, the development of science and technology has led to changes in our societies, whose very foundations - economic, political, ethical and cultural - are very often shaken.
In that uncertain context, sometimes fraught with threats to the human community, the defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms must be a priority duty for each and every one of us. In the first place, that duty should be to ensure the full implementation of the principles and rights recognized in the Universal Declaration. Such implementation presupposes that every State will include those principles and rights in its internal juridical order, by adhering to the international Covenants on civil and political rights, on the one hand, and economic, social and cultural rights, on the other. We express again here our hope that adherence to the Covenants will soon become universal.
(Mr« Blanc, France)
»t this *,<;,, Should also „. „ mobilUe ^ awareneM ^ 4tacBinatioii of those »ho uphold justice, freedom and wae, ln ^ ^ ^^ ^ oaooot be victoriously defended without the help and commitment of each nan and
woman, and it is for us to seek and available to us.
evoke such help and commitment by all the means
Finally, this
duty should mean
increase the scope be lost in advance
and authority of
the shared desire of States and peoples to the cause of human rights. Our struggle will
if the definition and very content of each of the rights that we
have recognized that human beings must enjoy do not mate it possible to foresee and even anticipate develops of all types under way i„ the world. Our thinking and our action should be constantly open to new concepts and practices, we must, in
fact, have only one goal %
not the victims of these developments.
to ensure that human beings are the beneficiaries and
bet us recognize that our task is a long and difficult one. But, we have both the experience of 40 years of efforts and the text of our Oeclaration - more relevant today than ever before.
to gu ide us, Universal
The coming year will mark the bicentennial of the French Revolution. This
rendezvous with history must above all be directed towards the future, fbr
co«try, it will be a solemn occasion commitment to defending their dignity France, that from now on this will be
to reaffirm its faith in human beings and its everywhere. I express the wish, on behalf of a commitment of our entire Organization.
Mr. HDHENFELLNER (Austria): At the outset, on behalf of the people and Government of Austria, I should like to say that we share the feelings the President has expressed to the people and Government of the Soviet Union.
On the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights I have the honour to bring to your attention a declaration adopted by the Austrian Federal Government on 6 December 1988 which reads as follows:
"The tenth of December 1988 marks the fortieth anniversary of the day on which the General Assembly of the Uhited Nations unanimously adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
"The untold suffering that totalitarian regimes with their contempt for the individual had inflicted on mankind led, after 1945, to a new awareness of the dignity innate in all men and to the recognition of their equal and inalienable rights. The adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the international community thus opened the door to a more humane world.
"Despite the substantial progress achieved in recent decades in the protection and promotion of human rights, grave violations of human rights continue to occur in many parts of the world. An improvement of this deplorable situation requires constant and intensive efforts and vigilance on the part of the international community and of each of its members. Our awareness of the importance of human rights issues has therefore to take shape and grow.
"The ultimate objective of protecting human rights is to safeguard the dignity of the individual and to guarantee the free development of all aspects of his personality. The dignity of the individual cannot be guaranteed if economic, social and cultural conditions do not exist. However, adverse economic and social conditions can never serve as justifications for
(Mr. Hohenfellner, Austria) disregarding individual human rights and fundamental freedoms. Human rights are indivisible.
■w more ana more states agree to the principle that raising the issue of human rights violations cannot be interpreted as Interference in internal affairs, but that concern for human rights constitutes a basic task of the international community. The international community has not only the right, but the obligation to redouble its efforts to implement the inalienable rights and fundamental freedoms of every individual in the Interest of freedom, justice and peace in the world. The fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Bights provides us with a special occasion to keep this in mind.
"The Austrian Federal Government calls upon all States to respect, protect and promote the fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration."
~—”° yuanbong (China) (Interpretation from Chinese), On behalf of the Chinese Government ! wish to express our profound sympathy to the soviet Government and people for the great loss of human life and property caused by the recent strong earthquake.
At its very inception, the United Nations reaffirmed in its Charter-.
"faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human Person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small". Having suffered the scourges of two World Wars, the people of various countries felt more strongly the need for an international document on human rights formulated in the spirit of the Charter in order to ensure the promoting and encouraging of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. Consequently, at its third session, held in 1940, the United Nations General Assenfoly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
(Me. Ding Yuanhong, China)
The Declaration is the first international document that sets forth in a comprehensive way the protection of and respect for human rights at the international level. It stands for freedom and equality, opposes discrimination and defines human rights not only in the civil and political fields, but also in the economic, social and cultural fields. Many important principles laid down in the Declaration have since become the philosophical well-spring for the formulation °^ relevent international instruments and conduct of activities by the United Nations in the human rights field. The significance of the Declaration lies in its reflection of the aspiration of the world's people for equality and freedom. Its influence has increased with the continuous enrichment and development of its original content, As we review the actions taken and the achievements made by the United Nations in the human rights field over the past 40 years, we can see ever more clearly the role the Declaration has played.
The standards set by the Declaration of Human Rights are products of the era, which should develop along with the evolution of the times. In the 40 years since the adoption of the Declaration, tremendous changes have taken place in the world, rhe colonial system has become a thing of the past. Former colonies and dependencies have stood up one after another and joined the ranks of sovereign >tates. The developing countries in their large numbers are playing an increasing role in world affairs. All this had a favourable impact on human rights activities □nd theories at the international level. Guided by the spirit of the Declaration, he United Nations has over the decades adopted a series of human rights resolutions, declarations and conventions reaffirming, adding or defining in greater detail principles of human rights. As a result, the w ^t of human ' ights has been constantly enriched, concepts have been developed and theories perfected.
It
Peoples
should be emphatically pointed out that to self-determination and the principle
natural
(Mr. Ding Yuanhong, China) the principle of the right of of permanent sovereign rights over
wealth and resources, as affirm by international legal instruments and
accepted by most countries, as well as
the principles contained in the Declaration
on the Right to Development adopted bv the	„
y the Wilted Nations General Assembly in 1986,
are all of paramount importance to the
liberation from colonialist and racist
independent countries and peopl
nations and peoples fighting for freedom and rule and foreign occupation, to the newly
es striving for the maintenance of sovereignty and
territorial Integrity and restoration of effective control over their natural resources, and to the numerous developing countries calling fM ^ restructuring Of irrational international economic relations.
(Mr. Ding Yuanhong, China)
today, in celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration, we are here to reaffirm all the principles embodied for in the Declaration and other relevant human rights documents adopted since, so as to promote a wider respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, it is regrettable, however, that mass and flagrant violations of human rights in contravention of those principles still go on in many parts of the world. Owing to colonialism, racism, apartheid, foreign aggression and occupation, the basic rights of the people in South Africa, Namibia, Palestine, Afghanistan and Kampuchea are brutally trampled on. It is entirely justified and necessary for the United Nations to have listed these questions over the years as priority items for its consideration.
It is our view that the United Nations, in keeping with the purposes and principles of the Charter and the relevant provisions of international human rights instruments, should encourage, assist and urge all countries to shoulder their responsibility for safeguarding human rights and fundamental freedoms. Of course, while advocating respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, we are opposed to any country, in contravention of the purposes and principles of the Charter, interfering in other countries' internal affairs under the pretext of protecting human rights.
The two categories of rights provided for in the Declaration - namely, civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights - are interdependent and inseparable. As pointed out in the preanble to the two human rights covenants, "in accordance with the universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy his economic, social and cultural rights, as well as his civil and political rights." (resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex)
(Mr. Ding Yuanhong, China)
Giving equal attention and full rasped to those two categories of rights constitutes an important condition of the comprehensive protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Moreover, we believe that there is an interrelationship between political development and economic development. The political and social development of a country correlates closely with the level of its economic development, which has its own distinctive characteristics. In today's world, in which countries and regions are uneven in their economic development and diverse in their cultural itions, it is neither realistic nor appropriate simply to ask that all countries measure up to the standard or model of a particular country or type of coun try.
The Chinese Government and people have always stood for respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, supported and abided by the principles on human rights enshrined in the United Nations Charter and actively participated in the Ohlted Nations activities in the field of human rights. China has already acceded to a number of International conventions In the field of human rights, strictly discharged its obligations thereunder and regularly submitted reports to the relevant treaty bodies. On the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration, China, like many other countries, has conducted commemorative activities at home. It is our hope that these activities will help prorate compliance by the Governments and peoples of various countries with the purposes of the Charter, adherence to the principles provided for in international human rights instruments and efforts to bring about a continuous improvement in the level of enjoyment of every right by all people, thus making positive contributions to maintaining world peace and upholding justice.
The PRES WENT (interpretation from French)« I now have the honour of calling on Justice Elizabeth Evatt, who will speak on behalf of Australia. She is not only an outstanding jurist and an expert on human rights, but also the niece of Dr. Evatt, who was Foreign Minister of Australia and was President of the General Assembly in 1948. He presided over the meeting at which the Universal Declaration was adopted and also made an imper ant contribution to drawing up the Declaration.
Ms. EVATT (Australia)« I wish to associate the Government of Australia with the remarks the President made in sympathy with the people of the Soviet Uh ion over the results of the natural disaster that has struck them.
Where you sit today, Sir, my father's brother stood 40 years ago to announce the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The adoption of that Declaration was the completion of the work begun at Dumbarton Oaks in 1944 to establish an international structure for the preservation of peace, for the implementation of justice and for the protection of human rights. That work is enshrined in the Charter itself, in the Statute of the International Court of Justice and in this Declaration of the fundamental rights of man.
How do we measure up today compared with those grim times 40 years ago? We have much that is good to record. Colonialism is virtually a thing of the past, so that today 159 nations sit in this Assembly, compared with the 56 that voted on the Declaration.
The broad statement of human rights in the Declaration has been elaborated in a number of important additional treaties setting the norms of a decent and civilized world. Some of them deal with specific areas of abuse, such as torture and racial discrimination, and others with the needs of women, who suffer doubly
(Ms. Evatt, Australia)
from the denial of the right to participate on equal terns in political, social ana
economic life and
who bear heavily the burdens of poverty, famine and
violence.
Considerable
progress has been made in establishing machinery to implement
those norms. The last 18 months, In particular, have seen remarkable
advances
towards a more peaceful world, without peace, the eight, enumerated In the Declaration can have little substance, just as, without tolerance and respect for human rights, we shall not have any lasting peace.
The concept of the rule of law, perhaps the single most important requirement tor a just society, is taking new hold and achieving new reality. Democracy is emerging and emerging in all parts of the world. Equity between nations and within nations is, at the least, well established on the international agenda.
So there are things in which we can rejoice.
ait we should not delude ourselves that the race is yet won. It is barely begun. This great enterprise of Charter, statute and Declaration had Its well-spring In the determination that never again should war, poverty and Injustice be inflicted upon the peoples of the world, that never again could a Hitler walk among us. Set, on this very day, people suffer and die in a multitude of wars, millions flood the refugee camps, famine Is a present reality to the innocents of the world, and to the Khmer people, while Hitler may be scarcely known history, the shadow of Pol Pot is an ever-present nightmare.
We still have with us apartheid in South Africa, the only country in which by and constitution one race seeks to define its own value by its blind denial of the worth of all other races.
(Ms. Evatt, Australia)
I make those points not to denigrate the achievements of the last 40 years but to remind us all that the urgency and importance of our work on human rights is as great today as it was 40 years ago. In a sense, the struggle for human rights can never really be over. It is, instead, a struggle that is part of the human condition, a struggle that must be fought anew every day.
We all knew why that is so. The freely chosen government of a free people can be a mighty force for liberty and justice in all their diversity, but government can also be the potent instrument of repression, cruelty and deprivation. The reason that the Universal Declaration is so overwhelmingly important is that it has established once and for all that Governments cannot plead interference in internal affairs to deflect the legitimate concern of the international community, for human rights knew no national boundaries. Human rights are the business of us all. It is the obligation of every Government to pursue, internally and internationally, policies that will ensure the enjoynent of the rights of each man, woman and child.
I bring here today a proposal to give further strength to the Declaration. It is not a new proposal - indeed, it is a little older than the Declaration itself. It was first put forward by Australia in February 1947. The proposal is for the establishment of an international court of human rights for the enforcement of the emerging international law on human rights. We do not underestimate the major political and legal difficulties that stand in the way. Who would have access to such a court, just Governments or individuals? And non-governmental organizations as well? Would it be part of the International Court of Justice or would it be separate? How would its decisions be enforced? would its jurisdiction be compulsory?
We recognize that the establishment of such a court would take years to (ring to fruition. Accordingly, we are happy to see work begin on this proposal in a
(Ms. Evatt, Australia) modest way - for example, by its being put to study by the United Nations Centre for Human Rights or the Sub-Comnission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, ait we are anxious that work begin soon because we see this as an unrealized ideal whose time has surely come.
On that day in 1948 the President of the General Assembly said that millions of people, men woman and children all over the world, would turn to this Declaration for help, guidance and inspiration. To the extent that that hope has been realized, the Organization has played a part, as have such organizations as Amnesty International. But to the extent to which that hope has been realized it is, above all, a testament to the ordinary men and women who in their daily lives fight their often lonely and unsung battles to assert the worth intrinsic to their humanity, it is true that enough fear, enough pain, enough hunger - indeed, enough apathy and preoccupation with simple survival - can sustain the tyrant for a while and make him confident that his power will endure. But in the end each tyrant will confront truth’s superb surprise: that the urge to freedom is so deep in the heart of all men and women that it will not be denied.
We know that, in the final analysis, if the United Nations is to mean anything it is in its dedication to the simple idea that among the teeming millions of the world each man, woman and child has unique value and that each individual's very humanity gives an inalienable right to freedom and dignity.
So, for us here in New York, on the East River, our task today is a simple one. It is to send forth from this place a message of renewed conmitment, a message to the tortured, to the oppressed, to the starving and to the dispossessed. We feel your agony, we share your anger, we hear your cries and we are with you.
ML^JXJMPHREY (Canada)s My first words must be to thank the Assenbly for the great honour that was conferred on me this morning. I accepted on behalf of all my colleagues in the United Nations Secretariat who helped in those early years when we were drafting the International Bill of Human Rights. I also want to thank the Canadian Government for having invited me to join its delegation for this day when the General Assembly is celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This is for me a very special occasion. I was present, in my capacity as the Director of the Division of Human Rights, in the Palais de Chaillot on the night of 10 Decenber 1948 when the Declaration was adopted. The Assembly’s Third Committee had just devoted some 85 meetings to the discussion and amendment of a draft declaration that had been prepared by the Commission on Human Rights. I had sat through all those meetings at the side of the Coninittee's Chairman, the late Charles Malik of Lebanon, who was, I may say, one of the principal architects of the Universal Declaration. I had also worked on the Declaration with the Commission on Human Rights and its two drafting committees. You can imagine with what emotion I now address the Assembly, 40 years after its adoption of the Universal Declaration.
A proper history of the Declaration relating the reasons that prompted its adoption, describing its juridical character and discussing the importance it has acquired over the years, morally, politically and legally, still remains to be written. I do not attempt to fill that gap today. I want, however, in the short time that has been allocated to me, to say something about the moral and political authority of the Declaration, its status in international law, the close relationship between respect for the rights enunciated in it and the peace of nations and how the new world law of human rights, which it has largely inspired, is helping to change the very nature and structure of international law - and, finally, something about the mechanisms that exist in the world for the implementation of the Declaration.
Immediately after its political authority equal, international instrument. Carta of mankind and, in a
(Mr. Humphrey, Canada) adoption the universal Daclaration acquired a moral and if not superior, to that of any other contemporary The late Eleanor Roosevelt used to call it the Magna speech before the Assembly in 1979, His Holiness Pope
John Paul II referred to it as the "basic Inspiration and corner-stone of the onited Nations- <¿¿34/^17, p. l6). », other internatlonal instrument has battac reflected the aspirations of mankind. It quickly became a standard of reference by which the conduct of Governments in their relations with individual men and »omen cou-d be judged, tad it has inspired a »hole ne» body of international la». Including, of course, the t»o United Nations Covenants on human rights.
Bit, notwithstanding its great moral and political the Declaration by the Assembly did not make it binding international law. The Assembly is, unfortunately, not except in housekeeping matters, such as the adoption of
authority, the adoption of
on States as part of
a world parliament and, the budget, its resolutions
are not legally binding on states. It follows that, whatever its moral end political authority may have been in 1948 „hen the Declaration »as adopted, it did not become binding on States as part of international law.
That, ho»ever, „as 40 years ago, and during those 40 years the Declaration has been Invoked so many times in the General assembly and elsewhere as if it were law that it can now be said - and perhaps I should say that I am speaking both in my personal capacity and as a lawyer - that one can say that it is now part of the customary law of nations and therefore binding on all states, including the nearly 50 per cent membership of this Organisation which has not ratified the two
Covenants on human
rights.
Consider, for
example, tho long series of resolutions which the Assently has
adopted emdemlng s»«, Africa £or violating its obligatIons ^ ^ ^^ Nations Charter. 1„ every case the General Asseably goes on to say in every
(Mr. Humphrey, Canada) case "and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights". It is obvious that the General Assembly is using the Declaration to interpret the Charter, which, while references to human rights run through it like a golden thread, nowhere defines human rights and fundamental freedoms or, indeed, even lists them. I could, if time permitted, provide many more examples of the kind of practice that supports the conclusion that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is now part of the customary law of nations.
If what I am saying is correct - and I have no doubt that it is - the event we are celebrating today, the adoption by the General Assembly of the Uhiversal Declaration of Human Rights, turns out to have been a much greater success than anyone would have dared to hope in 1948.
International law is traditionally defined as the law governing the relations of States and of States only. If the Uhiversal Declaration of Human Rights is how part of the customary law of nations, then, because it confers rights on individual men and women, it is helping to bring about a radical change in the very nature and structure of an international lav; that some people think is now obsolete. It reaches down to entities other than States. Indeed, what we have traditionally called international law - jus inter gentes- should now be called world law.
Human rights law is directed primarily to the protection of the dignity and worth of the human person. But human rights law also has another purpose. History tells us that there is a close relationship between respect for human rights and the peace of nations. The catalyst that brought about the references to human rights in the United Nations Charter, and later in the Uhiversal Declaration, was indeed the gross violations of those rights that occurred during and immediately before the Second World War. IWo of the main purposes of the United Nations, as proclaimed in Article 1 of the Charter, are to maintain international peace and security and to promote respect for human rights. That association is no accident.
(Mr. Humphrey, Canada)
We live on a planet that is governed - if one can indeed say that it is governed - by a legal order that is, as I have just suggested, becoming obsolete. During my own lifetime we have lived through two world wars that have literally shattered our planet, and we are still suffering the consequences. How many wars, declared or not, now divide nations and peoples? It is Governments that make wars, it is individual men and women who are made to suffer by them. Perhaps the radical change to which I have referred in the very nature and structure of international law could help us keep this planet a place where men and women can continue to live.
I have talked about a revolution in the nature and structure of international law. But what is law? Law tells us what should happen. It does not tell us what will happen. That is why in developed legal systems there exist elaborate mechanisms for the implementation and enforcement of the law - the courts, the police and so on.
(Mr. Humphrey, Canada)
Hit at the international level, these median isms are weak when, indeed, they even exist. Most of them are directed, moreover - although that is not their declared purpose - only to the education of world public opinion. We sometimes call it the organization of shame. It is true, nevertheless, that governments, even authoritarian governments, are sensitive to world public opinion. But, however important, that obviously is not enough. Yesterday in Paris at a conference convened by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UiESOO), where there were some 300 youngsters from various countries, I threw out the challenge - after having told them that our generation had been able to agree on these standards - that it was for their generation to devise adequate measures of implementation and enforcement of the Universal Declaration.
This is the message that I want to convey in this short intervention. Never in the history of the Universal Declaration has it received the attention which it has received during this fortieth anniversary. I hope that this may be the élan vital, that will help us to bring peace to our world and universal recognition of the dignity of man and of woman.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)-. I thank the representative of Canada, who has just given us a brilliant exegesis of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as a member of the delegation of his country attending the Uhited Nations conference for the adoption of that Declaration.
ÜEX AIKMAN (New Zealand)s It is a privilege to follow Professor Humphrey, who has made such a massive contribution to the development of human rights law.
Before I go on, I should like to express on behalf of my delegation our concern at the reports of the destructive earthquake which has struck the Soviet Union, and our deep sympathy for all those affected by that disaster.
(Mc. Aikman » New Zealand)
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states-.
"All human beings are born free and equal In dignity and rights. They are endowed „¡th reason and conscience and should act towards one another In a spirit of brotherhood", (resolution 217 (nin
This recognition of the inherent dignity of the individui
between human rights, peace and justice
, and of the linkage
engagement in the field of human rights.
It is worth reminding ourselves that international law barely existed, in the accepted for the first time the principle
' is at the heart of the United
prior to 1945 human rights as Uhited Nations Charter Member
responsibility for the promotion and protection of
freedoms.
freedoms.
Nations
a branch of
States
that the international oomnunity had a
The Universal Declaration was the first
human rights and fundamental formulation of those rights and
opinions of
It »a an expression of the consensus of the moral and political mank ind.
in ■» statement to the General assembly i„ 1948
New Zealand delegation attached to the
I stressed the importance the
next stage in the adoption of an
Blu o£ Human Mghts . the atafting of a ^t „ imposing legally binding obligations on ^ ^ ^ ^^ of ^^
measures of implementation.
»e hoped, too, that a aeries of international
conventions would progressively elaborate and define the principles set forth in the Declaration.
Forty years later, we can reflect on the made in the achievement of these objectives. Covenants - on Civil and Political Rights and Rights. There is also an impressive range of
human rights issues, such
remarkable progress that has been There are the two International on Economic, Social and Cultural conventions dealing with particular
AggEtheid, discrimination against
as those on genocide, racial discrimination,
the crime of
women, torture, and freedom of information.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Aikman, New Zealand)
Article 1 of the United Nations Charter couples the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms with the solution of economic, social and cultural problems. And in 1948 we in the New Zealand delegation noted with satisfaction the place given in the Universal Declaration to economic, social and cultural rights.
We had taken an active part in the Third Committee discussions of those rights. We made the point that the right to personal freedom can be enjoyed only by those who are free from fear and free from want. As has since been graphically said; for many millions in the present world human rights begin only after breakfast. Thus we supported the inclusion in the Universal Declaration of the right to work, the right to rest and leisure, the right to a standard of living adequate for health and well-being, the right to education, and the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the conmunity.
In this area, too, the past 40 years have seen gratifying successes - a result of work throughout the United Nations system, and in this I include the work of the specialized agencies, beginning with that of the International Labour Organisation. And we must not forget the dedicated and unremitting support of the non-governmental organizations. Indeed, it is in the promotion of human rights that those bodies have laboured most actively and constructively.
However, this is not only an occasion for looking back over the past 40 years. We must recognize that there are still many tasks over the whole field of human rights which must be faced with energy and insight in the 40 years ahead. Everywhere we see gross violations of personal freedoms and there are still millions who are living in conditions of fear, poverty and ignorance. The standards proclaimed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights will continue to be a reminder to us that these are issues which present a challenge for the international community to which we in the United Nations must respond.
(Mr. Aikman, New Zealand)
The active part which the Ne» Zealand delegation took in the Third Committee
proceedings in Paris in 1548 reflected the interest taken in human rights by the leader of the delegation, Prime Minister Peter Fraser. It »ill be recalled that in 1945 he had chaired, with distinction, the International Trusteeship Coimittee at the san Francisco Conference. We no» have another Labour Prime Minister, Mr. David Lange. I shall conclude by reading the follo»ing message from him:
(Mr. Aikman, New Zealand)
I extend greetings from the New Zealand Government to this special conmemorativo session. We are proud that New Zealand was in the company of the 48 countries which supported the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on 10 Decenber 1948 at the third session of the General Assentoly "The Universal Declaration was undoubtedly ’a fruitful seed cast on good ground', as the New Zealand Labour Prime Minister of the day, Peter Fraser, hoped it would be. In the intervening 40 years many of the rights and freedoms proclaimed by the Declaration have been given the status of international law.
"It is undeniable that serious abuses of human rights still continue around the world, in South Africa they are in a category of their own. But the international community has asserted its right to express its abhorrence of such practices with the force and authority of the United Nations Indeed, we are bound to do so by our obligations under the United Nations Charter.
I should like to reaffirm New Zealand's commitment to the United Nations goal of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. We look forward to another 40 years of United Nations achievement."
iLt^EMEE (Philippines): Before making my brief statement I should like to express, on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines, our deepest sympathy to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its people for the many casualties and great damage caused by the severe earthquake in Soviet Armenia.
The Philippines, in observing the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, reaffirms its pledge to promote and achieve, together with the other Member States, universal respect for, and observance of, inalienable human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Philippines was privileged of this historic document and to be then which supported its adoption.
(Mr. Teehankee, Philippines) to participate actively in 1948 in the drafting counted among the 48, out of 56, Meirber States The 30-article Declaration, purposely written
in simple and easily understood language, speciflea foe the first time the basic
human rights ana fundamental freedoms of all members of the human family that must be guaranteed, respected and protected by all nations and all peoples. Its adoption »as a response to the deepest aspirations of mankind based on the inherent dignity and equality of all human beings, of „hatever race or colour, sex or creed.
Tuday the Declaration has served to inspire the elaboration and adjption of some SO international human rights Instruments. Its provisions have been included in national constitutions of Monter states, including the Philippines.
Nevertheless, this is only one aspect of the envisioned international bill of human rights. The Philippines appeals to other Werber states to become parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Bights and the International Covenant on Bccnomlc, Social and Cultural Bights, which stipulate in detail the rights outlined in the Declaration. The Philippines reiterates its position that the basic rights enshrined in these Covenants must be given equal attention by all states since they are indivisible and indispensably interrelated.
Her Excellency President Corazon Aquino of the Bepublic of the Philippines, upon her assumption of office in February 1986, installed a government strongly committed to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. She forthwith ordered the immediate release of all political prisoners, even those who would afterwards seek her downfall, and the restoration of the writ of habeas corpus, the great writ of liberty under whit* no one may be detained indefinitely without charges, she ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Bights and made the Declaration under article 41 of the Covenant, she ¡■as signed the instrument of ratification to its corresponding Optional Protocol,
(Mr. Teehankee, Philippines) which has been submitted to our Senate now for its concurrence. We have also acceded to the Convention against torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and have become a State Party to Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949.
The Philippines believes that the best vanguard against human rights violations is a citizenry fully aware of its rights and freedoms. Thus, as part of the process of full restoration and establishment of democratic institutions, the Philippine Commission on Human Rights with full authority to investigate violations and enforce the rights of aggrieved parties has been functioning since May last year. The Philippine Government has in addition integrated the study of human rights at all levels in schools and in the government service and has made this study part of the continuing education programme for the police and the military.
Forty years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights there are still numerous reports of human rights violations all over the world. -: has been aptly said that our world has become a global village in which, as the poet said, "Any man's death diminishes me." Every deliberate violation of the human rights of one person is inflicted on all others. The best way for us to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Uhiversal Declaration of Human Rights is to renew our consecration and resolve at all times to hold inviolate the principles enshrined in it for the promotion and protection of human rights and human dignity.
In closing the Philippine delegation congratulates the six distinguished recipients of the human rights award, whom we have honoured this morning for their outstanding achievements in the field of human rights.
Mr ; NCWORYTA (Poland)% Before making my statement I wish to express my compassion to the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the tragic consequences of the earthquake.
(Mr. Noworyta, Poland)
From the point of view of history, the 40 years that have passed since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are a very short period of time, but the world’s evolution in that period has proceeded at a more rapid pace the political map of the world has been completely transformed, and the
extraordinary advances in science and technology have helped to make all of us on this planet aware of the basic unity of our aspirations and anxieties.
AW/dsg
(Mr. Noworyta, Poland)
The Universal Declaration at that time set forth inalienable rights - civil, political, economic, social and cultural - the first and essential prerequisite of constructive activities by every human being. Looking at the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights from such a perspective, I should like to recall its simple, bold words, an eloquent expression of human dignity:
"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood." (article 1)
As the Assentoly knows, 40 years ago Poland was actively involved in the process of the elaboration of the universal Declaration of Human Rights. We tried at that time to help in drafting a document that would effectively serve the cause of progress and democracy, improve the living conditions of all people and make an effective contribution toward respect for human rights.
We then considered, as we still do today, that the place of any human being in society depends on his or her social and economic condition*, and that is why it is so important not only to proclaim human rights but also to create conditions that will enable these rights to become a reality. It is exactly for that reason that we wanted the Declaration to contain basic social and economic rights: the right to work, the right to equal pay for equal work, the right to education and social security, among others.
Nevertheless, when we look today at the values of the Declaration, we note with satisfaction that its elaboration and subsequent proclamation inspired many new instruments, including the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Covenants on Human Rights, the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, as well as the recent Uhited Nations efforts in
(Mr. Noworyta, Poland) this respect: the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, or the draft Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Thus, not conceived originally as a part of binding international law, the Declaration is accepted today by many States as an international standard, cited regularly in international legal instruments, and invoked in numerous national constitutions. We recognize these values. Through scientific conferences, symposia and seminars, organized under the auspicies of the Uhited Nations Association of Poland, the Polish Institute of International Affairs, and others, the ideals, the spirit and the contents of the universal Declaration have been widely publicized, discussed and studied.
In concluding, let me express the hope that the celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration will produce new ideas in the wide field of human activity called human rights, especially economic, social and cultural rights, we are strongly convinced that the international climate is propitious today for new ideas in these vital fields.
We join all voices suggesting that this anniversary should not only be an occasion for ceremonies or commemorative events, but should also prorate all activities which could effectively serve the cause of human rights and their proration. It is important that one of these activities today is to stimulate early ratification, by the States that have not done so, of international instruments elaborated in the framework of the United Nations. let the observance of this anniversary be a new step forward in the direction of a noble cause: all human rights for all people in accordance with the letter and spirit of the »liversal Declaration.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/43/PV.85
16 January 1989
ENGLISH
Forty-third session general assembly
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REOORD OF THE EIGHTY-FIFTH MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 22 December 1988, at 3 p.m.
President?
Mr. CAPUTO
(Argentina)
' Ä.S.ÄoTÄ*1 sln9h’ “*“and £MmM M“ident °f
' S^iMa“0 "”’' °£ *' B"nt C“13M"' “•“■* ®Uon3 Commissioner
“	the agenda and organisation of works Request for the inclusion of
an additional sub-item submitted by the Secretary-General [8] (continued)
- Report of the Economic ar.d Social Councils plenary meeting (121 (c- tinued)
Chapters considered directly in
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in Enough
»Si^^^^	- ---^^
sent Sider^t J!?d becsub,nitted to original speeches only. They should be
U^Sü)BU ''’“"'‘'s “ -•“«y organs Ma oarer appoint <h) Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit development [44°b31 negotiations °n international economic co-operation for icurity Council^* representation °” and increase in the membership of the
’ co^eL^	«7 ^i "«clear installations and its grave
uses of nuclear energy, the non-or^if”3^"31 system con«rning the peaceful international peace a^d sX^	°f nuclear wea^ns a"*
” Question of Cÿp;!;' [47J
- Conse^nees of ^ proies,gatlo„ of are ar^a œnfllet „^ ^ ^ ^ '
“ Organization of work
- Concluding statement by the President
- Suspension of the forty-third session
Z!ilJi®îiHliwSL£ÏÜ®ÉJl°£É®L®^
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF MR. NAGENDRA SINGH, INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
MBiBER AND FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF MR. BERNT CARISSON, UNITED NATIONS COMMISSIONER TOR NAMIBIA
—^ PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)* It is with deep regret that I must inform the Assembly that Mr. Nagendra Singh, menber and former President of the International Court of Justice, passed away on 11 December 1988 in The Hague. Judge Nagendra Singh, a distinguished diplomat and jurist, had a long and close
association with the (hited Nations as a representative of India to many sessions of the General Assembly and to conferences convened under the auspices of the United Nations, and as a member of the International law Commission. I am sure I interpret the sentiments of the Assembly in expressing the condolences of the General Assembly to the family of Mr. Nagendra Singh and to the President of the Court and his colleagues. I should also like to ask toe delegation of India to
accept and transmit to the Government of India and to Mr. Nagendra Singh's bereaved family our expression of sympathy at this sad loss.
We have also learned with great sorrow of the tragic death yesterday of our highly esteemed colleague and recently reappointed United Nations Connissioner for Namibia, Mr. Bernt Carlsson. His death has occurred at a time when the long-awaited independence of Namibia is at last in sight. Mr. Carlsson, who was first appointed Commissioner in December 1986 after distinguished service as ambassador at large and special emissary of the late Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden, will not see the fruits of his labour.
On behalf of the Assembly and on my own behalf, I express our heartfelt condolences to the family of Mr. Carlsson and to the Secretary-General of the Un ilea nations. I should also like to ask the delegation of Sweden to accept ana transmit to the Government of Sweden ana to Hr. Bernt Carlsson’s bereavea family our expression of sympathy at their tragic loss.
I now invite the members of the Assembly to silence in tribute to the memory of Mr. Nagendra
(The President) stand and observe a minute of Singh and Mr. Bernt Carlsson.
The member s _of the General Assembly observed a minute of s il ence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)» & ere tary-Gen er al.
I call now upon the
^SS«^®^ I ^ llk. te Msoclate ^ wWi ^ wUf that has been expressed concerning the death of Judge Nag.ndra Singh.
™,e Singh brought great distinction over many year, to the international court of Justice and to the United Nations M a whol.. „. was a most Mlnent jurist whom I counted among my personal friends.
I have expressed to th. President of the Court, to the Government of India and to Mr.. Singh „ sincere onfol.«., ,hid, t ^ _ ^ ^ ^	^^
It is a very sad duty for me to expres. my deep regret and that of my colleague, in the Secretariat at the untimely and tragic pausing yesterday of Bernt Carlsson. The clrcumstenc. no les. ... th. .„„t of his death have come as a great shock to all of us. He »ui be greatly missed.
Mr. Carlsson was appointed Commissioner for Namibia in 1986 .d was reappoint just recently. * .M . ,„ ftie„a o£ ^ „^ ^ * this Organisation with exemplary devotion and distinction, and constantly adhered to the internationalist principle, that guided hl. ^utlcal career. It is a «tter of great sorrow that he will not see . indepmident Namibia join the community of nations as a Member of this Organization.
In paying tribute to Mr. Carlsson, I should also like to to his country, Sweden, which over the years has offered this services of so many of its eminent nationals.
express my gratitude
Organization the
May I ask the representative of Sweden, on my behalf and on behalf of my colleague., to convey to th. family of Mr. Crls.cn our hnartf.lt condolence,.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
AGENDA TEEM 8 (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGE IDA AID ORGANIZATION OF WORK« REQUEST TOR THE INCLUSION OF AN ADDITIONAL SUB-ITR4 SUBMITTED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/43/248)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now consider the request for the inclusion of an additional sub-item in the agenda of the forty-third session under agenda item 15, entitled "Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs", in that connection a note by the Secretary-General has been circulated in document A/43/248.
In his note the Secretary-General informs the Assembly that the death of Judge Na gen dr a Singh of India has resulted in a vacancy in the International Court of Justice and draws the attention of the Assembly to the provisions of the Statute of the International Court of Justice hereby the members of the Court shall be elected by the General Assembly and the Security Council and whereby the Security Council is to fix the date of the election.
Inasmuch as agenda item 15 of the forty-third session of the Assembly does not include a sub-item relating to the election to fill this vacancy, it is proposed that suah a sub-item should be included in the agenda of the forty-third session on the understanding that it would not be considered at the present time but would be taken up at a meeting of a resumption of the present session on a date fixed by the Security Council.
Unless there is an objection, I shall take it that the General Assembly agrees that, under the circumstances described in the note of the Secretary-General, the provision of rule 40 of the rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of the General Committee on the question of the inclusion on the agenda of a sub-item, should be waived.
It'was so decided.
The.PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): May I also take it that the Assembly wishes to include an additional sub-item under agenda item 15 to read as follows: -(c) Election of a member of the International Court of Justice"?
It was so decided.
AŒNDA ITEM 12 (continued)
Sg0^^1^““^^	»»ider® direct« in «beare
(A/43/ 3)	9
(SECTION C) AND VII]
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Members will recall that chapters I, 11, m (sections A and B (a)), VI (section C) and VII of the report of the Economic and Social Council were assigned to plenary meetings for consideration May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note of those chapters of the report of the Economic and Social Council?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 12.
A(ZNDA ITEM 17 (continued)
APP01N1MEN1S TO pm, mCANCIES IN SUMMARY ORGA® A® OTHER APTOMWENTS.
<h) AProrawEHT OP MEMBERS or THE joint INSKCPION UNIT (A/43/978)
The.mg WENT (Interpretation fro», Spanish). As is indicated in the note Circulated in document A/43/978, the General Assenbly is required, at its current session, to appoint a mertoer of the Joint Inspection thit to fill the vacancy that «ill arise fro. the expiration on 31 DeoenOer 1989 of the tern of office of Mr. Kahono Nartohadinegoro of Indonesia. As is further indicated in the note, the »Bsenbly is also required to aEpol„t a ^ fc nn ^ ^^ ^ ^ from the resignation of Nr. Enrique Ferrer vieyra of Argentina effective 1 April 1989.
in accordance with the procedures described in Article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint Inspection thit, the regional groups concerned were consulted and it was determined that Indonesia and Argentina, respectively, should be requested to propose candidates to replace Nr. Nartohadlnegoro and Mr. Ferrer Vieyra.	'
As a result of further consultations in accordance with Article 3, Paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection thit, including consultations with the President of the Economic and social Council and with the secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, I nov submit to the Assembly the candidatures of Mr. Kahono Martohadinegoro of Indonesia for appointment as meeber of the Joint pectlon thit for a term coimnencing on 1 January 1990 and expiring
31 tecenber 1994 end of Mr. Radi Quijano of Argentina for a term commencing on 1 April 1989 and expiring on 31 December 1993.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assenbly to appoint those candidates?
It was so decided.
Ihe raESmaiT (interpretation from Spanish)t He have concluded our consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 17.
ACZNDA ITO! 44
SSm GW8M’ NEQOTIATIOf«S ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION FOR
TJirasiDBjT (interpretation from Spanish)» in connection with this item representatives will recall that on 23 Septesber 1988 the Assentoly decided to include the item in the agenda of the forty-third session.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to defer consideration of this item and to include it in the provisional agenda of the forty-fourth session?
It was so decided,
The_PREro«T (interpretation from Danish)» This concludes our consideration of agenda item 44.
AGENDA ITOI 45
CUESTION OP EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION ON SECURITY COUNCIL
At© INCREASE IN THE MB4BERSHIP OP THE
The PR isWENT (interpretation from Danish)» I understand that there is no request to consider this item at the present session.
That being the case, may I take it that the Assenbly decides to include the item in the provisional agenda of the forty-fourth session?
It was so decided.
ThePRETOWT (interpretation from Spanish)» This concludes our consideration of agenda item 45.
AGENDA ITEM 46
mSffiS^n^i” AGAINST THE IRAQI NUCLEAR INSTALLATIONS AID ITS GRAVE OP w^^X tbTX^^XT^ sæî“ œHŒR«"«= "■ «*œTOI. USPS AND SECURITY '	^ PR0LIFER/‘TI0N 0F NUCLEAR WEAPONS AN) INTStNATIONAL PEACE
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)* it is my understanding that agenda item 46 should be retained on the agenda of the forty-third session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to retain the item on the agenda of the forty-third session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 47
QUESTION OP CYPRUS
The «*ESIDa<T (interpretation from Spanish)* Menbers will certainly recall that on 23 September 1988 the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the present session but deferred any decision on the allocation of the item to an appropriate time in the future.	.
It is ray understanding that it would be desirable to leave the question of Cyprus open at the present session.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to that understanding and decides to retain the item on the agenda of its forty-third session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 48
CONSEQUENCES OP THE PROWNGATION OF THE ARMED CONFLICT BETWEEN IRAN AID IRAQ
The_PRETOBiT (interpretation from Spanish)* I have received a request that this item be kept on the agenda of the current session.
(The President)
^®y I t&ke it that it is	- - - * >
wisn of the General Assembly to retain the item on the agenda of the forty-third session?
It was so decided.
ORGANIZATION OF WORK
"SJEE2BS (interpretation fro. span!.!,). ^t ft0B -ttK, „^ ^ arise relating to the agenda „a organization of th. current session, of which the General teS91*iy remain. .eUea, and hiring in nl„d the aotlon already taten at Its 7«th, Sind and Bird plenary meetings as ».11 aB action taten at the present meeting concerning agenda Ites. 15 <c). 4«, 4, ,„d 48, the General «steeply „UI retain on the agenda of the forty-third session the folic Ing agenda Items.
Item 15 (c) mention of a member of the International court of Justice,
Item 37 Question of Palestine»
Item 46 Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and International peace and security»
Item 47 Question of Cyprus»
n.m «8 Consequences of th. prolong.tics of th. armad conflict between Iran and Iraq»
It.m 82 De.elopeent and International economic cooperation, Item 137 Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.
CONCLUDING STATfflENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRE TOBIT (interpretation from Spanish)* We have thus concluded our consideration of the agenda of the forty-third session of the General Assembly. This session, which has taken place in what we might describe as an exceptional climate, has given us much food for thought. Many of the events that have occurred here are freshly engraved in our memories» we are all familiar with them. Because of their scope, their overriding importance and their significance for the future of the international community, however, they merit being recalled to mind this afternoon.
At the beginning of this session I noted that we were gathering at a special time in modern history* The general climate in international relations was positive» for the first time, the confrontational atmosphere of recent decades had given way to dialogue and co-operation» the new relationship and disarmament agreements between the super-Powers and the gradual solution of major regional conflicts had at one and the same time fueled and resulted from this new climate.
It was our responsibility to ensure that these positive developments were placed on a sound footing. I believe we can take satisfaction from having fully discharged our duty in this respect. Both the decisions that we have taken and the tone of the debates have served to strengthen and promote the process of dialogue and detente.
Just a few hours ago, in this very building, we witnessed the signing of an agreement that will at last enable the process of independence for Namibia to begin. Thus, after a lapse of 10 years, the United Nations will have the historic task of putting into effect Security Council resolution 435 (1978). In this connection, I wish to note that in the last several hours a number of delegations have inquired whether I might inform the Assembly on the possibility of a resumed
(The President) session of the Assembly to consider the most practical and suitable ways of tonte luting fln«cl»lly to the effective and thorough Implantation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978> and to the agreements sl^ed today In New York by toe representatives of Angola, Cuba and Sbuth Africa.
For the first time the General Assembly has adopted by consensus and without discussion a resolution on Afghanistan, to a greater or lesser extent, the resolutions on Kampuchea, Western Sahara and the Middle East, also reflected a promising development.
For its part, the General Assentoly had occasion a few days ago, in Geneva, to adopt a series of resolutions which will, without question, give new momentum to the search for a solution to the Palestinian problem. They reflected the grave concern felt by the international community at the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and at the continued non-compliance with Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on these matters. In a global framework of détente, it is vital for all the parties directly involved in the conflict to open a dialogue as early as possible, so that peace my finally be restored to the Middle Eastern region, in this respect, the decision of the United States Government to initiate a substantive dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PIO) represents a striking step forward, which I hope will give fresh impetus to the peace process in the region.
With similar concern, the General Assentoly considered the critical situation prevailing in South Africa as a result of the unacceptable policy of apartheid. The persistence of apartheid represents a hotbed of tension that imperils international peace and security. The General Assembly reaffirmed its conviction that the Security Council should impose mandatory sanctions on South Africa pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter.
gnition of the major diaries that have been occurring in international .oonomic relations, their ln«easln,ly global Md interdependent „„„., ^ prolong echoic «1.1. besetting most develop!., co««!., - particularly the debtor nation. . had a„ tap.« on the Mrk of *, ^^ ^^ »^„^ in any assessment of the outcome of that work are the role entrusted to the Se«etary-Cn.ral In Mnettlaa ,1th *. ,„„„ o£ ^ ^^ ^^^ of ^ developing countries, the progress achieved towards convening a cited nations conference on environment and development, th. international strategy for the fourth cited Nations development deeds, and the pos.lenity of holding a special
session of the General Assembly in co-operation.
1990 devoted to international economic
«part fro. the aforementioned developments In these particularly Important issues, the forty-third session of the General Assembly maintained a pace of work consonant with the demands of the present circumstances.
In the field of disarmament and international security, there was a significant narrowing of view, among delegations, and a great number of resolutions were adopted by consensus. The negotiations in this field are undoubtedly passing through a historic phase which the multilateral environment should foster and promote.
with respect to social and humanitarian questions, the debates reflected a willingness on the part of all delegation, to .trlve for consensus In th. adoption of text., indeed, the way ha. been paved for candid dialogue, leaving behind dogmatic ideology and reciprocal accusations.
I should also lib. to note that, consistent with the comalteent w. undertook In Initiating th. .x.rcls. ..tabllehed by resolution 4V213, the Assembly achieved a high degree of agreement on budgetary matters.
The high percentage of resolutions adopted without a vote on the recommendation of the Fifth Comittee, the adoption of the revised estimates for the current budget, the agreement on the budget outline for 1990-1991, which launched the new budgetary cycle, and the resolution just adopted on the future scale of assessments, are achievements unprecedented in the history of the Organization.
I venture to hope that this process will continue to enhance our Governments' commitment to the Organization, and that the budgetary uncertainties that now beset us will soon disappear entirely.
In the area of legal matters, years of work in important subsidiary organs of the Sixth Committee came to a successful conclusion with the unanimous adoption of the Draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes, the Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations which May Threaten International Peace and Security and on the Role of the United Nations in this field, and the Draft Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any form of Detention or Imprisonment.
This brief summary confirms that the forty-third session of the General Assembly has reflected and contributed to the progress that has been made towards peace and security and that this year has been marked by fresh developments in International co-operation.
It is of great significance to all Members of the United Nations to see the beginning of a new relationship, based on disarmament, between the Soviet Union and the United States. Addressing the Assentoly at the beginning of our session, the President of the United States, Mr. Ronald Reagan, spoke of the great challenges facing the international community; then, virtually at the end of our session, the President of the Supreme Soviet, Mr. Mikhail Gorbachev, referred to a new age of responsibility and international relations that reflect a new reality.
(The President)
The President of Argentine reflected the feeling, of »any «hen, .peeking here •bout thi. new rel.tlon.hlp between the United Stet., end th. Soviet union, he declared that, four decade, after Hiroaki.., the politic.l re.lltle. of the nuoleer age were finally being understood.
Many leaders and statesmen have made the General Assembly their forum. The reinvigoration of the (felted Nations, epitomized by the awarding of the NObel Prize to the peace-keeping forces, is testimony to the achievements that have marked this year 1988. The role that the United Nations can play and the way in which the Organization can continue to contribute significantly to world peace have been demonstrated. The Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, deserves all our gratitude for having so dynamically maintained the role of our Organization on all fronts - eoonomic, social and political. Our special appreciation and recognition go to those Member States feat have exceeded their obligations, and to the Whited Nations peace-keeping forces and other bodies devoted to peace, as well as the thousands of staff members of the Whited Nations system. They have ensured- this Organization’s continued existence and richly contributed to this year’s promising results.
A look at the agenda of the General Assembly reveals the united Nations broad-ranging and profound contribution to improving our world. As a result of the recommendations, studies and conclusions of the various committees, the Assembly's work was highly satisfactory, in presiding over this session of the General Assembly I have benefited from the endeavours of each of you. The specific results achieved in the various committees have proved that our energies have been channelled effectively, generously and productively. My sincere and special thanks go to the chairmen and members of those committees for having made all this possible. *
Against this generally positive backdrop, however, there is a fundamental problem which calls for the same devotion and energy. I g‘3 referring to the question of economic development and social justice in the world. This session served to confirm the inescapable priority nature of this question and the urgent
need to take specific and concrete initiatives based
of interdependence means that we must recognize and regional conflicts are not the only threats again it has become plain in this forum that in
that
on consensus. The recognition the cold warp nuclear weaponry
to peace and stability. Time and the final analysis another
indispensable guarantee of peace is economic development, and „„til specific Esures are taken to alleviate the unjest economic situation and social states of t»o thirds of mantled any achievement in the area of security »ill rede precarious.
The developing countries have demonstrated a clear determination to tote
fresh approach circumstances.
to international economic cooperation in the light of changing Ebr this reason the warnings and the recomendations of the
a
Bruntland Commission must be heeded. Our common future, one chosen and designed by ourselves, must take a vigorous approach within the economic field and in the area of environment, not only through a laCk ol confrontation but tte<wgb among our peoples to bring about a new International security.
The recognition of the united
world leaders and international citizens who
Nations achievements is a tribute also to
many
preceded us. The commemoration of the
fortieth anniversary of the federation of Human Hights calls to mind to ardent champion of the Hnited Hations, Hrs. Hleanor toosevelt, of whom it was said that
she would prefer to light a single candle rather than curse the "■any candles alight around us> it is now up to us to keep those SUSPENSION OF THE FORTY-THIRD SESSION
darkness. We have
flamas alive.
Tfie^EEST (interpretation from Spanish), wishing all representatives a very happy year 1989, t hereby declare the forty-third session of the General Assembly suspended.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
United Nations GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FORTY-THIRD SESSION
Official Records*
FIRST COMMITTEE IB th meeting held on Friday, 28 October 1988 at 10.30 a.m.
New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 18th MEETING
Chairman: Mr. Roche (Canada)
CONTENTS
- OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
*lhi\ remiti n subivii h louruinn Cnninh.un shoukl he seni untici ihe Mgimiuic ni u inrinhci ni ihc ddc gglion vuikfiiwtl wihn <mr urei t*f thr dtur »1 puhlhaltim lo ihc Chwf ni lite OII'kiiI Rvinrih Kliliii)t Secnun. iwm IX’2 iMì, 2 Vmwd Nnwn\ PI»/#, unti HWtu)XMMvd in a mp^ ni ihv temiti
< otmiitins »ili Ite issucit filler ihc end ni (he scsmud. ut .i svp.n*ilc Insule Ini vaili ( niiimiUiT
Distr. GENERAL A/C.1/43/PV.18 1 November 1988
ENGLISH
88-63110 7720V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN: I welcome members to this annuiil observance o£ Disarmament Week. Ten years ego, at the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, the international community unanimously decided that the day of the founding of the United Nations would begin a week devoted to foster.ng the objectives of disarmament. So, we are today, for the tenth time, holding this special meeting.
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to welcome to the Committee His Excellency Mr. Dragoslav Pejic, Vice-President of the General Assembly at its current session.
I also have the distinct honour and pleasure of welcoming che Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. The Secretary-General has long been a courageous advocate of the strategies for peace that can build enduring collective security throughout the world. He has played a critical role in the alleviation of regional conflicts, one that has contributed so significantly to the new positive atmosphere in international relations.
The timely award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces reflects the universal awareness of the recognition of the crucial role the United Nations plays in promoting peace, security and disarmament. As the Secretary-General himself noted just a few days ago, "Thib is a time of pride for the United Nations. We have witnessed a vindication of the concept of multilateralism."
The world is truly at a turning-point - in East-West relations, in the alleviation of regional conflicts, in the recovery of confidence in the United Nations itself - and our work should reflect this improved atmosphere in a positive
way. We should strive with more confidence than ever before to build the conditions for peace through more pragmatic and realiatio approaches to disarmament.
The First Committee must show its determination to aeek possibilities for the settlement of major issues in a number of areas such as the need for radical reductions in nuolear weapons, conventional-force reductions, a chemical weapons convention, the protection of the non-proliferation régime, limitation of testing, verification and compliance.
Result-oriented resolutions and decisions and a better use of the dis.-mament machinery oannot but improve the potential for United Nations accomplishments. In short* we have a responsibility to speak* to a greater degree than ever before* with one voice through consensus resolutions.
The tenth anniversary of Disarmament Week also provides us with an opportune moment for some deeper reflection on the nature of peace.
It is not likely that disarmament will come about because there are too many weapons. It is not likely that economic and social development will be accomplished because there is starvation. Stronger motivations are required to build the conditions for peace.
It seems to me that the development of this motivation will come from a greater recognition of what the "common ground" of our planet means. This past decade* especially* has revealed the physical* security* economic and social connections that increasingly affect modern life. We now say that the world is an "interdependent" place. That is* in fact* a very pragmatic analysis of the world. The power of nuclear weapons has made us all vulnerable to annihilation, so -logically - we must co-operate to reduce that threat. Economic systems* commodity prices* resource development in one part of the world are now critically affected by policies in other parts of the world.
In short, science and technology have made evident the integral relationships that dominate the components of modern life. The commonality of life everywhere is thus revealed. The earth is one place - subdivided, to be sure* into different nations* cultures and ideologies* yet increasingly seen to be perilously fragile or marvellously productive in ways that no one nation or society aan control. The road map to survival is now clear: political* ideological or economic domination of one group by another must give way to a new range of cultural and societal
(Th» Chairman) valuta to protect the common good of people who stand on "common ground". Pragmatism forces oo-operation.
That does not mean that the now path to collective security will be easily traversed. We all know the obstacle» created by conflicting national positions. There is still too much mistrust. Thore is not yet enough reoonciliation. Fears are still intermingled with hopes. Our vision doos not yet sufficiently transcend national boundaries. Wo need to become more convinced that global strategies are essential to saving the planet.
None the less, it is undeniable that we have entered upon that now path. Wo ought to put our full energy into doing everything possible in order to enter the twenty-first century, now only 134 months away, with more hope, security and development for all. Meeting that ohallengo will lift up our work to give new hope to a world in change.
I now have the pleasure of calling on the Vice-President of the General Assembly, Ambassador Dragoslav Pejic, to address the First Committee.
Mr, PEJIC (Vice-President of the General Assembly)! Permit me first of all, Sir, to convey to you and to the other members of the Committee the profound regret of the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Dante Caputo, who is unable, for reasons beyond his control, to attend this important meeting of the First Committee in the traditional observance of Disarmament Week. He therefore asked me to speak on this solemn occasion. At the same time, let me assure you that I feel particularly happy and honoured to be able to address the Committee in my capacity as vice-President of the General Assembly.
This is the tenth time sinoe 1978 that we have had ocoasior. to observe Disarmament Week. We are doing so in a propitious clime to, since it seems that humanity may well have readied a turning-point in this most heavily armed of all ages. Never before has tho nuclear age witnessed an agreement to eliminate an
entire class of weapons syst ms. Seldom have disarmament negotiations prompted so many expectations as they do today. Even more than before, there is a ground swell of public concern for disarmament reaching across national boundaries and geographical frontiers. The world is becoming interconnected in more ways than ever before. No nation can any longer control its destiny tn an international ethos where hasards in the oceans, outer space and the atmosphere must be forestalled in order to sustain life on Earth.
This is not the time to be complacent, however. It is the time to continue breaking the vicious circle of the accumulation of arms, insecurity, mutual fear and military rivalry. It is the time to replace the pursuit of unilateral security by seeking undiminished security for all. It is the time for devising ways of promoting security that do not use up valuable and irreplaceable resources. It is the time to perceive security as being challenged by both military and non-military threats - a perception which clearly lies beyond the means of any one country or even any group of countries to overcome. It is the time to transform the inevitability of interdependence into a promise of universal oo-operation.
As the institutional embodiment of such co-operation, the United Nations carries a heavy responsibility. It is and must remain the centre-piece of internationalism, wherein bilateralism, regionalism and multilateralism can be complementary and mutually supportive ir. promoting the primary purpose of the United Nations* the maintenance. and strengthening of international peace and security. That this Organization has the potential and capacity to attain that objective is evidenced by the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
There can be no long-term security, no enduring peace in a world where warfare is a permanent feature of life. The wide-ranging nature of modern warfare has put
entire populations in jeopardy, disrupted food supplies, uprooted industrial infrastructures, imperilled ecosystems and forced many to flee in search of mere survival. The phenomenal death toll in those conflicts has claimed more than five times as many civilians as combatants. Immunity from the insecurity of recurrent conflicts and the right to live in peace are minimum entitlements which must be held as sacrosanct by the international Organization founded to save humanity from the scourge of war. Tho resolution of conflicts and conflict situations must become an integral part of tho process of seeking security at lower levels of armaments and armed forces.
of the	Mwniblyl
I cannot emphasize too strongly the need Cor continued efforts to maintain the present course. Our main achievement so far is the creation of a significantly improved political climate - one that holds promise for further progress. But we must take caret all too easily the course could be reversed towards renewed mistrust and acrimony. However powerful the present feelings of hope and optimism, if we are unable to t trengthen the foundation of the recent progress in disarmament efforts wo may lose tho present iwintum, and what should have been a turning-point for tho better might turn out to bo just a temporary relief.
First of all, wo must recognise tho complementarity of tho bilateral and multilateral disarmament efforts. The relationship between those two processes should be one characterised by mutual reinforcement, not by suspicion and rivalry, wo must also duly appreciate tho different, but equally significant, roles of tho deliberative disarmament bodies and tho single multilateral negotiating body, tho Conference on Disarmament. By its very nature, general and complete disarmament as a universal objective is attainable only with the participation of all countries.
If I may be permitted to add a comment in my personal capacity as tho representative of a non-aligned country, I would like to point out that the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, from its inception in Belgrade in 1961, has placed disarmament at the forefront of its efforts, firmly believing that it offers the best way of strengthening international peace and security. We are therefore particularly pleased with the process that la taking place today. Yet I must add that, however welcome and noteworthy, this process cannot escape the fact that it is taking place in the shadow of worrisome, even alarming, international economic problems. International stability is inconceivable without economic progress and development, particularly of developing countries.
Disarmament is never an easy task just waiting to be achieved. Even the most dedicated and carefully prepared attemnts may not always reach the desired goals, as was the mn at the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. However, as often happens in life, a failure may sow the seeds of progress. I believe that during that cession a narrowing of differences took place and that there emerged a more realistic approach to diaarmament, which, although not reflected in an agreed concluding document, will significantly facilitate the solution of some of the current disarmament issues. This is an opportunity that the international community must not fail to grasp.
The United Nations is an indispensable tool in the work for disarmament, and its role in that endeavour should be constantly supported and strengthened. It is no accident that Disarmament Week and united Nations Day are celebrated together. Disarmament Week provides the opportunity for us all to redodicate ourselves to the pursuit of disarmament at progressively lower levels of armament and armed forces, which itself has, as its objective, the achievement of international peace and security.
In the world of tot'^y, as well as in the world of tomorrow, prestige will not be based on the force of arms, but rather - and increasingly so - on the readiness to meet the rightful expectations and needs of the entire international community.
The CHAIRMAN! It is now my pleasure to call upon the distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, to address the Committee.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your very kind words. The observance of Disarmament Week provides an occasion for all Member States to take stock of the current situation regarding arms limitation and disarmament. It invites fresh and serious reflection on the questions: What are the Impediments to arresting and reversing the arms race, and how can those obstacles be overcome?
AE/gt

All through the 10 successive years during which Disarmament Week has been observed it has served as a disquieting reminder of the lack of progress in this most vital field. While disarmament negotiations at the multilateral level have remained stalled, nuclear and other arsenals have grown apace. The relentless advance of weapons technology has added to the quantity of armaments, vastly augmented their destructive quality, and posed the danger of the extension of the arms race to new areas. We have thus seen that disarmament is a field in which to stand still is, in effect, to go backward.
This year, however, we can observe Disarment Week in a more hopeful frame of mind. I have previously commented on the conclusion and implementation of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles and the opening of prospects for a reduction in strategic nuclear weapons. These have been important steps forward. By itself, of course, the Treaty affects only a small proportion of total nuclear weaponry. Its significance, however, lay in moving the question of arms reduction from the visionary to the practical realm. It showed that it is not impossible to breach the wall of mutual suspicion and fear which has stood in the way of arms limitation. It has also confirmed one of the basic propositions of the whole disarmament effort: that security can be sought and attained at progressively lower levels of armaments.
This breakthrough in one sphere has been accompanied by tangible progress in another. The United Nations has been successful in setting in train various processes and diplomatic activities for bringing peace to troubled regions of the world. A climate of conciliation, an earnest search for ways and means of resolving long-standing conflicts, has begun to affect the attitudes and
perceptions of the parties involved. Entrenched positions are slowly giving way to greater flexibility and open-mindedness in the pursuit of just and durable solutions. 
All this is directly germane to our whole outlook on disarmament. With the restoration of a measure of International confidence, public expectations of positive results in disarmament negotiations have naturally increased. With the achievement of understanding at the bilateral level, parallel gains in disarmament at the multilateral level appear much more logical than they did before.
An historic opportunity has thus presented itself to us. Are we prepared to seize it? There is no guarantee against new set-backs or stagnation. Let us not forget that some promising developments in the field of disarmament in earlier decades were followed by long years of paralysis and stalemate. The conclusion of the partial test ban Treaty a quarter of a century ago and the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, with its historic Final Document, are but two examples.
Nor can we dismiss from our minds the inconclusiveness of the third special session, held earlier this year. We cannot, therefore, underrate the difficulties of our task. We know how complex are the issues involved when one strand is almost inextricably entangled with another. But one thing is certain: given the requisite political will, the Gordian knot can be cut.

We can take as a fresh starting point the convergence of views or the narrowing of differences on a number of Issues that was registered at the third special session or is otherwise noticeable. With a pragmatic approach and sustained determination, a strong impetus can be given to the gradual reduction of armaments, both nuclear and conventional. The current momentum towards peace needs to be maintained and carried forward. Let not the improvement in international relations which we witness at present become another passing phase. More than anything else, it is credible progress in disarmament which will make it certain that we are moving towards a new phase of international affaire, promising a better and safer world for all.
The CHAIRMAN: I thank you, Mr. Secretary-General, for your words of Inspiration and wisdom. We very much appreciate your taking time from your aohodulo to come here. We recognize that you have responsibilities that oblige you to leave the Committee at this time, but before you go I want formally on behalf of the Committee and on my own behalf to express our deepest thanks to you for your participation in thia important observance of Disarmament Week.
I now call on the Permanent Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, Ambassador Wilbert Kumallja Chagula, who will speak as Chairman of the Group of African States.
Mr, CHAGULA (United Republic of Tanzania): On behalf of the African States, I have the honour and pleasure to address the Committee on this year's observance of Dirarmament Week. It is gratifying to note that this occasion, among other things, provides us with yet another opportunity to reflect on and underscore the role of the United Nations in its efforts to
"save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
Today, more than ever, the international community is becoming increasingly aware of the potential threats to the survival of mankind. Nothing, however, poses
JP/SY	A/C.1/43/PV.18
17 (Mr. Chaqui», United Republic of Teniente) e greeter threet to the internetionel community then the continuing irme rece, particularly the nuclear arma race. Recent development! in the bilateral negotiationa between the two super-Powers have inspired heightened expectations of a breakthrough in nuclear disarmament and international security. The Treaty between the United states of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - INF Treaty - the first agreement ever which seeks to eliminate an entire class of nuclear weapons, was greatly welcomed and cherished by the entire International community. Regrettably, however, the Treaty covers only a small fraction of the total nuclear arsenals possessed by the two super-Powers. Humanity, thus, continues to live under the threatening shadow of a nuclear holocaust.
In this oonnection, as we observe the week dedicated to disarmament, we should not allow our vigilance for general and complete disarmament to relax. It would be wrong to remain under the delusion that peace and security can be achieved through a strategic balance of nuclear weapons among the nuclear-weapon Powers. For security can be ensured not through strength of arms, but through respect for International law and the principles enshrined in the Unitmd Nations Charter. If we did accept peaceful oo-existence, what justification would there be for our pursuing a path towards our self-extinction?
While we are all gratified by the renewal of hops engendered by the bilateral negotiations between the two super-Powers, we are dismayed by the continued erosion of the effective role of multilateralism in the disarmament effort, we were particularly disheartened by the sad ending of the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Although the session was convened at a time when there was growing momentum towards peace and disarmament, and Indeed
(Mr, Chaqula, Uni tod Republic of Tanzania)
against a background of positive developments in international relations in general, its result was an unexpected anticlimax and a crippling blew to tho role of multilateralism in this area.
The sluggish and disappointing progress in the United Nations multilateral disarmament bodies on tho major priority issues reflects yet another deliberate attempt by tho major Powers to circumvent tho role of this world body in the area of disarmament. We need not remind those Powers that, although tho direct responsibility for tho elimination of tho threat of a nuclear war roots with them, all of us are indeed involved. Every nation, big or small, has not only tho right but also the duty to make an active effort to prevent the ultimate disaster of a nuclear holocaust. We all inhabit one planet, and a global nuclear holocaust will wipe us all out - big and small nations alike. Tho international community cannot, therefore, remain a mere spectator when its survival is continually placed in jeopardy. That is what prompted India, Mexico, Greece, Argentina, Sweden and Tanzania to embark on their Six-Nation Peace Initiative ae a contribution to the world's disarmament effort.
We consider regional approaches to disarmament to be Important elements in the global effort for general and complete disarmament. In this regard, we recognise the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones and regional centres for disarmament as being vital in the disarmament process. Therefore, we request the strengthening of the Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa situated in Lomé, Togo. In addition, we demand particularly the denuclearization of Africa. The Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in Cairo in 1964, constitutes a firm commitment to prevent the introduction of nuclear weapons into
Africa. It it in this connection that we are particularly concerned by the nuclear-weapon capability that the raciat régime of South Africa hat acquired, with the oollueion and collaboration of certain countries. The acquisition of that nuclear capability by the Pretoria racist régime clearly undermines the objective of the African Declaration and indeed frustrates the efforts of African countries for disarmament, peace, security and development. At a time when the people of Africa are preoccupied with major issues of economic survival and decolonisation, they do not wish to see their problems compounded by the introduction of nuclear weapons into Africa.
One of the objectives of Disarmament Week is to bring to the forefront those issues which have continued to preoccupy us all in the quest for peace, disarmament and international security. A well-informed public opinion constitutes a vital element in our disarmament efforts. African States remain committed to the World Disarmament Campaign and other Unltnd Nations initiatives aimed at sensitizing world public opinion to the problem of disarmament. In this regard, we consider it vital to bring to the attention of the world public the new threat facing the people in Africa and other developing countries.
WB/dag
(Mr, Chaqula* United Republic of Taman
Thia ia the question of the dumping of nuclear and industrial wastes in our countries. African territorial waters have been turned into a dumping ground for hasardous waste by some transnational corporations. These corporationa have* regrettably* capitalized on the economic disadvantages of certain African countries by engaging in the illegal buiinm of the clandestine dumping of hazardous wastes without due regard to the effects on human health and the environment arising from such toxic wastes. The problems associated with such dumping include the penetration into human tisaues of toxic waste* either directly through radiation or through contact with contaminated materials. The long-term effects of such radiation are disquieting* particularly considering the fact that a large number of African countries are not technically equipped to detect* monitor and protect themselves from harmful ionising radiation.
The international community should thus resolutely condemn such unscrupulous practices as a crime against humanity and call for an immediate end to the illegal transboundary shipmenta of hazardous wastes. That Africa should bo targeted for the disposal of such wastes testifies to a lack of roapoot for the dignity of Africans and insensitivity to their plight. We hopu that* at the very least* an overwhelming public outcry against* and colloctive condemnation of* such selfish and immoral practices will bo mounted by the international community.
The CHAIRMAN: I now call on the representative of Kuwait* Mr. Al-Zawawi* who will address the Committee on behalf of the Chairman of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. AL-ZAWAWI (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to convey to you, Mr. Chairman* the apologies of my Ambassador* who has been unable to attend this meeting in person for reasons beyond his control. He has asked me to read his speech.
(Mg, Al-tawawl, Kuwait)
"It is a great honour for mo to address the Flrot Committee on behalf of the Croup of Asian states on the ocoaeion of Disarmament Wook, which is st the same time an annual commemoration of the establishment of the United Nations. The Wook alms at creating a climate that will footer progress in the disarmament process and strengthen world awareness of the dangers of the arms raoe.
"For the post few weeks, the media have given considerable exposure to nows of international efforts to save throe whaloo in Alaoka from death under the ice sheet. Interest in the whale drama has been heightened by the reoont involvement of a Soviet loebreakor in the endeavour. The whole thing highlighto the prevalent international climate, especially ir the area of super-Power relations. Such co-operation is cause for optimism with regard to the prospects of co-operation between the two super-Powers and i*s positive effeotr on the affairs of humanity. At the same time, one cannot help wondering whether humans are not more deserving of such co-operation, at least in the srea of joint efforts to save them from the danger of molear extinction? Aren’t people's aspirations after peace through disarmament, security and development worthy of such a rescue operation?
"The inter-relationship between those three oomponents of peace has been a major concern of our Organisation's because, in the aggregate, they represent a basic prerequisite of world stability. The Asian states have also attached groat importance to those throe components, as they embody the objectives of the International Conference on the Relationship Between Disarmament and Development.”
The very first resolution adopted by the United Nations was on disarmaments i.o. on tho peaceful uses of atomic energy and the elimination of nuclear weapons.
(Mt. Al-Zawawi, Kuwait) Today, more than ever, there la an urgent and inareas Ing need to adopt effective disarmament measures. This need arleee from economic, environmental, political and other factors, notably the very survival of mankind which is threatened by nuclear extinction. We, the members of the international community, have major roles to play in progressing toward disarmament: we have to educate world public opinion and heighten its awareness of what is at stake in the area of disarmament. In this respect, we laud the efforts of the United Nations and its agencies in educating numerous sectors of world public opinion and involving them in the Issues of disarmament and the celebration of Disarmament Week.
"The States on behalf of which I speak, are effectively contributing to the task of educating public opinion concerning those Issues. Hen^e, we request the United Nations and its agencies to intensify their efforts in this vital area. On the other hand, we must urge the two super-Powers to continue their positive dialogue. We should contribute to their bilateral negotiations which will strengthen the multilateral disarmament process on the nuclear and non-nuclear levels, internationally, regionally and sub-regionally. This will also prevent the extension of the arms race into outer space and consolidate the principle of multilateralism in solving disarmament problems as shown in the International Conierence on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development. It is evident that every measure that strengthens international peace and security Increases the United Nations efficacy in achieving its principal objectives.
"This places a special responsibility on the First Committee which deals with vital areas of disarmament and international security. We must take advantage of the present favourable international climate to reach agreements on disarmament which will work in favour of development, peace and security,
(Me. Al-Zawawl, Kuwait) •spacially now that international détente is having favourable effects on regional conflicts. For the United Nations and multilateral international and regional negotiating forums, this is an opportunity to make full use of their great potential and realize the noble purposes and principles of the Charter.
"Finally, we hope that the observance of this Week will not turn out to be a futile exercise but will contribute effectively to strengthening peace and security all over the world."
The CHAIRMAN« i now call on the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Ambassador Oudovenko, Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. GUDOVENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian)« The 1988 week of action for disarmament provides an opportunity for us to note with satisfaction that this year it has taken place in a propitious international situation. New political thinking, an increasingly dominating feature in world affairs, has in recent months produced impressive results in the field of disarmament.
The entry into force of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Rang? and Shorter-Range Missiles was a history-making achievement. This breakthrough confirmed that a world free of nuclear weapons and of violence Is a realistic rather than a Utopian proposition.
The Moscow summit meeting made substantial headway in formulating important agreements on disarmament problems. There are now real prospects for the early conclusion of a Soviet-United States treaty on the 50 per cent reduction and on the limitation of strategic offensive arms in the context of compliance with the anti-ballistic missile Treaty as signed in 1972. Implementation of these agreements would vastly strengthen security in the world and give enormous impetus to the disarmament process. Progress has been made in the Soviet-United States talks on the limitation and subsequent cessation of nuclear testing.
Wo are pleased to note that the world community is nearing the formulation of a global convention on the oomprehensivo prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons. The future convention would be s major landmark in the successful resolution of an extremely difficult disarmament problem through methods of multilateral diplomacy on the basis of a balance of the interests of States. Its conclusion should be expected in the very near future) that is feasible, provided that all participants in the talks manifest the political will to roach agreement. Prospects now exist for easing the dangerous confrontation in Europe and reducing conventional weapons on that continent. An international consensus is taking shape in the field of verification, and there has boon substantial progress in promoting confidence and glasnost in the military sphere.
The third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament contributed to a deepening of dialogue. It demonstrated the world community's growing interest in achieving further practical results in the sphere of disarmament, and it increased the breadth of understanding on the vast majority of the problems discussed.
AT»qq pu* hoìoj tnjoHd i(Pt»A il» 30 Uiiua BujmoiB »qq p»q*Aq*uow*p qoiqA '»onqnd piaga *q) 30 Xtqu»»v juiuib, *q; 30 uojiim t»n*^ » 04 piqunon* i|q; 'qoij ui 'qu»wmia*i|p oq p»qoA*p Atqu»«*v t»J»wo «in 30 uot**»* i*TO»d* pjjqq «qq 6upnp pi*q iuopiz]u»6jo tvquMtu»Ao6>uou 30 mnaoj »qq Aq p«uijuoo «va q*qA ‘PIAom «qq 30 tuopvu «qq n* 30 uopuiqq» «qq oq •qdoAq**q*o jwpnu t»PP)ni * quba»ad oq pwu *qq pu* iu»(qoJd quwiuuujp 30 AouibAn «qq 6upq di»q >|HM qu»uiwj»»|a finuui «Tqq pu* ubjidiMD qu»iuvuiA**Ta piaom «qx 'qu»uw»«JP 30 qjoddni uf uojujdo onqnd piaga iinqon oq ••An«t«n 6ujpniouj pu*uimiA**TP 30 *A*qd* *qq ut luopiN p»qR «qq 30 **mAjqo« uojqtonp* pu* uojqmuo3UT
•qq ut piAijqo* uwq **q uiAbOAd mio* ApuioiA q*qq »qou oq piiwid ia* *m
**UOT3*U
30 idnojb Ti» 30 nuopiiod «qq 6up»utpao-od pu* «qAOjj» Ajeqq funood '*»q*qs buoni iqiiAiqu) 30 wuiiiq • Buypujj A03 uinAO3 v ©qui BujagaB ij iuon>N piqjun •MA '*A|*33* t*uoTq*uA*quT ut A;njqiqo|p»jd pu* ***uu*do 'qaóuaiiB ‘6uTpu*q*A»pun linqnn pu* •ou*PT3Uoo Àq p«iTA»qo*A*qo »Aiqdioiq* i*oi3TIod *q*TAdOAdd* u* bqqwjo ut pu* piaga H3j-uod*iA-jMionu • oq buTPHl «ATqoifqo OT*»q 6utA3PU*pt ut «ioa ipnoiidiAi) u* A«id oq uodn p»n*o *t *uoTq«N P»M“O »41
•*uoTq*u il* buoni uop*A»do-oo noto pu* uopo» qu^of qBnoaqq Ajuo p*qo**A *q u*o qumi*uiA**TP qbnoAqq Aqpnoii »out* 'Aqitiioiu « 'AiiAfqoifqo '»a* *qjojj* quiniwziijp p**TI*uoTq*UA»qux **A»q A*td oq »toa »iq*ni*AUT u* **q *uop»N PPTUH »MX
*ii*»ooAd d»*p AibuTiwJoq pu* Butoòuo 'Aptiqi • qu»umiA**Tp •y*w oq qAO33* ■,AqTununuco piaga «qq buT^Tiuiqui 30 MW «Mi oq p*qo*qqv *t eouvqAOduiT A*q*»AB 'uowu 4*qq aoj ’*q pinoq* q) ■• PJd»J •* qou *t *)|l*q qu»uimiA**TP 30 *o*d *qx •uoporuqttp inn 30 >uodv*A 30 wnd)|OO4i mouAoui qijxi nn» »¿»MA •■•nuTquoo *o«a buia* *qq q*qq qo*3 «qq mooia^ao oq Buoam *q pinoA qi qne (M6F"ù•TUJ»'à>¡n'’",^^
¿1 ex 'M/il/t ’O/V
¿/sia
(Mr. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR)
We are convinced that the information and education activities of the United Nations in the sphere of disarmament should be pursued and strengthened. A central place in these global, regional and national activities should be given to objective, full and faithful coverage of bilateral and multilateral efforts to reduce strategic offensive weapons, to bar the arms race from outer space, to achieve a complete and comprehensive nuclear-test ban, to eliminate nuclear, chemical and other weapons of mass destruction, to reduce conventional weapons and frram, to reduce military expenditures, and to resolve other important security and disarmament issues.
The information and education activities of United Nations Member States with respect to arms limitation and disarmament should contribute in every possible way bo a general awareness of the risks inherent in all aspects of the arms race and to the dangers of war, particularly nuclear war. Those activities should help convince everyone in the world that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought, that all war, whether nuclear or conventional, must be prevented, and that in war there can be no victor.
The establishment of a secure world calls for new thinking and innovative approaches to issues of war and peace, and requires the total elimination of nuclear weapons and renunciation of the concept of nuclear deterrence and the policy of the use or threat of use of force in international relations. World public opinion should be concentrated on the development of the disarmament process, the need to prevent the escalation of the arms race, the relationship between disarmament and development, and the need to achieve general and complete disarmament under strict and effective control
In the countries of the Eastern European Qroup, numerous events related to Disarmament Week have confirmed the deep interest of the peoples of those countries in achieving practical results in the sphere of disarmament.
The CHAIRMAN» I call next on the representative of the Dominican Republic, Ambassador Homero Luis Hernandes Sanches, who will ^eak on behalf of the Group of Latir American and Caribbean States.
Mr, HERNANDEZ SANCHEZ (Dominican Republic)(interpretation from Spanish): It is a great honour for me to be addressing the First Committee as Chairman of the Latin American and Caribbean Group on the occasion of the observance of Disarmament Week, in keeping with the tradition established by the General Assembly at its first special session devoted to disarmament.
Tie problem of the arms race affects every man and woman in the world. While responsibility for the arms race is nearly universal, it cannot be viewed as evenly distributed: More than half of the $900 billion spent annually for military purposes is accounted for by the super-Power a. The Industrialized countries, including the super-Powers, account for more than 80 per cent. It has been estimated that since 1945 more than 150 wars have been fought around the world, involving some 90 countries.
The amount of nuclear and conventional military capability already amassed defies rationality and seems to be beyond all logic and good sense.
(Mr. Hernandez Sanchez, Dominican Republic)
All the industrialized countries together share the main responsibility for attaining a new international economic order inasmuch as they are the major beneficiaries of the present one, and this is unfair to the developing countries, based as it is on very unequal terms of trade and asymmetrical interdependencies between North and South. Because of its enormous injustice it constitutes a source of international discord and insecurity.
The developed countries must understand that development and security are two intimately related objectives for the international community. Just as there can be no real security based on fear, there can be no security with hunger, destitution, disease and illiteracy. Those countries must understand that a more just, balanced and symmetrical international economic order in international trade and financial relations is a prerequisite for security, which would render the arms race much less necessary throughout the world.
We are much encouraged by the signature of the protocol concerning the exchange of instruments of ratification of the Treaty between the united States of America and the union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles. That will, for the first time, eliminate an entire category of nuclear weapons and thus establish new standards for arms control.
None the less, we believe that the United Nations, a universal symbol of multilateralism, must play a leading role in achieving world security, as its own Charter prescribes.
Latin America is known and often cited for the Treaty of Tlatelolco and its two additional protocols, which have made our region the first inhabited region in the world voluntarily to renounce nuclearization, permitting only nuclear
(Mr. lernandes Bench»», Dominican Republic!
development for peaceful purposes. For that reason, we have always supported the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free sones.
We welcome the determination repeatedly expressed by the leaders of the super-Powers and the industrialised countries to reach International agreements prohibiting the use and abuse of chemical and biological weapons. However, we are convinced that so long as an agreement has not been reached aa regards prohibition and condemnation of the production and sale of such weapons, thia goal will be difficult if not impossible to achieve.
The Latin American and Caribbean Group avails itself of the opportunity of the observance of Disarmament Week again to assess the work done by the United Nations - particularly the efforts of its Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar - for world peace.
To date, neither nuclear nor highly sophisticated conventional weapons have managed to prevent the more than 150 wars that have broken out since the Second World War.
The theory of predominance by one nation over another, the balance of terror, does not produce security, because fear is not security. Security means peace, and there will never be peace until we have once and for all eradicated the vestiges of hunger, poverty, illiteracy, racism and injustice.
The CHAIRMAN» I now call on the representative of Austria, Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, Chairman of the Group of western European and other States.
Mr, HOHENFELLNER (Austria)t I have the honour and pleasure of addressing the First committee on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States as we observe Disarmament Week.
Ten years ago the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament proclaimed the anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations
(Mr. Hohenfellr^r, Austria) as the first day of the annual Disarmament Week. The observance of Disarmament Week offers all of us the opportunity to reflect not only on the basic aspirations of mankind, which are freedom, justice and peace, but also on other relevant questions such as security.
When Ambassador Pugliese of Italy addressed the First Committee last year, he felt privileged to speak at a time when encouraging signs were emerging from the bilateral negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the reduction of nuclear arms. Twelve months later, we are pleased to note that the improvement in East-West relations has produced significant results, creating favourable conditions for the achievement of further progress in arms control and disarmament issues and in strengthening peace and security.
A breakthrough was achieved in the area of reducing nuclear armaments on 1 June this year, when the united States and the Soviet Union exchanged instruments of ratification, bringing into force the Treaty on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Sorter-Range Missiles and thus eliminating an entire category of nuclear arms for the first time in history.
Furthermore, the United States and the Soviet Union committed themselves to undertake a more difficult step, the conclusion and implementation of the strategic arms reduction treaty, which would provide for a 50 per cent reduction in the strategic offensive arms of the two sides.
The international community has also noted with satisfaction the agreement reached between the United States and the USSR on the notification of launches of intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
Another significant event of the past 12 months was the third special session of the Gene.al Assembly devoted to disarmament. Although it was unable to agree on a concluding document, the session afforded a large number of Heads of State or
(Mr. Hohenfellner, Austria) Government, as well as ministers of foreign affairs, a valuable opportunity to explain their current basic ideas and strategies on peace and disarmament. Furthermore, the useful procedure followed at the special session, in which many delegations continued their intensive search for areas of convergence until the last moment, sharing their thoughts for future disarmament efforts, should not be underestimated. As appropriate, the proposals put forward during the third special session might be explored further, which could lead to new areas of agreement and consensus.
Another security-building effort is in its final stage now in Vienna, where members of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe are engaged in intensified negotiations to bring the Vienna Follow-Up Meeting of the Helsinki process to a successful conclusion.
Mention should be made, finally, of the forthcoming Paris Conference, which will help strengthen the global prohibition of the use of chemical weapons. The convening of the Conference, which is due to take place in Paris from 7 to 11 January 1989 and which has been welcomed by the Group of Western European and other States, should result in the solemn confirmation by all parties of their full adherence to the Geneva Protocol of 1925, and it should also reaffirm the urgent character of the negotiations under way in Geneva with regard to a convention completely banning chemical weapons.
All the above-mentioned events have created a positive political climate that should be not only preserved but strengthened.
The observance of Disarmament Week, which is taking place in a particularly favourable atmosphere, should - more than ever in the past - present a useful opportunity for the promotion of disarmament goals. Tt should also bring to mind the important role the united Nations is playing in helping to restore peace in many areas of the world.
(Mr. Hohenfellner, Austria)
The members of the Group of Western European and other States are ready to continue constructively to contribute their share towards further disarmament efforts, which should enhance confidence, strengthen security, and lead to lasting international peace.
It is with that spirit that we are taking part in the observance of Disarmament Week.
The CHAIRMAN» This brings to an end the observance of Disarmament Week.
The meeting rose at 11,50 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PRO VISIONAL
A/43/PV.86
14 February 1989
ENGLISH
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-SIXTH MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 14 February 1989, at 10 a.m.
President:	Mr. BORG OLIVIER (Vice-President)	(Malta)
-	Resumption of the forty-third session
-	Tribute to the memory of His Majesty Emperor Hirohito of Japan
-	Tribute to the memory of Dr. José Luis Bustamante y Rivero, former President of the Republic of Peru and former President of the International Court of Justice
-	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations [120] (continued)
-	Adoption of the agenda and organization of work: request for the inclusion of an additional item in the agenda of the forty-third session [8] (continued)
(a)	Note by the Secretary-General
(b)	Report of the Secretary-General
-	Development and international economic co-operation [82] (continued)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
88-64019/A 1304V (E)
EMS/4
A/43/PV.86
2-5
In the absence of the President, Mr. Borg Olivier (Malta), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
RESUMPTION OF THE FORTY-THIRD SESSION
The PRESIDENT: I declare the forty-third session of the General Assembly resumed.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF HIS MAJESTY EMPEROR HIROHITO OF JAPAN
The PRESIDENT: Before taking up the items on our agenda for this meeting, I should like to invite the Assembly to join in a tribute to His Majesty the late Emperor of Japan, who passed away on 7 January 1989. His reign, which began in 1926, was the longest in the history of Japan. The late Emperor received the recognition and deep respect of his people, and he will no doubt have an important place in the history of Japan. The international community will remember his reign as an important feature of our times.
I know that the General Assembly would wish me to convey, on behalf of all members, our heartfelt condolences and profound sympathy to the family of the late Emperor and to the Government and the people of Japan on his demise.
As a tribute to the memory of His Majesty, the late Emperor of Japan, I now call on members of the Assembly to rise and observe a minute of silence.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Since last the General Assembly met in this Hall, the world has learned of the passing away of His Majesty Emperor Hirohito of Japan. All friends of Japan and its people have been moved by that sad event. The late Emperor was widely admired and respected, having traversed with his country a tumultuous period in world affairs.


The great strains of mid-century heralded a new era in which the United Nations was called upon to play a critical role. Japan, under the moral leadership of the late Emperor, made a dramatic contribution to that era and is playing an ever-growing role in the work of this Organization.
The late Emperor exemplified an innate dignity. His serenity as well as his wisdom impressed all who had the privilege, as I did, of meeting him. His passing away will, I know, be mourned very widely.
I have already had occasion to extend my personal condolences and those of my colleagues to the Government and people of Japan. A further opportunity will soon present itself. I trust that the Permanent Representative of Japan will relay to his Government the condolences that are being expressed in this Hall today.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Algeria, who will make a statement on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr, DJDUDI (Algeria) (interpretation from French); Africa was deeply moved when, on 7 January last, it learned of the death of His Majesty the Emperor Showa of Japan.
Throughout his life Emperor Hirohito was a devoted servant of the Japanese nation. For the international community he incarnated for many decades the image of a respected leader and the symbol of a people admired for its exemplary progress, which went hand in hand with its praiseworthy devotion to an age-old, rich tradition.
Under the reign of His late Majesty the Emperor Shewa, Japan endured difficult trials with courage and dignity and successfully ensured the dynamic of economic and social development. It went through the stages of progress in an exemplary manner. At the same time, it won the admiration of the international community by preserving the ancestral cultural values of which his Majesty the Emperor Showa was both the custodian and the symbol.
(Mr. Djoudi, Algeria)
His passing certainly represents for Japan the loss of an eminently respected guide, we are convinced that this moral force and this continuity that he
incarnated for so long will make this severe ordeal with courage.
it possible for the Japanese people to overcome
Africa, which has relations of friendship and co-operation with Japan, sincerely shares the mourning of the great Japanese people. The Group of African States in the United Nations extends its condolences and deep sympathy to the Government and people of Japan and to the imperial family.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Papua New Guinea, who will make a statement on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
— ERI (Papua ^ Guinea)» On behalf of the Group of Asian States, I wish to Offer our deep condolences and profound sympathy to the imperial family and the Government and people of Japan on the sad demise of His Majesty the Enperor of Japan. We share the sense of loss of a leader who holds a revered place among his People and the respect of the world community. He embodied the finest traditions and values of a proud people.
We wish to convey our most sincere condolences to the delegation of Japan to the United Nations, to the imperial family and to the Government and people of Japan on this tragic loss.
The PRESIDENT» I call on the representative of Czechoslovakia, who will make a statement on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. ZAPOTOCKY (Czechoslovakia)* Only a short time has passed since we received the sad news of the passing of His Majesty Bnperor Hirohito. Allow me, in my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Socialist States of Eastern Europe, to extend to the Japanese delegation and, through it, to the members of the imperial family, as well as to the Government and people of Japan, our most profound condolences.
(Mr. Zapotocky, Czechoslovakia) onaer the leadership of the late Baperor, Japan - after the tragic events of
the Second World Wär
joined the noble efforts of the United Nations to help The dynamic development of the Japanese economy, science
create a better world.
ana technology, achievea without excessive miutarisation, has become a historical experience, which shoula be used for the benefit of mankina. He regara this as an essential factor of Japan's growing contribution to moaern international relations and to the activities of our Organization.
Hr. President, sharing your feeling of great loss, I shoula like to offer the Japanese delegation, in my capacity as chairman of the Group of Eastern European States, our most sincere condolences on this very sad occasion.
The RESIDENT, I now call on the representative of Guyana, who will speak on behalf of the Group of latln American ana Caribbean states.
Hr. IlGANAtLy (Guyana). As the year 1989 aawnea, one of leasing statesmen maae his exit from the International stage, for of a century he haa commanaea public attention ana awe not only in
the
the
his
world•s
greater part native Japan
hot beyond. His cole haa been a rentable one, fun of accomplishment ana rich historical significance. History .ill surely remoter hi™ as an important actor
the human drama.
in
in
At the time of his death at the age of 87,
the Eknperor was the
longest-reigning monarch on earth, installed as Crown Prince at 15, he ascenaea the chysanthemum Throne as the one hunarea ana twenty-fourth representative of a aynastic line going back more than 25 centuries, unassuming by nature, he was
to
reportedly content with a humble existence, office, a model of constancy and serenity,
eschewing the pomp and circumstance of
he presided over the continuing
Progress of his people. He was thus able to write with unaerstanaable satisfaction in one of his last poems:
(Mg. Insanally, Guyana) "Year by year, as our country
Has recovered from the war
The dawn redwood has grown taller."
There was, however, behind the imperial image a private side to the Bnperor's life. As a man of liberal education, he took pleasure in studying the world around him and in cultivating the values of humanism. He was an avid botanist and biologist who devoted himself to a serious research of nature's mysteries. His writings also testify to an equally passionate interest in all forms of culture. Some of the poems which he has left behind reveal the complete personality that he was - a man of great refinement and undisputed learning.
It is fitting, therefore, that on this occasion we the United Nations should recall his eminence and note his passing. He was, after all, a most distinguished personage whose life shone with many facets. As his biographers are sure to record, he was much loved and revered by his people, for whom he was the living symbol of national pride and unity. Under his inspiring leadership, they succeeded in making Japan today a major economic Power and a respected member of the international community.
(Mr. Insanally, Guyana)
His demise will understandably be much lamented by the Japanese nation, to whom he gave his entire extistence. At this time, therefore, I would wish to extend, on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, our respectful
condolences to Che Imperial family and to Che GovernmenC and Che people of Japan on Cheir prisons loss. We wish Chern well in Cheir CranslCion Co Heisei, a word which, I am told, signifies -Che achievemenc of oompleCe peace on earch and In Che heavens".
The PRESIDENT» i call on the representative of Spain, who will make a statement on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
— ^^ (Spain) interpretation from Spanish)-. On behalf of the Group of western European and Other States I wish to convey to the Government, the people and the imperial family of Japan our heartfelt grief over the passing of Bnperor Hirohito on 7 January.
His figure cowered over Che developmenC in recenC years of Japan, which, wich a cruly praiseworchy will to move forward, has come to occupy an ImporCanC place in todays world. TogeCher wich Che cradiclons of his ancestors, he worked Cowards forming a melclng poe in a counCry chac respeccs ics rich hisCory hue aC Che same time works towards the future.
The current economic developnent of Japan is based on the well-being of the Japanese people, but can also be seen abroad. The rich contribution that Japan makes to developing countries - which is so obvious here at the United Nations - is the result of far-sighted leadership, which during the reign of His Majesty the Emperor earned him prestige and recognition.
Ha Cruse Chac in Chis new scage chac opens up under Che guidance of Baperor Akihito Che people of Japan will furCher Che work of peace, openness and progress started by Bnperor Hirohito.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Tunisia, who will make a statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Group of Arab States I should like to convey our most sincere condolences to the Japanese delegation and, through it, to the Government of Japan and its friendly people and to express our support on the occasion of the passing of the late Bnperor Hirohito on 7 January this year.
The late Emperor devoted his whole life to the service of his people and country and discharged his responsibilities with courage and enthusiasm. He thereby won the admiration and support of his people and the respect of the whole world.
Apart from his responsibilities and official duties, the late Enperor was particularly devoted to scientific research, especially in biology and botany. He published many works and studies. He was also interested in social, educational, sporting and economic matters.
For Japan his demise is a tremendous loss.
During his life he was a very special symbol of peace and prosperity for Japan - and, indeed, he will remain so beyond his death. The Group of Arab States salutes and pays tribute to the memory of the late Emperor. We wish to convey our sincere condolences once again to the people and the Government of Japan.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the United States, who will make a statement on behalf of the host country.
Hi-. OKUM (United States of America): While this Assembly was in recess, my Government was informed of the death of His Imperial Majesty, the Bnperor of Japan. On hehalf of my Government I extend the deepest condolences of the American people to his son, the new Emperor, and to the people of Japan.
(Mr. Okun, United States)
The late Bnperor lived in tumultuous but stimulating times. Seldom in the history of mankind has so much change taken place in such a short period of time: depression, war, economic recovery and development, and great technological progress. Through all of this change His Majesty, the symbol of the Japanese State and of the unity of its people, served as an inspiration for the Japanese people, encouraging change while assuring the continuity of tradition.
Reflecting the industry of the Japanese people, His Majesty was not content with the performance only of his official duties. Rather, he devoted much of his time to science. Indeed, he was a widely respected authority in the field of marine biology and wrote or co-authored at least 12 books on sea animals.
His Majesty was also a devoted family man, whose simple tastes and unassuming manner won the respect and affection of his people.
It is a lasting tribute to His Majesty that, having once been the symbol of the pre-war Japanese political system, he persevered to become the symbol of a peaceful, democratic and prosperous Japan.
His visit to the United States in 1975 is well rementoered in my country. It underscored the fact that two countries and two peoples, once enemies, had become friends and allies. I am sure that achievement finds a special resonance here in the United Nations. It should give us all encouragement as we work towards peace and reconciliation.
We mourn the passing of His Majesty and we will always remember his contributions to the strengthening of relations between the United States and Japan.
The PRE ID ENT: I now call on the representative of Japan.
Mr. KAGAMI (Japan): On behalf of the Government and the people of Japan, I wish to express to you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General and to the representatives of the regional groups and of the host country my sincere
appreciation for the kind words of condolences upon
(Mr. Kagami, Japan)
the demise of His late Majesty
Emperor Showa.
After a heroic struggle, His Majesty succumbed to illness on the morning of 7 January at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo at the age of 87. His 62-year reign of Showa coincided with a period of unprecedented change. He had been on the throne only a few years when the world experienced the world-wide depression. Then there was the catastrophic and deplorable war.
(Mr. Kagami, Japan)
Throughout these years of hardship, the late Bnperor devotedly prayed for world peace and the welfare of the Japanese and fellow nations, which he fervently pursued in his daily life. His decision to bring the war to an end without regard to the consequences to his person remains deeply impressed in the hearts of our people.
Subsequently, His late Majesty witnessed how the Japanese people toiled to build, from the ashes of war, a prosperous nation, its re-entry into the world community of nations and the expansion of its international co-operation.
The late Bnperor took particular interest in international peace and co-operation, of which the United Nations forms an important corner-stone. Thus his visit to this body in 1975 marked a high point in his foreign visits.
Throughout his reign, the late Bnperor followed international developments very closely, and received foreign guests and dignitaries until the very last day before he fell ill. Those who met him and had the opportunity to talk with him often spoke of his great personal warmth and sincerity.
shall convey to the imperial family and to my home Government the thoughtful words of sympathy expressed here today. I am sure that the Japanese people will find them a source of comfort at this time of great sorrow.
I also wish to take this opportunity to express the sincere gratitude of my Government to all those who have expressed their condolences and those who have decided to send their representatives to the funeral ceremony of Bnperor Showa to be held in Tokyo on 24 February.
BHS/edd
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF DR. JOSE LUIS BUSTAMANTE Y RIVERO, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF PERU AND FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
The PRESIDENT: We have also learned with deep regret of the death on 10 January 1989 in Lima of Dr. José Luis Bustamante y Rivero, former President of the International Court of Justice and former President of the Republic of Peru.
Dr. Bustamante y Rivero, a most illustrious jurist, diplomat and author of numerous works on legal, sociological, historical and political subjects, served his country and the international community with distinction.
On behalf of the Assembly and on my own behalf, I express our heartfelt condolences to his family and to the Peruvian Government and people.
I now invite the members of the Assembly to observe a minute of silence in tribute tc the memory of Dr. José Luis Bustamante y Rivero.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): In this Hall where representatives of the world community come together in the search for harmonious formulas of coexistence. I wish to pay sincere tribute to the memory of Dr. José Luis Bustamante y Rivero, recently departed, who, as a distinguished member of the International Court of Justice and President of the Court, as well as former President of Peru and an experienced diplomat, leaves behind a memorable example in support of those noble objectives. The activities of Dr. Bustamante, of whom, as a Peruvian citizen, I am proud, extended beyond national boundaries. In his capacity as a jurist and as President of the International Court of Justice, a main organ of the United Nations, he did outstanding work based on international law as a basic tool in relations among States. The same ideas inspired his mediation in the difference that arose between El Salvador and Honduras, which led to a successful solution.
Throughout a long and fruitful public career, going from President of Peru to President of the International Court of Justice, Dr. Bustamante placed at the service of the international community his qualities of personal honesty and intellectual sincerity and was guided by all the principles of justice and fairness which inspire the work of our Organization. 
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Peru. 
Mr. ALZAMORA (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Peru is deeply grateful for the tribute the Assembly has paid to the recently departed illustrious Peruvian jurist and statesman and for the heartfelt words with which you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General have referred to Dr. Bustamante y Rivero and his contribution to the cause of international justice.
Dr. Bustamante was, above all, a passionate believer in law. Even his brief but outstanding role in Peruvian politics was marked by his advocacy of legal order as the basis of national and international coexistence.
That is why we Peruvians elected him to preside over the democracy which emerged after decades of dictatorship. We wished to build a State of law with social content which would attain a time honoured goal: the reconciliation of freedom and justice. But his deep-seated sense of legal balance did not withstand the violent cross currents unleashed by the recently acquired freedom, the pressure of long delayed claims and the clash of opposing interests, and thus he had to go into exile.
Perhaps because of that, his talents and competence as a jurist found admirable expression in the International Court of Justice. As a result of his election to preside over the Court Peru has attained a triple honour. Bninent
(Mr. Alzamora, Peru) citizens of Peru have held the following posts: President of this Assembly, President of the Court, and Secretary-General of the United Nations, This is without precedent in the history of the Organization.
His long life provided an example of dignity and was a constant plea for democracy and law. Peru is beholden to him, and in his name I express gratitude for the universal significance of this tribute.
AGENDA ITEM 120 (continued)
S«?8®”® TOR “ APK>RTro,«S»T Of THE BXæœES OP THE <M1IB> NMIOæ
^PRESIDENT: Before turning to the items on our agenda for this morning, I should like, in keeping with the established practice, to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/43/995, which contains a letter adressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he informs the Assembly that 10 Member states are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under Article 19 of the Charter:
"A Member of the united Nations which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding two full years." May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information? It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORKS ADDITIONAL ITEM IN THE AGENDA OF THE FORTY-THIRD
REQUEST FOR THE SESSION:
INCLUSION OF AN
(a)	NOTE BY THE SECRET ARY-GEN ER AL (A/43/249)
(b)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/43/249/Add.l)
—e RESIDENT: The Assembly will now consider the Secretary-General's request for the inclusion of an additional item in the agenda of the forty-third session.
In this connection, a note by and a report of the Secretary-General have been circulated in documents A/43/249 and Addendum 1. in his note, the Secretary-General, pursuant to rule 15 of the rules of procedure, requests that an additional item of an important and urgent character be placed on the agenda, entitled "Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission". Owing to the nature of the item, he also requests that the item be allocated to the Fifth Committee for consideration.
Under the circumstances of the present case, may I take it that the General Assembly agrees that the provision of rule 40 of the rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of the General Commitee on the question of the inclusion of an additional item on the agenda, could be waived?
It was so decided,
Tne PRESIDENT: May I also take it that the Assembly wishes to include an additional item to read as follows: "153. Financing of the Uhited Nations Angola Verification Mission", and to allocate that item to the Fifth Coninittee for consideration?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Given the urgency of the matter before us, and unless notified otherwise, the Assembly will again meet tomorrow afternoon to consider the report of the Fifth Committee with a view to approving it as expeditiously as poss ible.
AGENDA ITEM 82 (continued) DEVEIDPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
The PRESIDENT: Regarding item 82, entitled "Development and international economic co-operation", as well as the draft biennial programme of work of the Second Committee for 1989-1990, members may recall that the Assembly took two decisions on those matters at its 83rd meeting, on 20 Decenfoer 1988.
By the terms of decision 43/443, the Assembly decided that it would convene a resumed forty-third session not later than the end of February 1989 so that the Second Committee might consider further and take a final decision on the convening of a special session of the General Assembly in 1990 devoted to international cooperation, in particular to the revitalization of economic growth and development in the developing countries.
Furthermore, by decision 43/448, the Assembly decided to defer consideration of the draft biennial programme of the Second Committee for 1989-1990 to the resumed forty-third session of the Assembly.
In accordance with such decisions, therefore, the Second Committee will meet during the week beginning Monday, 27 February 1989.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
4 1989
UH*SA COu^^vi "
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.3
25 September 1989
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THIRD MEETING Held at Headauarters, New York, on Friday, 22 September 1989, at 10 a.m.
President;
Mr. GARBA
(Nigeria)
Tribute to the memory of Giovanni Migliuolo, Permanent Representative of Italy
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work: first and second reports of the General Committee (A/44/250 and Corr.l and Add.l)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should he submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64102/A	2682V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF GIOVANNI MIGLIUOLO, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY
The PRESIDENT: It is with deep regret that I must inform the Assembly of the death of our distinguished friend and colleague Ambassador Giovanni Migliuolo, Permanent Representative of Italy. Ambassador Migliuolo was known for his admirable qualities and the devotion with which he served his country and the cause of the United Nations. I am sure that I interpret the sentiments of the Assembly in expressing the condolences of the General Assembly to the family of Ambassador Migliuolo. I would also like to ask the delegation of Italy to accept and to transmit to the Government of Italy and to Ambassador Migliuolo's bereaved family our expression of sympathy at this sad loss.
I now invite representatives to stand for one minute in silent tribute to the memory of Ambassador Migliuolo.	’
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: it was with immense sorrow that I learned yesterday of the passing of Ambassador Migliuolo, Permanent Representative of Italy. He was a friend of many years. I remember him with great respect, both as a human being of rare intelligence and dignity and as a diplomat of the highest quality. I recall with admiration the manner in which he presided over the Security Council some months ago, when, despite his failing health, his dedication to the great purposes of the the Organization was evident to all of us.
I wish to join others in paying deep tribute to his memory. May I convey my profound condolences to the Government of Italy and to Mrs. Migliuolo and the bereaved family.
The PRESIDENT:I call on the representative of Guinea-Bissau, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. CABRAL (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): It was with great consternation and sorrow that the African Member States of the United Nations learned of the passing of our distinguished colleague and friend, Ambassador Giovanni Migliuolo. His passing has affected us all, since it has deprived us of a very dear and distinguished friend, and since it reminds us, as has so rightly been pointed out, that death is inevitable and very often considered to be a rebirth. I am sure that all of us, as you yourself have said, Sir, join in conveying to the Italian delegation our most heartfelt condolences, and we ask them to transmit to the bereaved family our feelings of affection.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Bahrain, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. AL-SHAKAR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Group of Asian States, over which the delegation of my country has the honour of presiding this month, and on behalf of the delegation of Bahrain, I too should like to extend to the Government of Italy and to the bereaved family of
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) Ambassador Migliuolo our sincere sympathies and condolences on the untimely death of our colleague, the Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations.
Throughout his career, and since he became a member of our diplomatic family in September 1988, he earned the respect and admiration of us all. He possessed first-rate diplomatic and uniaue human Qualities. He thereby earned the respect and esteem of all those in our Organization who knew him. Of course, all his colleagues in the United Nations will miss him. We in the Group of Asian States are particularly proud of our relations and our friendship with Ambassador Migliuolo.
Therefore, on behalf of the Group of Asian States and on behalf of the delegation of my country, I should like to convey to the Italian Mission to the United Nations, to the Italian Government and people, and to the bereaved family our sympathies and sincere condolences on the untimely death of our friend and colleague. I should also like to express our esteem for and gratitude to him for his valuable contribution to the defence of the cause of the United Nations and of the causes of humanity and justice. Death awaits us all.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Bulgaria, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. STRESOV (Bulgaria): Please allow me on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States to express our deep sorrow at the demise of a highly respected colleague, Ambassador Migliuolo of Italy. Mr. Migliuolo's unswerving commitment and dedication to the noble aims of the Organization are broadly known and highly appreciated by all of us, and have left a deep imprint on the work of the United Nations. His outstanding career as a diplomat has left a no lesser imprint on international affairs.
He will be sadly missed by all of us who worked with him here in New York. Please extend our heartfelt sympathy to the family, relatives, and friends of
(Mr; Stresov, Bulgaria)
Mr. Migliuolo. We should also like to extend our sincere condolences to the Government of Italy on the loss of one its most dedicated envoys.
The PRESIDENTj I call on the representative of Paraguay, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.	.
Mr. CAÑETE (Paraguay) (interpretation from Spanish): It was with profound grief that the Latin American and Caribbean delegations learned the sad news of the passing of our dear friend and colleague. Ambassador Giovanni Migliuolo, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Italy to the United Nations.
Because we came to know him as a colleague in our work and learned to appreciate his great qualities as a human being in our social and working collaborations, the loss of such a distinguished colleague has caused us to meditate pn the fragility of life, which we sometimes tend to forget in the midst of the daily problems that concern us.
As we approach a new session of the General Assembly, the memory'Of Ambassador Migliuolo will make all the Missions of the Latin American and Caribbean diplomatic community feel his loss in a particularly keen way, because throughout the months ahead we will miss his warm personality and serenity in our common endeavours. Ambassador Migliuolo was a worthy representative of Italy, a country with which most of our peoples in Latin America and the Caribbean entertain very close links. His death therefore constitutes a loss not only for the Italian nation but for our whole region.
At this sad moment, on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I should like to convey our most sincere condolences to the Italian Government, to the Permanent Mission of Italy, and to the bereaved family.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Luxembourg, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. FEYDER (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): As Chairman of the Group of Western European and other States, I wish to voice, on behalf of all countries in our Group, our sincere condolences to the widow of Ambassador Migliuolo, to her family, and to the Government and Mission of Italy. Within a year, and for the second time, they have been struck by the untimely death of one of their most eminent representatives. The passing of Ambassador Migliuolo, following a terrible illness, has filled us with deep sadness. It is an immense loss for us all, who appreciated his many qualities, both human and professional.
It was only about a year ago that our Italian colleague submitted his credentials to the Secretary-General of our Organization. It was as Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations that Ambassador Migliuolo crowned his brilliant career, a career during which he served as General Director for Economic Affairs and Director-General for Emigration and Social Affairs in the Foreign Ministry in Rome as well as Ambassador of his country in the Soviet Union and Mongolia and in Egypt. From 1969 to 1975, Ambassador Migliuolo served with distinction as Counsellor to the Italian Mission to the United Nations in New York, for the first tour of duty. He came back to this city a year ago, and Ambassador Migliuolo was determined to take full advantage of his brilliant career and his rich experience, and made an important contribution to the work of our Organization, where he so lucidly saw the changes that were taking place and the full potential that was being made available. But fate decided otherwise, and put an end, all to soon, to his work - the work of our friend and colleague, whom we will always remember.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Qatar, who will speak on behalf of the member countries of the Arab Group.
Mr. AL-KMARI (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group and on behalf of my country, Qatar, I would like to express our sincere condolences to the Government of Italy, to the friendly people of Italy, to the bereaved family, and to the Italian delegation. A brief review of the career of Ambassador Migliuolo gives us the impression that it was a life full of giving, not only on the national, but also on the international, level. He served his country and his people with all sincerity. He had a distinguished role in serving the United Nations through his membership on the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations and his contribution to international law, the law of the sea and outer space. He crowned all that with his work, since last year, as Permanent Representative of his country to the United Nations. Although the period in which he worked as representative of his country to the United Nations was short, he played a major role and left his mark clearly here, and he left behind him so many friends. We have all been impressed with his profound confidence in the United Nations and its principles. We have also been aware of his devotion to the cause of peace and justice.
Italy has a special relationship with all the Arab countries, arising from their geographical proximity and cultural interaction and from their clear position with regard to the primary Arab cause, the cause of Palestine. He reflected all that during his long and rich work. He served Arab-Italian relations in a very good way when he served as ambassador in one of the major Arab capitals, namely Cairo. The Arab Group has lost a friend, one whom they appreciated very much, and the cause of peace and justice has lost one of its believers, one who worked for it.
Once again, on behalf of the Arab Group, I wish to express our condolences to Italy, to its people and its Government, and to the bereaved family. I wish also to express our appreciation for the role which he played during his career in the
(Mr i Al-Kawari, Qatar) service of his country and people and in the service of the United Nations and its just causes. May he be blessed.
The- PRES ID ENT: I call on the representative of the United States who will speak on behalf of the host country.
■ Mr; ~ PICKERING (United States of America): Mr. President, in my capacity as Permanent Representative of the host country, I wish to express py profound condolences and deepest sympathies to the Government of Italy, the Permanent Mission to the United Nations, and to the widow and family of Ambassador Giovanni Migliuolo on his untimely death.
Ambassador Migliuolo was a distinguished diplomat and a statesman whose long career of service to Italy and the international community included assignments in Tunis, Cairo, Paris, Prague and Moscow, as well as his assignment as Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations. I had the good fortune to work with Ambassador Migliuolo here in New York and benefited from his wise counsel and his experience. He was a leading member of our diplomatic community and we will all certainly miss him. I request, Mr. President, that these condolences be conveyed to the Government of Italy and to Ambassador Miglluolo's family.
The PRES IDENT: I now call on the representative of Italy.
Mr; SCIAIOJA (Italy): Thank you, Mr. President. I have been deeply moved by your kind words, by the condolences of the Secretary-General and by the statements of the Chairmen of the regional groups as well as those of the Permanent Representative of the United States. With the untimely demise of Ambassado Migliuolo, Italy has, without any doubt, lost one of its most brilliant diplomats, a man who, in the course of a long and distinguished career, rendered great services to his country. I personally - allow me to add a personal reference - have lost one of my very best friends. We will always remember Ambassador Migliuolo for his'dedication and untiring activity in the United
(Mr. Scialoja, Italy)
Nations, for his first-rate intelligence and high diplomatic skills in leading the Italian delegation to the General Assembly, for his charming personality, and finally, for the great courage with which he fought against his illness until the very end. I will convey your condolences and your expressions of friendship, Mr. President, as well as the expressions of sympathy of the Chairmen of the regional groups to my Government and to the family of Ambassador Migliuolo.
ITEM 8 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK: FIRST AND SECOND REPORTS OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (A/44/250 and Corr.l and Add.l)
The PRESIDENT: We shall begin with the consideration of the first report of the General Committee. I shall refer to specific paragraphs of the report which contain recommendations for consideration by the Assembly.
We shall begin with section I, "Introduction". The General Committee, in paragraph 2, draws the attention of the General Assembly to the provisions reproduced in annexes V, VI and VII of the Assembly's rules of procedure.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of those provisions?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We shall now examine section II of the report, which deals with the organization of the session-
In section II B, which deals with the rationalization of work of the General Assembly, the General Committee draws our attention to recommendations 2, 3 and 7 of the Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations.
In connection with recommendation 3 (c), in particular, the General Committee recommends to the General Assembly that, as at recent sessions, the holding of concurrent meetings of the Special Political Committee and the Fourth Committee should be avoided to the extent possible, and with the necessary flexibility, during the forty-fourth session.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to that recommendation?
The PRESIDENT; We turn next to section II C, which relates to the closing date of the forty-fourth session. The General Committee, noting that the normal closing date would be Tuesday, 19 December 1989, recommends, however, that in view of the financial problems still faced by the United Nations and in the context of the process of renewal and reform under way, and in the light of the practice at recent sessions, no closing date should be decided upon at this time and that every effort should be made to curtail, to the maximum extend practicable the duration of the forty-fourth session.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRES ID ENT; In that connection, I wish to reiterate my appeal to all the Main Committees, without exception, that they should start their work as soon as possible.
Regarding the schedule of meetings referred to in section II D, the General Committee, in paragraph 7, recommends that meetings should start at 10 a.m. promptly both for all plenary meetings and for meetings of the Main Committees during the forty-fourth session.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; In paragraph 8, the General Committee also recommends that in order to avoid the late starting of meetings and as a cost-saving measure the General Assembly should waive the requirement of the presence of at least one third of the members to declare a plenary meeting open and permit the debate to proceed and at least one quarter of the members to declare a meeting of a Main Committee open and permit the debate to proceed. This recommendation is made on
(The President) the understanding that such a waiver would not imply any permanent change in the relevant provisions of rules 67 and 108 of the rules of procedure pertaining to the opening of meetings.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; The General Committee, in paragraph 9, recommends to the General Assembly that delegations should be reminded of the utmost importance of punctuality in the interest of ensuring an effective and orderly organization of work and achieving economies for the United Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; In that connection, I should like to assure the Assembly that I shall be in the Chair punctually at the scheduled time, and I urge the Chairmen of the Main Committees to do the same. I sincerely hope that all delegations will make a special effort to co-operate in that regard.
In that connection also, I should like to digress and pay a tribute to the delegations which were in their seats this morning at 10.05 a.m.; Albania, Australia, Austria, the Bahamas, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, France, Guyana, Iceland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Nepal, Norway, Poland, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Venezuela and Viet Nam. I thank them very much for being punctual.
We turn now to section II E, concerning the general debate. May I consider that the General Assembly approves the recommendations contained in paragraph 10?
The' PRES IDENTt In view of the very large number of speakers already inscribed, I shall urge representatives to speak in the order in which they appear on the list. Those who are unable to speak at the scheduled time will be put at the end of the list for that day.
in paragraph 11, the General Committee draws the General Assembly's attention to the decision taken by the Assembly at previous sessions, namely that the practice of expressing congratulations in the General Assembly Hall after a speech is delivered was prohibited, and recommends that this provision should also apply during the forty-four th session. Simply put, there shall be no congratulations in the Hall after a speech has been delivered.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation?
It • was ~ so ~ deci ded.
The• IRESID ENT» We shall now turn to section II F, regarding explanations of vote, right of reply and length of statements.
In paragraph 12, the General Committee draws the General Assembly's attention to paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 of Assembly decision 34/401.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of those provisions?
It was so•decided.
The IRES IDENT» in paragraph 13, regarding the length of statements, the General Committee draws the attention of the General Assembly, as it did at recent sessions, to rules 72 and 114 of the rules of procedure and to paragraph 22 of annex VI thereof for appropriate action in plenary meeting and in the Main Conmittees.	•
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of those provisions?
ms/s
The PRESIDENT; Section II G deals with records of meetings.
May I take it that the Assembly approves the recommendations contained in paragraph 14?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; The General Committee also draws the General Assembly's attention to paragraph 17 of Assembly decision 34/401, which is reproduced in section II H, concerning concluding statements in the General Assembly and its Main Committees.
Section II I of the report of the General Committee refers to questions related to the programme budget. In that connection, the General Committee draws the General Assembly's attention to paragraphs 12 and 13 of Assembly decision 34/401.
The Committee also draws the Assembly's attention to paragraph 6 of its resolution 35/10 A of 3 November 1980, which deals with proposals affecting the schedule of conferences and meetings and to regulation 4.9 of the Regulations Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, which is found in the annex to General Assembly resolution 37/234.
As members are aware, this has been a serious problem, especially towards the end of the session. If the General Assembly succeeds in curtailing the duration of the forty-fourth session, the target date for the conclusion of the work of the Main Committees and the mandatory deadline for the submission to the Fifth Committee of all draft resolutions with programme budget implications should be adjusted accordingly.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of the provisions contained in paragraphs 16 and 17?
The PRESIDENT.* Section II. J refers to documentation. In paragraph 18, the General Committee draws the General Assembly's attention to paragraph 28 of its decision 34/401.
In section U.K the General Committee draws the General Assembly's attention to paragraph 32 of its decision 34/401 concerning resolutions, to recommendation 3 (f) of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts and to the relevant recommendations made by the Presidents of the General Assembly in the appendix to document A/44/377.
Section II. L relates to special conferences. The General Committee draws the General Assembly's attention to recommendation 6 of the Committee on Conferences, adopted by the Assembly in paragraph (b) of its decision 34/405 and to recommendations 2 (d) and 4 of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts.
I take it that the General Assembly takes note of these provisions?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: In section II.M, concerning meetings of subsidiary organs, the General Committee, in the light of recommendations submitted by the Committee on Conferences, recommends to the General Assembly that the following subsidiary organs of the Assembly should be authorized to hold meetings during the forty-fourth session.* Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa; Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,* Committee on Relations with the Host Country,* Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People; Intergovernmental Group to Monitor the Supply and Shipping of Oil and Petroleum Products to South Africa; Special Committee against Apartheid; United Nations Council for Namibia; and Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves those recommendations?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT» This completes our consideration of section II of this report of the General Committee, which relates to the organization of the session.
We turn now to section III of the report of the General Committee, relating to the adoption of the agenda.
I remind members of the General Assembly that rule 23 of the rules of procedure provides that:
"Debate on the inclusion of an item in the agenda, when that item has been recommended for inclusion by the General Committee, shall be limited to three speakers in favour of, and three against, the inclusion." For your information, the limitation of the number of speakers does not apply to other recommendations.
I should like to stress that at this time we are not discussing the substance of any item.
In paragraph 27, in connection with item 74 of the draft agenda, entitled "Liability for illegal transfer and/or use of prohibited weapons and weapons of substances which cause unnecessary human suffering", the General Committee recommends that the ite^m should not be included in the agenda of the forty-fourth session.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this recommendation?
It•was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: In paragraph 28, concerning item 122 of the draft agenda, entitled "Question of East Timor", the General Committee recommends that the consideration of this item should be deferred to the forty-fifth session and that the item should be included in the provisional agenda of that session.
May I take it that the Assembly approves those recommendations?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: In paragraph 29, in connection with item 153 of the draft agenda, entitled "Environmental protection of extraterritorial spaces for present
(The President) and future generations", the General Committee recommends its inclusion as a sub-item of item 83 of the draft agenda, entitled "Development and international economic co-operation".
May I take it that the Assembly approves this recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRES IDENT: We turn now to the agenda which the General Committee recommends for adoption by the General Assembly.
In accordance with past practice, we shall follow the numbering given in paragraph 30 of the General Committee’s report, document A/44/250, and shall consider together several items in groups, where that seems appropriate. I should like to remind members once again that at present we are not discussing the substance of any item, except when such discussion can assist the Assembly in deciding whether or not to include an item in the agenda.
Items 1 to 6 have already been acted upon in plenary meeting. Therefore, their inclusion has been approved.
We come now to items 7 to 25. I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to include those items in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Next we come to item 26, entitled "Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 27 June 1986 concerning military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua: need for immediate compliance".
May I take it that item 26 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We come next to item 27, "Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity".
May I take it that this item is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Next we come to item 28, concerning the policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa.
May I take it that item 28 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We come now to item 29, entitled "Question of the Comorian Island of Mayotte".
May I take it that item 29 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; I now put before the General Assembly the question of the inclusion of item 30, entitled "Law of the sea".
May I take it that item 30 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Next we turn to item 31, entitled "The situation in Kampuchea".
May I take it that item 31 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Next we turn to item 32, entitled "The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security".
May I take it that item 32 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Next we turn to item 33, entitled "Zone of peace and co-operation of the South Atlantic".
May I take it that item 33 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; The next item - item 34 - is entitled "The situation in Central America; threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives".
May I take it that item 34 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Next we turn to item 35, entitled "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) "•
May I take it that item 35 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to item 36, entitled "Question of Namibia".
May I take it that item 36 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to item 37, entitled "The situation in the Middle East".
May I take it that item 37 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRES ID ENT; We come next to item 38, entitled "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations". May I take it that item 38 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; The next item, item 39, is entitled "Question of Palestine".
May I take it that item 39 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We turn now to item 40, entitled "Current financial crisis of the United Nations".
May I take it that item 40 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: The next item, item 41, is entitled "Question of peace stability and co-operation in South-East Asia".
May I take it that item 41 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The pres ID ENT: Item 42 is entitled "Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on the aerial and naval military attack against the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the present United States Administration in April 1986".
. May I take it that item 42 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.	-
The' PRES ID ENT: We now turn to item 43, entitled "Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations".
May I take it that item 43 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Item 44 is entitled "Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development".
May I take it that item 44 is included in the agenda?	_
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now come to item 45, entitled "Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council".
May I take it that item 45 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to item 46, entitled "Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security".	-
May I take it that item 46 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to item 47, entitled "Question of Cyprus".
May I cake it that item 47 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Item 48 is entitled "Consequences of the prolongation of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq".
May I take it that item 48 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I now invite members to turn to items 49 to 61, relating to disarmament.
May I take it that items 49 to 61 are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We come now to item 62, entitled "Chemical and bacteriological weapons".
May I take it that item 62 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to items 63 to 69, also relating to disarmament.
May I take it that items 63 to 69 are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now come to item 70, entitled "Question of Antarctica".
May I take it that item 70 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Item 71 is entitled "Strengthening of security and co-operation in the Mediterranean region".
May I take it that that item is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now come to item 72, entitled "Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security". May I take it that item 72 is included in the agenda?
The PRESIDENT; We now come to item 73, entitled "Comprehensive approach to strengthening international peace and security in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations".
May I take it that item 73 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; May I also take it that items 74 to 79 are recommended for inclusion?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to item 80, entitled "Question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India". May I take it that item 80 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now come to the Question of the inclusion of item 81, entitled "Question of the composition of the relevant organs of the United Nations". May I take it that item 81 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now come to items 82 to 87, relating to international economic co-operation.
May I take it that those items are included in our agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to items 88 to 115, relating to social and humanitarian Questions.
May I take it that those items are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to items 116 to 120, relating to Non-Self-Governing Territories.
May I take it that those items are included in the agenda?
The PRESIDENT* We now turn to the group of items dealing with administrative and financial questions, items 121 to 137.
May I take it that those items are included in the agenda?
It ~ was'so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to items 138 to 147.
May I take it that those items are included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRES ip ENT* We new turn to item 148, entitled "Observer status for the Council of Europe in the General Assembly".
May I take it that the Assembly approves its inclusion?
It was so decided.	’
The PRESIDBiT* We now turn to item 149, entitled "United Nations decade of international law"..
May I take it that item 149 is included in the agenda?
It was so decided. '
The PRESIDENT* Item 150, entitled "Protection and security of small States", is recommended^for inclusion. May I take it that the Assembly approves its inclusion?	*
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT* We now turn to item 151, entitled "Education and information for disarmament".
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to include it in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT* We now turn to item 152, entitled "International criminal responsibility of Individuals and entitles engaged in illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs across national frontiers and other transnational criminal activities: establishment of an international criminal court with jurisdiction over such crimes".
May I take it that item 152 is included in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to item 153, entitled "Bnergency assistance to the Sudan".
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to include this item in the agenda? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We now turn to item 154, entitled "Operation Lifeline Sudan".
May I take it that item 154 is included in our agenda?
It was so decided.
The PRES IDENT; We now turn to the question of the allocation of items dealt with in section IV of the report of the General Committee. In this connection, the General Committee, in paragraph 31, draws the General Assembly's attention to paragraph 4 of its decision 34/401, which states that "Substantive items should normally be discussed initially in a Main Committee and, therefore, items previously allocated to plenary meetings should henceforth be referred to a Main Committee unless there are compelling circumstances requiring their continued consideration in plenary meeting."
The modifications indicated in paragraph 32 are reflected in the proposed allocation. We shall therefore consider them when we come to the relevant items under paragraph 33.
Before we proceed, may I remind members that the item numbers refer to the agenda in paragraph 30 of the report before us, namely document A/44/250.
May I now invite members to turn to the list of items recommended by the General Committee for consideration in plenary meeting.
Regarding item 18 on the list, the General Committee recommends in paragraph 32 (a) (i) that the Assembly should refer to the Fourth Committee all the chapters of the report of the Special Committee relating to specific Territories so that the General Assembly nay deal in plenary meeting with the question of the implementation of the Declaration as a whole.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; I now invite members to turn their attention to item 28 on the list, entitled "Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa". In this connection, as stated in paragraph 32 (a) (ii), the General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be considered directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that the representatives of the Organization of African Unity and of national liberation movements recognized by that organization would be permitted to participate in the discussion in plenary meeting and that organizations and individuals having a special interest in the question would be permitted to be heard by the Special Political Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves the recommendation of the General Committee?
The PRESIDENT? May I now invite members to consider item 35, entitled "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) ". In this connection, as stated in paragraph 32 (a) (iii), the General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be considered directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that bodies and individuals having an interest in the question would be heard in the Fourth Committee in conjunction with the consideration of the item in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRES IDENT: We now turn to the recommendation of the General Committee on the allocation of item 36 on the list, entitled "Question of Namibia". As indicated in paragraph 32 (a) (iv), the General Committee decided to take note of all the statements concerning this item made at the meeting and to recommend that the General Assembly take note of the statement by the Secretary-General in paragraph 40 of document A/BUR/44/1-
I shall now call on those representives who wish to speak.
Mr. VAN LIEROP (Vanuatu): At the outset my delegation would like to associate itself with the deeply moving sentiments expressed this morning at the untimely passing away of our friend and colleague, Ambassador Giovanni Migliuolo of the Permanent Mission of Italy.
Mr. President, it is only out of respect for your wishes to expedite our work and move us with the great efficiency thus far demonstrated by the General Assembly under your leadership that I do not, at this time, extend our congratulations and express the pleasure of our delegation at your unanimous election. I shall do so at a later date when time will permit an appropriate expression of our sentiments.
With respect to item 36, we should like to suggest that, in order to be consistent with what has been the practice in the past, we might consider adding.
(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu) after the words "take note of the statement by the Secretary-General", the following phrase: "with the understanding that hearings of the organizations concerned would be held in the Fourth Committee". This is the result of some wishes expressed by other delegations in consultations.
Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): My delegation shares the sentiments expressed by the spokesman of the African Group at the untimely passing away of Ambassador Giovanni Migliuolo.
I am sure that what I have to say relates to a secretarial omission or typographical error. My delegation’s recollection of the discussion in the General Committee is that the General Committee decided to recommend that the General Assembly take note of the statements made as well as of the statement of the Secretary-General. Therefore, the last part of the paragraph should read "... the General Assembly also take note of the statements made as well as the statement by the Secretary-General".
The PRESIDENT; The Secretariat has noted the statements we have just heard.
I take it that the General Assembly approves the recommendation as expanded by the representative of Vanuatu and the statement made by the representative of Zimbabwe, bearing in mind the statement of the Secretary-General in paragraph 40 of document A/BUR/44/1.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; May I now invite the General Assembly to turn its attention to paragraph 32 (a) (v) , regarding item 47, entitled "Question of Cyprus".
The General Committee decided to recommend that the General Assembly allocate the item at an appropriate time during the session.
May I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation?
The ERESIDENT: Regarding sub-item (i) of item 82 on the list, entitled "Science and technology for development", the General Committee recommends in paragraph 32 (a) (vi) that a commemorative plenary meeting should be held on Thursday, 26 October, to observe the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development. May. I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation? It was so decided.
The IRES ID ENT: Furthermore, the General Committee recalled that the General Assembly, by its resolution 42/192, had decided that the general debate on the question of its forty-fourth session would be conducted in plenary meeting. May I now invite the General Assembly to turn its attention to paragraph 32 (a) (vii), regarding item 148, entitled "Observer status for the council of Europe in the General Assembly". The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be considered directly in plenary meeting.	'
May I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I now invite members to turn to paragraph 32 (a) (viii), regarding item 149, entitled "United Nations decade of international law". The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be considered directly in plenary meeting.. In this connection, the Committee also decided to draw the attention of the Assembly to the statement made by a representative to the effect that the item might in the future be referred to the Sixth Coiranittee.
May I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to paragraph 32 (a) (ix) concerning item 154, Operation Lifeline Sudan. The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be considered directly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decisions just adopted regarding allocation of specific items for consideration in plenary meetings, may I now consider that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 49 items listed in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee for consideration directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We turn now to the list of items which the General Committee has recommended for allocation to the First Committee.
In connection with item 63 on the list, General and complete disarmament, the General Committee recommends in paragraph 32 (b) (i) that the relevant paragraphs of the annual report of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is to be considered directly in plenary meeting under item 14, should be drawn to the attention of the First Committee in connection with its consideration of item 63.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; May I now invite the General Assembly to turn to paragraph 32 (b) (ii) concerning item 151, Education and information for disarmament. The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be allocated to the First Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decisions just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 26 items proposed for the First Committee in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We turn now to the list of items which the General Committee has recommended for allocation to the Special Political Committee. In connection with item 150, Protection and security of small States, the General Commmittee decided to recommend to the General Assembly in paragraph 32 (c) that the item should be allocated to the Special Political Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt that recommendation? It was so decided
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decision just adopted, may I consider that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 10 items proposed for the Special Political Committee in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to the list of items which the General Committee has recommended for allocation to the Second Committee.
In paragraph 32 (d) (i) relating to sub-item (b) of item 82, Trade and development, the General Commimttee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that a plenary meeting should be held to observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: As regard sub-item (f) of item 82, entitled Environment, the General Committee decided in paragraph 32 (d) (ii) to recommend to the General Assembly that the debate on the proposed 1992 United Nations conference on
(The President) environment and development should be held directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that action on this aspect of the sub-item would be taken by the Second Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to paragraph 32 (d) (iii) concerning sub-item (j) of item 82, Environmental protection of extraterritorial spaces for present and future generations. The General Committee decided to allocate this sub-item to the Second Committee for consideration in conjunction with sub-item 82 (f), Environment.
I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decisions just adopted, may I consider that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 10 items proposed for the Second Committee in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now come to the items proposed for allocation to the Third Committee.
We turn to paragraph 32 (e) (i) relating to item 91, Twentieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development. The General Committee decided to recommend that the observance of the anniversary should be held at a plenary meeting on Monday, 11 December.
May I take it that the Assembly adopts that recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: In paragraph 32 (e) (ii), regarding sub-item (b) of item 104, United Nations Development Fund for Women, the General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme on the operations, management and budget of the Fund should be referred to the Second Committee for consideration under item 86, Operational activities for development.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decisions just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 28 items proposed for the Third Committee in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; We turn now to the list of items recommended for allocation to the Fourth Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 9 items to the Fourth Committee as proposed in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to the list of items recommended for allocation to the Fifth Committee.
In connection with item 38, Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations, the General Committee, in Paragraph 32 (f) (i), recommends that the item be allocated to the Fifth Committee, on the understanding that the report on the United Nations intergovernmental structure and functions in the economic and social fields would be considered directly in plenary meeting and that such a decision should in no way prejudge the
arrangements to be made for the future consideration of the item.
(The President)
May I take it that the Assembly approves those recommendations? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Regarding item 127 on the list, entitled "Joint Inspection Unit", the General Committee recommended in paragraph 32 (f) (ii) that the item should be allocated to the Fifth Committee, on the understanding that the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit dealing with subject-matters assigned to the other Main Committees would be referred also to those Committees.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRES IDENT: Taking into account the decisions just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 21 items proposed for the Fifth Committee in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee?
It was so decided.
'Tine PRESIDENT; Next we come to the items recommended for allocation to the Sixth Committee.
Paragraph 32 (g) concerns item 152, "International criminal responsibility of individuals and entities engaged in illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs across national frontiers and other transnational criminal activities: establishment of an international criminal court with jurisdiction over such crimes". The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be allocated to the Sixth Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly approves the recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decision just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly approves the allocation of the 11 items proposed for the Sixth Committee in paragraph 33 of the report of the General Committee?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now consider the second report of the General Committee, which has been circulated as document A/44/250/Add.1. The report concerns the request by Egypt and Guinea-Bissau for the inclusion of an additional item, entitled "African alternative framework to structural adjustment Programmes for socio-economic recovery and transformation", which appears in document A/44/242.
The General Committee decided to recommend to the Assembly that the item should be included in the agenda.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this recommendation? It was so decided.
Tne PRESIDENT: Tne General Committee also decided to recommend to the General Assembly that this item should be considered directly in plenary meeting.
(The President)
May I take it that the Assembly also approves this recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Taking into account the decision just adopted regarding the allocation of one additional item for consideration in plenary meeting, the General Assembly has approved the allocation of 50 items for consideration directly in plenary meeting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of the second report of the General Committee.
I wish to thank members of the Assembly for their co-operation, which has made it possible for us to complete our task expeditiously.
Each Main Committee will receive promptly the list of agenda items allocated to it so that it may begin its work as soon as possible, in accordance with rule 99 of the rules of procedure.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV. 41 2 Noventoer 1989
ENGLISH
■BDHSHEKBMHHHHBUnBMWMMIMHHnBBKEHKI
Forty-fourth session GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-FIRST MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 26 October 1989, at 10 a.m.
President»
Mr. FEYDER (Vice-President)
(Luxenbourg)
Development and international economic co-operation (82]
(i)	Science and technology for development
(a)	Report of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development
(b)	Draft resolutions



This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, dthin one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64332/A 4217V (E)
In the absence of the President, Me« Feydet (Luxembourg), Vice-President» took • | the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 82 (continued) DEVELOPMENT AN) INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION» (i) SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT
(a)	REPORT OF THE INTER® VERN4ESTAL COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT (A/44/37)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/44/37, para. 3, 1 (X))
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Fre' h)» On behalf of Mr. Garba, President of the General Assembly, I should like to make the following statement on science and technology for development»
At its forty-second session the General Assentoly decided to observe the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development and to consider the item on this subject in plenary meeting. In taking that decision, the General Assembly recognized that the Question of science and technology was in the forefront of international concerns and should be given a prominent place on the political agenda.
One of the characteristics of the current period is the omnipresence and pervasiveness of science and technology. They are everywhere. They have brought about a radical transformation in the way human beings live, work, trade and even fight. There is no aspect of human life that is not touched in one way or another, positively or negatively, by science and technology. Whether we like it or not, the fact remains that humanity cannot turn its back on them. It is also now fairly well established that the industrialized societies have enormously benefitted from their ability to use this immense potential of science and technology for economic growth and development.
MM/jl
(The President)
It is for that reason that, in spite of differences in cultural environnent and difficulties in acquiring technologies, developing societies have to make sore efforts to mobilize science-based technologies as a major mans of economic leap-frogging, fitting the several stages of economic growth into a short space of time. Nevertheless, they have a lot of ground to cover and their peoples are increasingly impatient with their economic plight and miserable poverty. The international community has relied so far largely on aid, investment and trade as the instruments with which to help uplift the economies of the developing world through accelerated growth and development. While these three variables are important, the sustainability of development can be provided only through knowledge. The scientific and technological asymmetry in the world, in particular the gap between the industrialized and the developing societies, is wider perhaps than the already wide economic gap between them. And it is clear that unless the gap is reduced the majority of developing countries will continue to fall behind the industrialized countries and will have difficulties in becoming full partners in world affairs.
(The President)
Until the adoption* in 1979, of the Vienna Program»* of Action international attention in the field of technology had focused primarily on access to and transfer of technology. In other words* technologies were largely left to be developed in the industrialized countries* and developing countries were expected to obtain then - it was hoped on reasonable terms - and adapt them for their own use. It was the Vienna Programme of Action that brought to international attention a new approach and a major new dimension; namely* that* while access to and transfer of* technology on fair and reasonable terms remains valid, it is essential to focus on building the endogenous capacity of developing countries. If developing countries do not have such capacity - which means the ability to choose technologies and to acquire* adapt and utilize them - access will make little difference to their technological dependence and economic underdevelopment. It was this message of the Vienna Programme of Action that added an invaluable dimension to development. It not only remains valid but has become more important.
While there is broad awareness of* and political commitment to* the mobilizing of science and technology as tools of development* many developing countries have been unable to harness technology for development actually end meaningfully. There are several reasons for this and it is important to mention a few of them. As we all know* many developing countries* particularly the least developed countries* most of which are in Africa* are grappling with issues of survival and basic sustenance, such as food* water and shelter. Their meagre resources are already stretched to the limit as they try to meet their immediate needs. We know too that external assistance has been far from forthcoming on the terms and to the extent internationally agreed upon* for example* in the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. As a result* these countries have
(The President) been unable bo mobilise the critical mass of human and financial resources necessary to impart momentum to the process of mobilizing science and technology for development.
The international community is rightly preoccupied with saving the endangered Earth and safeguarding our environment. It is not sufficiently appreciated that choice of technology has a lot to do with the present state of affairs and, more important, is a means of preventing and reversing environmental degradation. Similarly, the building of endogenous technological capability in developing countries can also contribute to the solution of the debt problem, by which we are all deeply concerned, by improving the international competitiveness of the agricultural and industrial products of these countries. There is also a need to enhance the ability of developing countries to assess technologies so that they can make a careful socio-economic assessment of the impact and implications of new technologies, thus improving the quality of their technology-choice process.
All these are critical issues which the Assembly should discuss. Such consideration is particularly timely in view of the ongoing processes in connection with the preparation of the fourth international development strategy, the special session of the General Assembly devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular to the revitalisation of economic growth of the developing countries, the intergovernmental meeting on the least developed countries, and the proposed United Nations conference on environment and development, lb assist us, we have before us the report of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development, which has proposed a comprehensive resolution for our consideration and adoption.
I note that the Committee proposes to choose its substantive themes from selected items on the agenda of the General Assembly and to provide all delegations with comprehensive technology-assessment analyses of the chosen topics to inform
fThe President) and stimulate debate. I welcome this proposal and, in particular, the decision of the Committee when choosing its substantive theme to focus its work on environmentally sound technologies, the participation of developing countries in the development of these technologies and on their effective transfer to developing countries.
I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I am pleased to participate in this plenary meeting of the General Assembly commemorating the tenth anniversary of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development.
The world is witnessing far-reaching developments in science and technology that affect practically every aspect of human activity. In many respects this has been a blessing for humanity by prolonging life, conquering diseases and creating the potential for unprecedented material prosperity. But advances in science-based technologies have also brought about new problems.
One area of particular concern relates to the application of science and technology for military purposes. This now accounts for about a quarter of the world's expenditure on research and development. Over half a million of the world's finest scientists and engineers are engaged in the production of weapons and other specialized military equipment. This not only diverts scarce human and financial resources from use for constructive activities but also contributes, in the long run, to destabilization and political tension. I sincerely hope that the easing of international tensions that we are now witnessing will lead to the redeployment of resources to development activities. 
Modern technologies are also accentuating the already wide gap between the industrialized and the developing countries. In general terms, this poses a serious challenge to the ability of many countries to participate in the modern

world economy. But it also has an immediate and specific impact, for example, new materials are replacing the traditional primary commodities the export of which has long been the mainstay of many developing countries. The decline in the rates of consumption in developed countries and generally low prices for raw materials have aggravated the already serious debt crises faced by many developing countries. 
The use of science-based technologies is one of the major characteristics of our age. The velocity and range of new discoveries are accelerating exponentially and contribute to the growing interdependence of the world. Information technologies, for example, including computers, satellites and sensors have created a kind of planetary electronic nervous system. In addition the time-lag between scientific discovery and technical application has narrowed. New discoveries are now applied in a matter of years rather than decades« and this trend is likely to accelerate.

The world faces a seminal Question: has technology become an independent force, propelled by its own motion and charting its own course, or can it still be channelled, controlled and applied as a means to improve human life? 
It was the Vienna Programme of Action that brought science and technology for development to the forefront of international attention. It spread the message that, while access to advanced technologies generated in the developed world is essential, developing countries should also acquire an autonomous capacity to choose, select, adapt, apply and innovate if they are to harness the full potential of technology as a tool for accelerated growth and development. Ten years after Vienna, that message has become more important and more urgent. 
Central to any efforts to build endogenous scientific and technological capacities is the development of human resources. Without an adequate number of well-trained scientists, engineers and technicians, both men and women, no country has a chance to accelerate its development process.
One of the important developments that have occurred since the Vienna Conference is the growing awareness in both developing and developed countries of the vulnerability of the environment. Since many problems of environmental degradation have been created through applications of science and technology that are ecologically unwise, scientifically sound options and measures based on environmentally safe technologies must be developed on an urgent basis.
Endogenous scientific and technological capacity is also crucial for sustained and sustainable development. It is only through such capacity that developing countries can optimize the exploitation of their natural resources without the risk of damaging the environment. Developing countries must be able to participate in international co-operation for research and development of environmentally sound technologies. And they must be able to benefit from the rapid and effective . transfer of such technologies.

International co-operation in science and technology is not, of course, limited to the environment but cuts across all sectors. The United Nations system, which encompasses such a wide range of expertise and experience, has a pivotal role to play. More than ever before, it is necessary to harmonize the system's activities in science and technology and to channel our resources towards well-defined and coherent objectives. The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination has recently concluded that the future focus of the United Nations system in science and technology for development should Include strengthening the endogenous capacities of the developing countries and assessing new and emerging technologies, and that co-ordination at the country level should be enhanced. 
I wish to assure the Assembly that the executive heads of the agencies and I will continue to enhance inter-agency co-operation and co-ordination in order to provide effective support for science and technology for development. 
The time has come to integrate the building of endogenous scientific and technological capacity into the mainstream of macro-economic management. This will require deliberate efforts to harmonize it with economic, social and cultural forces so that it can be controlled and put to constructive use. This should be an important consideration at the forthcoming special session of the General Assembly on international economic co-operation and in the preparation of the next international development strategy. I am confident that the deliberations at this session of the General Assembly will impart the necessary political impetus to that end. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):  I now call on the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. KABIR (Bangladesh)» As Ambassador Karim is unfortunately busy in another meeting, I shall read out a statement on his behalf.
•It is my privilege to speak before the General Assembly on behalf of the Asian Group on the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development. The Vienna Programme of Action, adopted in 1979, represents an important landmark. It stresses the critical necessity for promoting the linkages between science and technology in the developing countries and their other pressing socio-economic imperatives. The adoption of the Programme by the General Assembly in 1979 in resolution 34/218 was a remarkable achievement, with great potential to strengthen the scientific and technological capacities of developing countries. The Programme of Action also reflected the much-needed political will to address the disparity in scientific and technological capacities.
"Ironically, 10 years after the adoption of the Programme much still needs to be done and achieved. During that period, contrary to what was expected of the Programme of Action, the gap between the developed and the developing countries has further widened. Scientific and technological innovation has actually contributed to that unfortunate evolution. The paradox of all these years has been that scientific and technical advances have actually taken place side by side with an accentuation of human misery. The scientific and technological revolution has largely by-passed the majority of the developing countries. Even today, most of them find themselves in a situation of serious disadvantage in pursuing their own national development goals. They continue to suffer from the underdeveloped nature of their scientific and technological bases. We firmly share the view that during the years that lie ahead the Vienna Programme of Action and, for that matter, the international community, will increasingly address themselves to redressing this unacceptable imbalance.
(Mg. Kabir, Bangladesh)
"In 1979 we did not foresee many of the drastic economic, political and scientific changes that would characterize the 1980s. These include the relaxation of East-West tensions, significant yet at times disturbing evolutions in the international economic environment, the emergence of an unprecedented third world debt crisis, a^d a distinct degradation of our ecosystem and environment. Poverty, starvation, malnutrition, overpopulation, disease, illiteracy and other social ills have further tightened their grip on the globe. For many developing countries, the 1980s have indeed been a lost decade. External-debt crisis, net transfer of resources, decline of financial-resource flow, deterioration in the terms of trade, particularly in the primary commodity trade of th© developing countries, have adversely affected the capacity of the developing countries to undertake meaningful efforts to develop science and technology and ignite economic and social development.
"Conditions in the least developed countries, which are the weakest partners in the international community, hi;ve also worsened during the decade of the 1980s. Science and technology in those countries are still in a rudimentary state, with relatively few practitioners and weak connections between different levels of the scientific and technological system. This serious situation cannot be allowed to take an even more serious turn. The time has now come for all of us to reverse the inexorable process of regression and retrogression that has led to such a situation.
"Nothwithstanding our present problems, the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development still has tremendous potentialities, which have not been fully tapped during the decade that is coming to an end. Looking back, we thus see a tale of promise not redeemed, potential not realized.
16
(Mr. Kabir, Bangladesh)
"We strongly feel that these unrealized potentials should be fully utilized. We must reaffirm our commitment to do so with a view to marching ahead to meet the new challenges of the coming decade. Urgent actions by the international community are indeed needed to close the technology gap between the developed and developing world. What is required specifically is a policy for both developed and developing countries, aimed at the developing technologies and equitably sharing them to answer to the needs of all. In the process, we must strive to integrate the social and cultural advantages of traditional technologies with the efficiency and scope of advanced modern technology, a blending of modern and traditional technologies. To establish proper links between research and development and production will also be an important aspect. The efforts to encourage the application of science and technology to fight poverty, disease, malnutrition, environmental degradation, floods, cyclones and desertification should command all our energies.
Enhanced international scientific and technological co-operation to meet these challenges is a must. An increasing role of developing countries in the development and appropriate application of new and emerging technologies will need special attention. The developing countries should be effectively involved in the development of its various aspects. The process of acquisition, transfer and generating of technology has now assumed critical importance for the developing countries.
“Given these complex challenges, we have closely followed the tenth session of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Oevelopmant. Its deliberations rightly sought to find viable and innovative option to integrate our activities in the field of science and technology with our development efforts in i»th the social and the economic arenas. The Intergovernmental Committee, which at its last session considered the
A/44/PV. 41
17
(Mg. Kabir, Bangladesh)
end-of-decade review in the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action, reaffirmed quite appropriately the validity of that Programme and its basic goals. It recommended focusing in future on strategies to enhance endogenous capacity-building of the developing countries in science and technology for development and also on the relevant role of the United Nations system in this field. The message of the Vienna Programme of Action that endogenous capacity-building is the mainstay of development at the national, regional and international levels is very much as valid today as it was 10 years ago when that Programme was adopted. We should seriously address ourselves to meeting that challenge.
"Bilateral and multilateral co-operation among countries Menbers of United Nations has shown the increasing potential for exchange of technological information and technical co-operation and assistance. This is particularly true of the countries in the Asian region. Countries in that region share the urgent need for more effective world-wide co-operation in harnessing science and technology for development. It is in this context that the United Nations needs to consider more seriously ways and means of lending its support to the accomplishnent of the objective of such co-operation.
"We acknowledge that the developing countries have the primary responsibility for their owi development. However, the United Nations development system, like the international community, has an important catalytic role to play to support the efforts of the developing countries. We hope this support will be more forthcoming in the coming years than it has been in the past decade. Naturally, we are happy to lend our support to the recommendation of the last session of the Intergovernmental Committee that adequate resources on a continuous and assured basis be allocated to foster science and technology for development in accordance with the priorities of
(Mr. Kabir, Bangladesh) the developing countries. The Intergovernmental Committee also stressed the importance of increasing science and technology as an important component of the deliberations of some of the most important concerns of the General Assembly during the next few years. These include the deliberations of the special session of the General Assembly on international economic co-operation, the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole for the consideration of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade, the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, and the proposed United Nations conference on environment and development. It is our sincere hope that the outcome of those deliberations will guide us in our endeavour to strengthen our common efforts in the field of science and technology.
"I should be failing in my duty if I did not mention the conmendable role of the United Nations Centre for Science and Technology for Development in promoting and implementing the Vienna Programme of Action. Over the past years the Centre, in spite of various constraints, has brought about new approaches to co-ordination in science and technology and has imparted new dynamism and a sharper focus on this subject. We do, however, wish to see the activities of the Centre more fully co-ordinated with the United Nations Fund for Science and Technology for Development for more effective utilization of their resources. The Centre's activities relating to the national policy dialogues in endogenous capacity-building in various developing countries and the Advanced Technology Alert System are indeed praiseworthy. We hope that the resource situation of the United Nations Centre and the Uhited Nations Fund for Science and Technology for Development will improve in the coming years, which will help them to expand their role in a significant manner.
"I have tried to underscore sone of our concerns and hopes in the field of science and technology for development. The recommendations of the tenth session of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development are modest but they are important steps forward towards ensuring the integration of science and technology in our development process. Our task is not easy. But we are confident that, acting together, the developing and the industrialized countries alike can make a real and important beginning collectively to face our complex challenges. We sincerely wish and hope that the 1990s will mark a new turning-point for all of us, with concrete results."
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. PASHKEVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic): I have the honour to speak on behalf of Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Poland, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Since the 1979 Vienna Conference we have been witnessing dynamic progress in science and technology, globalization of a number of problems, increasing interdependence of developed and developing countries and their economies, rapidly changing social structures, increases in population, and urbanization. These developments have had a great impact on the process of implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action aimed at promoting the role of science and technology in social and economic development.
Scientific and technological progress has contributed to the rapid development of the economies of many, mainly developed, countries. Unfortunately, the gap between the developed and the developing countries as a whole - particularly in the
(Mr. Pashkevich, Belorussian SSR) levels of their scientific and technological potentials and technologies - has widened.
Although it is generally acknowledged that the Programme’s lofty goals remin largely unattained, its main objective, which ¡coved scientific aid technological aspects to the top of the agenda for multilateral co-operation, remains vital. Today science and technology are becoming an independent and, in the final analysis, decisive factor in world development. That is why we share the view expressed by many delegations at the tenth session of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development that the international comsunity has yet to do some serious thinking in order to grasp the meaning of the qualitatively new situation in the world, to work out appropriate machinery for co-operation, and to mobilize the necessary resources, particularly at the national level, in order to utilize the technology and the inexhaustible intellectual capacity of scientists and experts for the benefit of people, particularly in the developing world.
(Mr, Pashkevich, Byelorussian SSR}
As the Secretary-General of the United Nations has just emphasised, scientific and technological achievements should be utilized for peaceful purposes only. It is necessary to create by joint action the proper conditions for mutually beneficial scientific and technological exchange and the transfer of technologies to less advanced countries.
The opportunity to forge a new consensus on growth and development should not be missed, because the international climate has noticeably improved. New political thinking is on the rise and a heightened sense of responsibility in the international community is evident in the light of such major forthcoming events as the elaboration of the international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade, the convening of a special session of the General Assembly devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular to the revitalization of economic growth and development of the developing countries, and the United Nations conference on environment and development.
Technological potential, access to new and emerging technologies, particularly in the field of environmental protection, and expanding contacts among scientists, governmental mid non-governmental organizations dealing with Questions of science and technology are nowadays essential pre-conditions of development. Technology transfer is of special importance.
In our opinion, there Is also considerable potential for upgrading the level of scientific aid technological development in the exchanges of achievements among third world countries through the setting up of an appropriate machinery of co-operation among them.
The socialist countries are adopting common strategies for their scientific aid technological development, taking into account international specialization and co-operation in science and technology.
<wr« Pashkevich, gyelorussian SSR)
At the sane tine« the socialist countries are deeply interested in integrating' their scientific and technological potential in the world treasury of experience and in collaborating with the developing countries, especially in training. Life demonstrates that.the United Nations is a unique instrument capable of uniting the efforts« bilateral as well as regional and international, of different States. Our countries are in favour of improving the conditions of technology transfer and eliminating artificial barriers on this path.
Within the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Committee cn Science and Technology for Development has a major contribution to make in this regard. Every effort should be made to ensure that the Committee performs the role of active co-ordinator of United Nations activities in the field of science and technology for development.
In the context of practical realization of the purposes of the Vienna Programme of Action fot the forthcoming period, we wish to emphasize specifically the importance of promoting the development of human resources, in particular fay providing the best possible training for experts in science and technology from developing countries and machinery for the transfer of technological achievements and know-how. In particular, consideration could be given to setting up a global network of scientific research laboratories and training centres in state-of-the-art technologies at the best universities end scientific centres of developed and newly industrialized countries.
Technology transfer and assistance in developing technological potential should be properly reflected in the new international development strategy for the 1990s, which should reinvigorate the implementation of the Vienna programme of Action.
Re&iction of the technological gap would be beneficial not only to less advanced countries, but to the world economy as a whole.
The ¡PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the Permanent Itepresentative of Peru, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. LUNA (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a pleasure for me to speak on behalf of Latin America and the Caribbean at this plenary meeting celebrating the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development.
The recent meeting of the Intergovernmental Coamittee on Science and Technology showed that the philosophy and postulates of the Vienna Programme of Action are still valid. The Centre for Science and Technology for Development is playing a creative rble, as is the Advisory Committee as the consultative body in this area.
Ten years have passed since the international community undertook to promote science aid technology for the developing countries. Some progress has been made in carrying out this difficult task. Nevertheless, it must be admitted that because of the extraordinary changes in world production, consumption and trade restilting from the rapid pace of scientific and technological advances, the inequalities between developed and developing countries have been further accentuated. In other words, instead of benefiting from scientific and technological innovation, we the developing countries face the paradox of these	■
innovations exacerbating our marginalisation in terms off the world economy.
The picture is even more gloomy if one views the current international economic climate in the correct perspective, in that this has an adverse impact on the ability of our Governments to promote and finance our science and technology activities. Suffice it to mention in this connection the crushing problem off indebtedness, toe negative «Effect of toe net transfer of resources from the
W/bg
(Mr. Luna, Peru)
developing world, the growing protectionism of industrialized countries, and the continual deterioration in the terms of trade.
In a world of clearly increasing interdependence, where science and technology play a significant role in the efforts of our countries to raise the-quality of life of our people, it is imperative today to move towards innovative methods of strengthening international co-operation.
We know that in the final analysis the task of promoting the development of science and technology is the primary responsibility of our own countries. For several years our region has been improving its institutional capacity in this area. Latin America and the Caribbean now have national, subregional and regional organizations which formulate science and technology policies, and to a lesser extent directly promote research. At the national level, ministerial offices have been set up, and when these do not exist there are national councils and systems of science and technology. However, none of these efforts will be successful unless we redefine the conceptual and operative foundations of the scientific and technological capacity of our countries so that, on the basis of respect for our history and culture, they can genuinely support development.
(Mr. Luna* Peru)
This is how we understand the development of our countries* endogenous scientific and technical capacity« as a response that can generate and utilize the knowledge with which we can face the challenges of development.
The economic crisis* the deterioration in terms of trade* and the external-debt burden have had a major impact on the scientific and technological capacity of the majority of the countries of the region for the past 10 years* since the Assembly adopted the Vienna Programme of Action. To cope with this situation* there must be a programme of reconstruction and expansion of the scientific aid technological infrastructure in Latin America and the Caribbean -	,
and here international co-operation can and should play an extremely important role.
In this connection it is especially disappointing to note - particularly when the region is transfering massive financial resources to industrialized countries -that one of the main pillars of the Vienna Progranrae of Action* the financial system for science and technology for development* could not be put into practice. This item must be taken up again in order to re-examine the role that international financial co-operation in science and technology for development will play during	I
the next decade. I take the liberty of suggesting to the Secretary-General, on	'
behalf of Latin America Md the Caribbean, that an updated report be prepared on the situation of the financing of science and technology for development, stressing the needs of the developing countries, possible mechanisms to channel resources and the role of international oo-operation.
■ We have referred to the urgent need to expand international oo-operation in the firm belief that the challenges to be faced in the next decade will be so great the assistance of the international constunity as a whole will be reauired.	[
(Me. Luna, Peru)
The first of these challenges is to meet the basic needs of our peoples. We believe that science and technology are vital to the elimination of poverty and the improvement of the quality of life. If we hope to incorporate new contingents of the labour force into the productive sector, the development of human resources must be one of the highest priorities in coming years.
The preservation of the environment will be another challenge we shall have to face in the next decade. Fortunately, there are already signs that the international conmunity is aware of this question. We must not forget that the Northern countries' models for industrialization and consumption are the main polluting agents. The transfer of environmentally sound technology and access to research in this field must be the object of future international co-operation to benefit the developing countries.
If we bear in mind that one quarter of the international scientific community is engaged in developing destructive technology, and if each year the expenditure for armaments amounts to the entire external debt of the developing countries, it becomes ethically imperative to eliminate (he technology of terror, because it jeopardizes the very survival of mankind. If we could divert these resources, or part of them, to more noble causes - causes that would promote peace and world progress - science and technology could find its real purpose« to serve mankind, not to threaten its existence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)« I call on the Permanent Representative of Kenya, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. KIILU (Kenya)« The Chairman of the African Group is engaged elsewhere. I shall read out a statement on his behalf.
"The decade of the 1980s was ushered in with urgency and momentous activities centred on efforts to enhance and accelerate the rate of scientific and technological development and the capabilities of developing countries.
(Mr. Kiilu, Kenya)
Amons the moat important of these was the United Nitions Conference on Science and Technology for Development, held in Vienna in 1979, which adopted the \ Vienna Program:» of Action. Others include the fifth United Nations	-
Conference on Trade and Development, held in Manila - UNCTAD V - and the third .General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held in New Delhi - UNIDO III.
"The participation of African countries in the preparatory processes and in the conferences themselves provided them with the opportunity seriously to examine the state of their scientific and technological development and the urgent need for accelerating the rate of scientific and technological development in Africa. At their meeting in Lagos in 1979, the African Heads of State or Government adopted the Lagos Plan of Action, underscoring the crucial role of science and technology in the development of their continent and emphasizing the need for endogenous capacity-building in science and technology.
"The conclusions at that time and today, 10 years later, are identical. Africa has a long way to go in seriously and effectively harnessing science and technology for development. The Vienna Programme of Action, whose tenth anniversary we are commemorating here today, has a lot in common with the Lagos Plan of Action, in that they both emphasize endogenous capacity-building. In our opinion, both Programmes are still valid and relevant, although their implementation has fallen far short of expectations. - Our countries recognize the importance of endogenous capacity-building in science and technology as the corner-stone of our social and economic development, but our efforts in this area have been seriously hampered by the economic crises we have been going through this decade, and by natural disasters that have often forced us to divert resources otherwise meant for
(Mr. Kiilu, Kenya) long-term development goals, like endogenous capacity-building, to solving the immediate problems of our peoples.
"The tremendous achievements in the development of new and emerging technologies and their application have seriously compounded the problems of African countries in their development efforts and the improvement of the welfare and living conditions of their people. The application of the new technologies in the production of goods and services, and their processes and marketing, has changed the patterns of production.and structure of services» that not only has drastically reduced the demand for raw-material exports from Africa but, more seriously, has cut deeply into the African countries’ internal markets, reducing domestic productivity and consumption. The combined impact has been a decline - or in some cases a halt - in productive economic activity, resulting in chronic unemployment, poor social services, and degradation of the environment owing to increased pressure on land in the ceaseless struggle for food» water, energy and material for shelter.
(Mg* Kiilu, Kenya) •
"African countries understand well that the burden of endogenous capacity-building in science and technology for development in Africa primarily lies on them; The global economy has, however, become interdependent and Africa does not intend to close its market for the products from technologically advanced countries as an alternative strategy to stimulating the African economic activity through increasing domestic production and the consumption of goods and services. We cannot embark on an additional Struggle to reinvent the wheel. We therefore seek the understanding of the industrialized countries that interete pendence implies a partnership with Africa and assisting Africa through the tr. isfer of the technology and financial resources it needs to supplement its development efforts. Through the Iagos Plan of Action, the African Priority Programme for Economic Recovery and, recently, the African Alternative Framework for Structural Adjustment, among other things, African countries have taken a tremendous initiative and clearly'”presented their priorities in the global partnership, particularly on science and technology. We are seeking an improved enabling environment for development, especially favourable terms for the transfer of the science and technology we need. Our partners, the developed industrialized countries and the international community, through the United Nations, have an obligation to allow Africa to play a more productive role in the global economy and in enrichment of the interdependence of nations.
"Africa, countries are disappointed by the paradox of the growing importance of science and technology and the poor response they have been receiving. We feel that there is need for a framework to be designed to
(Mr. Killa, Kenya)
■obiIlse the means, the political will and the wisdom to marshal the immense power of modern science and technology for the good of humankind, especially the improvement of living conditions in developing countries. The United Nation* system should become more involved in the development and dissemination of endogenous capacity in Africa.
In this regard the efforts off the Centre for Science and Technology to implement endogenous capacity-building projects in Africa are most welcome. I take this opportunity to emphasize the need for support in the six priority areas identified by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) secretariat for co-operation between the United Nations and OAU in the 1990-1991 biennium programme. These areas ares first, economic co-operation and integration, with special focus on the African Economic Community) secondly, food and agriculture; thirdly, refugees, displaced persons and emergencies; fourthly, environment and development; fifthly, human resources development; and, sixthly, science and technology. The meeting between the OAU and senior official* in the United Nations system which the OAU has organized to take place in Addis Ababa should go a long way towards strengthening the co-operation between the two organizations in all fields.
"^ the implementation off the Vienna Programme, Africa, like other developing countries, is very disappointed that the financing of projects which was so painstakingly negotiated and agreed on during the preparatory committee sessions and at the Conference itself and followed up in many intergovernmental committee meetings did not live up to expectations and is indeed at present temporarily not in operation. While I should like to emphasize that African peoples have to produce their own scientists, technologists* and technicians if they are to solve their own problems,
(Mg. Kiilu, Kenya) multilateral funding systems have a catalytic and supplemental role to play in support of our national efforts. It is our hope that new proposals and commitments to breathe life into a rejuvenated fund, with appropriate structures to satisfy both donors and recipients, will be worked out and .. implemented soon.
"Our Governments have taken the concept of sustainable development seriously. Efforts are being made to find how best it could be applied in Africa, taking into account our difficult economic conditions and the pressure to meet our peoples' immediate basic needs, such as food, water, energy and shelter. The First African Regional Conference on Environment and Sustainable Development, held in Kampala, Uganda, from 12 to 16 June 1989 at ministerial level, made important progress in understanding the concept in the context of Africa's development priorities.
"Africa is ready to contribute its share in international efforts to stop the degradation of the environment. It is determined to avoid the path followed by today's scientific and technological giants in the development of their current global power in the field at the expense of a clean, healthy global environment. It has chosen co-operation in development. Such a development path however entails, among other things, huge investments in Africa's Sain asset, its people. We cannot overlook these facts when it comes to sustainable development and hence emphasize the need for co-operation in the transfer of technology.
"Africa has full confidence in the United Nations and its system and will continue faithfully to discharge its responsibilities and commitments to the community of nations. It is our hope that those that are scientifically and
PKB/ras
(Mr. Kiilu, Kenya)
technologically p«^ ana advantagea »in gather enMg(1 co„cage ^
^ the political «ill „eeaea to aitaot their effort, toward.
the improvement
of humanhina W especially the ioprceoant of the lining conaition, of pwpl. in ^.loping countries without »Xing then pay so exorbitantly for it a. they must today."
«S^sioaj (interpretation from French), r eau o„ the „^ tepresentatiu. of Halm, *. ,lu speak o„ b.hal£ of ^ ^ of ^ and other States.
Mr. BORG OLIVIER (Malta)a It is an honour and a privilege for ne to P®r^cipate in this connenorative session celebrating the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Vienna Programe of Action cn Science and Technology for Development as current Chairman of the Group of Western European and other States. During the past decade there has been increasing awareness by States of the inportant role of science and technology in addressing problems of global significance. Emerging science and technologies are clearly relevant to achieving sustainable socio-economic development and preservation of the earth's environment for all humankind. The concept of using science and technology to promote development emanated from the 1979 United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development» in Vienna. One of the major outcomes of the Vienna Conference was the fact that technology and science were accorded a more central role in international discussions on economic and social matters.
The Vienna Programme of Action» which wus adopted by the Vienna Conference» is based on the idea that the ultimate goal of science and technology is to serve national development and improve the well-being of humanity as a whole. While focusing on strengthening the scientific and technological capacities of developing countries» the Vienna Programme of Action stresses that the primary responsibility for development of developing countries rests upon the countries then»elves. in building endogenous capacity» we must emphasize the productive and effective utilization of existing resources. Specific modes of international co-operation were envisaged to assist in the attainment of this objective» including fulfilment off the obligations of the international community, in particular the industrialized countries» in their bilateral, multilateral end United Nations context.
The 10 years since the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action have provided an opportunity to learn from lessons in its implementation and to seek
(Mr. Boeg Olivier, Malta) viable and innovative ways to bring science and technology into the mainstream of socio-economic development. There has been progress in the development, transfer and application of technologies in many areas, such as agriculture and health. In addition to their own efforts to strengthen their endogenous capacity in science and technology, developing countries have entered into bilateral and multilateral programes of co-operation among themselves. Industrialized countries have at the same time, through public assistance programmes and initiatives in the private sectors, entered into bilateral, multilateral and United Nations development systems assistance to help developing countries in their efforts. Recently a large number of western industrialized countries and other meters of the European Group have significantly increased their assistance programme to strengthen the science and technology capacity of developing countries.
Partly as a result of these co-operative efforts, many developing countries, which before the Vienna Programme of Action were recipients of technologies in their development have now become suppliers of such technologies. The provision of software in microelectronics and the provision of expertise in other fields relating to biotechnology are two areas of new and emerging sciences and technologies in which developing countries have become full partners in international economics. Other examples of the contribution that developing countries have made towards the sharing of science and technology envelopment include the newly industrialized countries and the use of CAD/CAM technologies in traditional sectors.
Many States feel, however, that the decade did not fulfil the hopes it raised with regard to development. Some States claim that the Vienna Programme of Action isolated science and technology too much, without placing sufficient emphasis on
(Mg. Borg Olivier, Malta)
eduction and a policy favouring investments. Other States contend that the fact that it proved impossible to reach a satisfactory solution cn the issue of financing had a negative impact on the work of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development. Also, it is felt that the Vienna Programme of Action in many ways duplicated existing efforts to promote development through science and technology. The large nunber of actors and the limited resources available necessitated continuous efforts towards harmonisation and co-ordination of activities and a careful selection of the tasks for which the United Nations system was most suitable.
The Vienna Programme of Action is an important policy document for many States. There is a need to act in consonance with the mutual interests of both industrialised and developing countries in the accomplishment of a programme that would benefit all humankind. Any change in organization or ways of implementation of the Vienna Programme should aim at a better use of science and technology for development which can be conducted in harmony with the environment and improvement of human life. Efforts should involve a more pronounced role in these matters by the United Nations system.
The new chapter in the implementation of the Vienna Progratmne reauires concerted efforts on the part of all to provide the same kind of assistance as was needed by the international community 10 years ago. But this action, in order to be effective, needs to be based on co-operative efforts on mutually beneficial terms in the application of science and technology for development. Ecually important, we cannot return to where we were 10 years ago and embark upon an over-ambitious plan of action which cannot be achieved.
The.members of the Group of Western European and other States, conscious of the needs and aspirations of developing countries, stand ready to develop concrete
(Hr. Borg Olivier» Malta) work programmes under the bilateral and multilateral assistance programmes and to participate constructively in the consideration of the role of science and technology in the important General Assembly developments referred to in the decisions of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
V
UNITED NATIONS
General ^Assembly
FORTY-FOURTH SESSION
Official Records
FIRST COMMITTEE 15th meeting held on Wednesday, 25 October 1989 at 10 a.m.
_____	New	York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 15th MEETING
Chairmans Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela)
CONTENTS
Observance of Disarmament Week
^,n .,„, „r,t	7 'Z'ZX.hc"",J
............""*.^'‘-^ ........................„
89-63087 4174V ( E)
Distr. GENERAL A/C.1/44/PV.L5 27 October 1989
ENGL ISH
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from Spanish): The First Committee is holding this special meeting in commemoration of Disarmament Week, which began on 24 October 1989. We are hereby continuing a tradition established by the General Assembly at its first special session devoted to disarmament.
It is a pleasure and an honour for me to welcome to the First Committee His Excellency Major-General Joseph N. Garba, President of the General Assembly for the forty-fourth session. May I, on behalf of the First Committee and on my own behalf, congratulate you, Sir, not only on your election to the presidency of the General Assenbly, but also on your diplomatic skills and the great efficiency with which you have been discharging the important responsibilities entrusted to you.
It is also a special honour and a pleasure to welcome to the First Committee the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. I am confident that his vast knowledge, his great experience and his tireless dedication to the promotion of the cause of peace and the noble objectives of the United Nations will contribute to enhancing the role played by the United Nations in resolving the vital problems confronting mankind at the present time.
As you know, and as I said at the outset, it was decided, in the Final Document of the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, that the week beginning on 24 October, the date of the founding of the United Nations, would be devoted, every 2ir, to promoting disarmament objectives and to mobilizing international public opinion in order to create a climate conducive to the promotion of practical measures with a view to the cessation of the arms race and disarmament. This year, the commemoration of Disarmament week is of especial significance because of the particularly favourable circumstances in
(The Chairman)
the international political environment. The new climate of the relations between the major Powers and between the two major military alliances has created a momentum that prompts us to believe that prospects for concrete and effective disarmament measures are more tangible today than they have been in the past. This fact has been present in the minds of the majority, if not all, of the delegations that have spoken in the general debate on disarmament items, which is now under way in the First Committee. There prevails an attitude of cautious optimism as a result of the qualitative changes that we have witnessed on the international political scene.
These new circumstances, it must be recognized, have not yet had an impact on the activities of multilateral forums that deal with disarmament questions. With the exception of work being done in respect of chemical weapons, little progress has been made on other subjects related to disarmament. In my opinion, the best contribution that the celebration of Disarmament Week can make, at the present time, to the efforts of the United Nations in the field of disarmament would be to promote the mobilization of international public opinion, through Governments, non-governmental organizations and the social communications media, in support of the work of the multilateral bodies dealing with disarmament, and in particular, the Conference on Disarmament.
(The Chairman)
Here I would like to stress the idea that the United Nations has the primary role to play in the field of disarmament. As was stated by the Secretarv-General of the United Nations in the message he addressed to the Conference on Disarmament at the beginning of its work this year,
"While issues of arms limitation and disarmament can and should be addressed also at the bilateral, regional and subregional levels, there is no substitute for global measures of disarmament. A number of critical disarmament issues can find durable solutions only in a global framework. This, and the fact that no such solutions have been achieved during the past decade, continue to lend further stress to the necessity of making full use of the machinery to negotiate multilateral disarmament measures." (CD/PV. 484, p. 5) It is therefore necessary to revitalize and strengthen the role of multilateral forums that have activities in the field of disarmament and, more specifically, as I have said, the Conference on Disarmament, which is the single multilateral forum for negotiations in this field. For this purpose, it is essential to give full effectiveness to the relationship of strict interdependence and complementarity between these forums and the smaller bilateral or regional machinery used by the two military alliances. As has been said on many occasions, disarmament is of concern to all countries, large and small, powerful and weak, because the arms race poses dangers to all. It affects the security of all, and its cessation will therefore be of benefit to all.
In the present economic conditions, the relationship between disarmament and development is becoming increasingly evident. The close interrelation of these two objectives requires that the international community make increasing efforts to advance simultaneously towards the attainment of those two objectives, taking into account the fact that the process of economic development will benefit from any progress, from any positive results, achieved in disarmament. The reduction of
(The Chairman) military expenditure, in allowing for the release of sizeable human and material resources, will contribute to the reactivation of the economies of the large developed countries and at the same time will give new impetus to the procesr of development in general and to a renewed and greater recovery in the developing countries.
It is my pleasure now to invite the distinguished President of the General Assembly, His Excellency Major-General Joseph N. Garba, to address the First Com 1 ttee.
Mr. GARBA (President of the General Assembly): As President of the forty—fourth session of the General Assembly, I have the honour and privilege of once again discharging the pleasant duty of speaking on behalf of this uniaue multilateral forum, the largest and most representative gathering of sovereign States that ever existed, representing the hopes and dreams of billions of human beings and, indeed, of mankind as a whole, as we commence the observance of Disarmament Week.
There is no greater honour than to defend peace, the basic principle upon which all other human aspirations are built. And to speak of world peace without disarmament, especially in our nuclear age, is, I daresay, like attempting to build a house from the roof downwards, or indeed, attempting to build a house without a foundation. Not only is disarmament a vital, indeed an essential, factor for the fulfilment of the primary and fundamental objective of the United Nations, which is to maintain international peace and security, it is above all, and auite simply stated, important for mankind's very survival - the survival of every one of us.
Nearly five decades ago, 50 million human beings perished in the most destructive armed conflict in history. That war, the Second World War, was perhaps the last major global conflict in which battlefields, numbers of casualties and the
(The President of the General Assembly)
quantity and auality of destruction could be localized. It was certainly the last world war to be fought and to be won.
In an age of rapid technological advances in almost every field, the seemingly endless quantitative and qualitative arms race has heightened the horrors and cost of war and rendered traditional notions of national security obsolete. As the Palme Commission on Disarmament and Security Issues has observed,
"In the nuclear age, nations can no longer hope to protect their citizens through unilateral military measures. All States, even the most powerful, are dependent in the end upon the good sense and restraint of other nations. Even ideological and political opponents have a shared interest in survival. In the long run, no nation can base its security on the insecurity of others. True security requires a co-operative effort, a partnership in the struggle against war which can only be established through dialogue and reconciliation." As the guest for security, including disarmament, is clearly a universal concern of interest to all countries, it is increasingly recognized that the multilateral forum of the United Nations, committed as it is to universality in its menbership, provides the best framework for intergovernmental dialogue and co-operation in this field. The complex and difficult task, of halting the arms race and moving in the direction of significant disarmament progress will not be easy. A continuous and sustained process that aims at pooling the efforts of the entire international community on the basis of equality and in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter will help advance prospects for progress. As progress continues to be made towards disarmament, the international community should also pay attention to global and regional security concerns. In this connection, we have the pleasure to commend the
(The President of the General Assembly)
Secretary-General for arranging this year the first United Nations regional disarmament workshop for Africa, which examined regional security requirements and perceptions, including related regional issues. My Government was pleased to host this workshop in Lagos in April of this year in co-operation with the Department for Disarmament Affairs.
The forty-fourth session of the General Assenbly and the observance this year of Disarmament Week are taking place against a background of truly remarkable changes in our world. These changes result, as I said at the opening of the forty-fourth session, from the gradual improvement in super-Power relations. While this improvement in super-Power relations has raised much hope world wide, especially in the field of disarmament, there is no cause for undue optimism, as the Ninth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries recently cautioned us. As long as the arms race - in particular, the nuclear-arms race - continues, there can be no room for complacency. Indeed, much work remains to be done to rid mankind of nuclear weapons and, for that matter, of all other weapons, as the means of settling international disputes.
Each year, during Disarmament Week, the United Nations seeks to focus particular attention on the urgent need to promote the objectives of disarmament. This important event provides a valuable opportunity to increase public awareness of the many, multifaceted dangers of the arms race and to encourage an atmosphere conducive to progress in disarmament efforts.
(The President of the General Assembly)
In this connection, I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to launch an urgent appeal to the nuclear-weapon Powers to take substantial steps towards nuclear disarmament and, as a first step in this direction, to stop the further development, testing and stockpiling of nuclear weapons. Such measures would have a major restraining impact on the arms race as a whole and allow the international community to prepare to enter the new century with rekindled hope and optimism for a new world order based on security at the lowest level of armaments and armed forces, more peaceful, just and equal, free from war and want, and hence, more stable.
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from Spanish): I now invite His Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, to address the First Committee.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: A spirit of positive change in international relations is spreading throughout the world. Despite current difficulties and there are many the present situation offers opportunities that must be seized for the resolution of problems that were, until recently, considered intractable. This applies not least to questions relating to arms limitation and disarmament. Member States have always considered these issues in the broad context of their national security. Their willingness to support the disarmament process has thus been inextricably linked to the prevailing political climate and their perceptions of the threats facing them.
With the recent improvement in relations at the global level, new horizons are at last opening for the pursuit of real disarmament and arms limitation measures. The two major Powers and their respective allies must be given credit for the significant steps that they have taken in this regard. The conclusion of the
Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles, and more important, its implementation, have already been hailed as the first truly tangible measure for nuclear disarmament. The recent indications of progress in bilateral negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on a 50 per cent cut in their strategic nuclear forces and on other related matters represent a most welcome reassurance to the international community. 
And yet, despite these developments, unless the present positive momentum in bilateral negotiations on various nuclear questions, including the urgent need for the cessation of nuclear-weapon tests, is soon translated into concrete undertakings, the risks of both vertical and horizontal proliferation will become more acute. The threat of further proliferation of nuclear weapons is a very real one. If not fully addressed, it may well jeopardize the constructive atmosphere that has recently emerged in various international forums and reverse the positive processes taking place in international relations generally. Only expeditious and decisive measures of nuclear disarmament can effectively discourage such a possibility from occurring. I therefore urge the two major Powers to intensify their efforts towards an early conclusion of a START agreement. This could be an important step in assuring the continued adherence of the international community to the principle of non-proliferation, the preservation of which remains one of the essential elements in our efforts to contain the nuclear danger.
I am heartened and encouraged by the breadth of vision and readiness for mutual accommodation displayed by the parties involved in the negotiations on conventional arms reduction in Europe, the most heavily armed region of the world. The outcome of these negotiations will have serious implications for the role of regional disarmament in the pursuit of global security. Each region has its own characteristics, and they must he taken fully into account, Genuine security for all, however, can only be attained if each region is ready to work actively towards
the global goal. I therefore appeal for renewed vigour and determination on the part of Governments in all regions of the world to join in the search for security at lower levels of armed forces and armaments. In this connection, States must devise and demonstrate a resolve to overcome existing differences by peaceful means in order to create the most conducive conditions for significant disarmament measures. 
While the role of bilateral and regional negotiations is self-evident, it is also no substitute for the pursuit of disarmament at the global level. The strengthening and reinvigoration of the multilateral disarmament process is vital, given the global nature of many of the issues involved and their implications for international peace and security. In fact, these processes must be seen as two sides of the same coin and should reinforce each other.
Among the many measures of extraordinary importance that can be taken at the global level, I believe that one stands out as both urgent and immediately requiring a multilateral solutions the complete ban on chemical weapons. The Paris Conference earlier this year served a most useful purpose in raising public awareness of the appalling nature of these weapons of mass destruction. Subsequent negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament and the recent Conference held in Canberra have helped in identifying the problems and charting the course of action for the successful conclusion of a convention. There cannot be any ambiguity concerning our objectives in this regard. The negotiations must be completed expeditiously and be comprehensive in scope. A partial solution is simply not acceptable. Delays, or anything short of a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons, would adversely affect the momentum created world-wide for the prohibition of these deadly weapons and increase the risk of proliferation.
As we are all aware, the problems on the agenda of disarmament negotiations cannot be resolved overnight. However, I strongly believe that recent steps taken


by the international community are in the right direction, but the process must be sustained and, more important, strengthened, I am confident that the annual observance of Disarmament Week will reinforce our commitment to the pursuit of arms limitation and disarmament as an indispensable means of creating a just and peaceful world. 
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from Spanish): This brings to a close the observance of Disarmament Week. 
Before adjourning the meeting I wish to inform the members of the Committee that immediately following this meeting there will be a pledging conference for the World Disarmament Campaign. 
The meeting rose at 10. 50 a. m. 