UNITED NATIONS
A
Genera! Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.127 30 April 1986
ENGLISH
Fortieth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 30 April 1986, at 10.30 a.m.
President;
later: later;
Mr. DE PIN IES
Mr. MAKEKA (Vice-President) Mr. DE PINIES
(Spa in) (Lesotho)
(Spa in)
CURRENT FINANCIAL CRISIS OF THE UNITED NATIONS [150] (continued)
(a)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
(b)	REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a mender of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
" ^.^ r*' ~ ’<» [•., ;.? '70 r< * *: nn ’ ;1 s ; "•
86-64770/A 8337V (E)
pc nv
^oyrner iwn io D!-^-;
The meeting was called to order at 11,10 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 150 (continued) CURRENT FINANCIAL CRISIS OF THE UNITED NATIONS (a) REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/40/1102 and Corr.l and 2 and Add.l and 2) (b) REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS (A/40/1106)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to remind representatives that, in accordance with the decision taken by the Assembly yesterday morning, the list of speakers in the debate on this item will be closed today at 12 noon. I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names soon as possible.
Mr. LEWIS (Canada): Every day there seems to be some unhappy preface to the proceedings in this Hall. Today I should like to express sadness and concern on behalf of my country to our colleagues from the Soviet Union and the Ukraine on the nuclear-reactor incident. We send our condolences to the families of those who may have died, been injured or subsequently affected, and I think it fair to say that we wait with some expectancy and no little apprehension to see what will happen.
There is, as we all know, a massive irony in this resumed session. Country after country mounts the dais - all of us - and with lyrical protestations of commitment, with soaring rhetorical candenzas of fidelity, we declare our eternal support for the United Nations and its Charter.
Even those most begrudging amongst us, even those beset by reservations, acknowledge the enormous contribution which the United Nations makes to humankind.
But we cannot - or will not - foot the bill. We have an annual budget so tiny relative to the needs and issues with which it must deal as to invite universal derision, and we cannot - or will not - meet it. If anyone had said in 1945 that
(Mr. Lewis, Canada) 41 years later we would be in danger of bankruptcy he or she would have been drummed out of the international prophets' union.
But here it is, 1986, and we have a financial crisis of catastrophic proportions.
There have been a large number of impressive and salutary speeches over the course of the last two days. Canada has 10 points to make in this debate, and we shall make them in brisk order.
First, all countries seem to agree with the Secretary-General that withholdings and late payments are the financial nemesis of the Organization. Canada, like others, deplores this pattern and like others we see it as a breach of binding financial obligations under the Charter, whether it be the Soviet Union with its huge accumulated arrears, in particular for peace-keeping operations -Canada, for example, has at this point absorbed over $11 million of those peace-keeping costs - or the new significant holdings imposed by United States congressional legislation, or the unfortunate financial delinquency of 70 to 80 other Member States.
It is wrong and it is crippling, and everyone knows it. We exhort each other to overcome it, but somehow there is a resistance which, through the years, saps the resources and strength and very life of the Organization and has finally plunged us into crisis.
Canada is by no means angelic, but we pay in full and on time. It is admittedly easier for us than it is for some, but no assessed amount is so onerous that it cannot or should not be paid.
Second, in response to the crisis the Secretary-General has provided an extended analysis, on the one hand, and a series of proposals, on the other. They represent in both particulars a considerable and urgent effort to find a solution. We salute the Secretary-General and his Secretariat colleagues for their frantic
(Mr. Lewis, Canada) work over the last three months. The labours of Hercules are dwarfed by the exertions of the 37th and 38th floors. In the interests of harmonious compromise, Canada supports the core package of recommendations. But we must be honest: there is much that concerns us.
Third, the analysis is frankly confusing. We can understand why the Group of 77 wants to go to the Fifth Committee to seek technical clarification. The commentary, which is meant to explain the calculations, the arithmetic conclusions, is occasionally perplexing. The figures have changed with mercurial rapidity as though a conjurer had said, "Now you see them, now you don’t. Now you see them again, and they're different". Could it perhaps be that the accounting systems that we have in place serve as much to obscure as to illumine?
And more.
Certain of the assumptions on which the analysis is based are pretty fragile. The premise that all Member States will pay their full assessed contributions in 1986, save for $4.1 million, seems to us a pretty bold leap of faith. Certainly the Secretary-General himself has qualms, pointing out accurately that, if we should fall short of the declared expectations, January 1987 will be a desperate month indeed.
It is the respectful view of Canada that the Organization at such a critical juncture, even with all the changing circumstances, needs and deserves a more consistent flow of estimates to facilitate a more reliable assessment of circumstances.
Fourth, one of the reasons we make this point so strongly is that the prevailing sense of confusion begets uncertainty, and uncertainty begets skepticism. I think it fair to say - I have chatted with a lot of colleagues -that there are countries in this Hall that wonder if the crisis is real any
(Mr. Lewis, Canada) longer. They wonder if things have not been exaggerated; they look at the updated figures for the Secretary-General's report and see that as of 25 April 1986 $409 million had already been collected and they feel, perhaps understandably, an illusory security.
It comes down, if you will, to a matter of presentation. This place requires a cash flow of $65 million a month. For the first four months of 1986 we have therefore chewed up some $260 million, leaving only $150 million on hand. That is just money enough to get us into July. And if by 31 December 1986 we have collected every dollar projected by the Secretary-General and exhausted every penny of our reserves, we will start 1987 with not so much as a pittance in the coffers.
As the Secretary-General said at the outset of this debate, the crisis remains terrifyingly real. It has simply been deferred. But it is obscured by uncertainty.
Fifth, that brings us to the series of proposals. We genuinely applaud the work that has been done. We know it has been painful - especially painful for the Secretary-General, because no chief executive officer enjoys being catapulted into a process of retrenchment, which is inevitably hurtful to his staff and to the programmes which he administers.
Even so, Canada - mirroring the trenchant arguments put forward by our colleague from Australia yesterday - would have supported further cuts. And, like Australia, we, too, were one of the minority of larger donors that voted for the budget last December. Nevertheless, during the deliberations of the Fifth Committee, we voiced a number of criticisms of administrative and budgetary procedures. And when we listened to the cry of alarm from the Secretary-General on 18 December, when we saw what was happening at the turn of the year, when we learned, early on, what was projected for 1986, we could see, for the sake of survival, no way out other than dramatic cuts.
As it turns out, those cuts, those savings, amount to $60 million. For the sake of consensus, we will support that package. But we are still, as everyone here knows, $46 million short. Canada does not believe that voluntary contributions are the answer, and, indeed, with one prominent exception, they have not been forthcoming. Nor do we believe that advance payments in 1986 for 1987, to relieve the depreciation of the American dollar, will work. And again, only one such contribution has been promised or significantly alluded to.
To the extent that the Secretary-General has been able to generate payment of arrears, we are pleased, excited and grateful for his persuasive tenacity. Eut if, given the prospects for 1987, insufficient arrears flow in, the Secretary-General will surely have to consider, with the approval of Member States, further drastic measures later this fall.
Sixth, we are, however, faced with a conundrum. The Secretary-General's recommendations will get us through 1986, and the High-level Group, with skill, wisdom and miraculous collaboration, will fashion a policy for the future. That is to say, we have a short term and a long term, but, as our colleagues from Japan pointed out yesterday, we have no mid term. Yet the financial crisis does not come in compartments; it is a continuum. What happens, pray tell, in 1987? Even if the recommendations of the High-level Group are truly inspired, and are adopted this fall, even if they establish a scheme of evaluation by which programme priorities can be satisfactorily measured, and even if they provide us with a new and dazzling scale of assessments, it still takes time, with the best will in the world, for implementation. How do we handle the transition? Can we perhaps think of some initiatives for the forty-first session of the General Assembly which will forestall crisis lurching into crisis?
Seventh, that is why we hope, at this juncture, that the Secretary-General's package can be supported, so that we are not made yet more vulnerable. But, let us face it, there are problems. The Yugoslav representative, on behalf of the Group of 77, has indicated that the package as proposed is not entirely acceptable. Clearly, there will have to be consultations. My delegation notes, however, that his speech was, as is his custom, a model of balance and moderation. So, too, were many of the sentiments expressed by my colleague from India, speaking for the Non-A?igned Movement. It makes us hopeful that things can be sorted out.
May I say to my Group of 77 colleagues - I hope not presumptuously - that it was difficult for us as well. There were items that Canada and many other nations wanted to have included, and could not. There are, similarly, items that we would
desperately like to retrieve, and have not been able to.
For example, my Government wishes with all its heart and soul - and I think this is true for many other Governments - to restore the 1986 convening of the Human Rights Commission's Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, and with it, the Working Group on Aboriginal Peebles. Canadians are profoundly concerned that we should sacrifice so important a human rights meeting. We bowed to it only in the interests of preserving the package. If the package is fully reopened, we shall want to negotiate strongly to rescue the Sub-Commission. I say this in no sense as a provocation, but only to share a dilemma. We have all been forced into uncomfortable culs-de-sac. Whatever happens, we must not allow the package to unravel, or the United Nations will appear immobilized - to use the words of the Secretary-General - in the face of
"a threat to the viability and the very integrity of the Organization itself". (A/40/PV.124, p. 3)
Eighth, vital to all our deliberations, then, must be support for the Secretary-General. We have asked him to take the lead. Central to our success is his success. The Secretary-General has a grip on this crisis. He is our historical continuity. To be sure, his mandate derives from the Member States here assembled. But once the broad mandate is conferred, the execution of its provisions is in his hands. No one will follow matters more closely. No one is better placed to take initiatives. No one works harder. Let us render unto the Secretary-General that which is the Secretary-General’s.
Ninth, there are many other specific aspects of the current crisis with whch we might deal. But this general debate is not the appropriate place. Instead, Canada intends in the near future to circulate in good faith a paper to all Member States setting out a number of potential approaches to financial and administrative matters. They will, of course, be tentative and exploratory. Our own minds are
(Mr. Lewis» Canada)
still in a state of flux» which, as some representatives have cheerfully pointed out to me, is a perpetual state for Canadians. We would hope to touch on everything, from our concern for stringent administrative procedures to the possibility of States' encouraging their nationals and private corporations to make tax-deductible donations to United Nations activities and bodies and to ideas appropriate for consideration by the High-level Group. We hope our brief will be useful for discussion. We pretend no more than that.
Tenth, I return to the beginning. All of us, to a lesser or greater degree, believe in this Organization. It is indefensible to let it grind down in financial paralysis. While it is true that any such paralysis has political roots, it is equally true that the great issues of peace, disarmament, development and human rights must not be captive to a squabble over balance sheets. What manner of craziness is that? In a world - to quote the Secretary-General again -
"torn still by conflict and violence, and burdened with want, injustice and the threat of nuclear destruction" (A/40/PV.124, p. 6)
are we to allow something called "arrears" to prejudice the capacity of the United Nations to create a saner and more civilized planet?
If that is the question - and we believe it is - then the answer is conclusive and self-evident.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a statement.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: In the light of the statements that have been made in the Assembly during the last two days and the intense discussions which I know have been taking place outside this Hall, I wish to try to clarify several important aspects of the financial situation of the United Nations at present and during the remainder of 1986. In particular, I believe it necessary to try to



answer a question that is being increasingly posed: have the recent payments of arrears, the prompt payment by a number of Member States of their full 1986 assessment and the pledge of a $10 million voluntary contribution resolved the immediate financial crisis?
In my report I projected that the funding shortfall in 1986 would be $106 million. Of that amount, $76 million related mainly to the anticipated shortfall in the payment of assessed contributions, and $30 million was the estimated additional cost that would arise as a result of the recent depreciation
of the United States dollar.

Although the two amounts can be analysed and addressed separately, this should not be allowed to divert attention from the fact that any accurate assessment of the funding shortfall must include both. This is essential since there are no reserves.
The projected shortfall is premised on the assumption that Member States, other than the major contributor, would pay $520 million in 1986. This amount is equivalent to their assessment for the current year less some $4 million expected to be withheld by some of them for reasons they have indicated in the past.
The economy measures I instituted prior to this resumed session have the effect of reducing the shortfall by $30 million - that is, to $76 million.
As a result of the encouraging response to my appeals for the payment of arrears and voluntary contributions, this shortfall would be further reduced by some $24 million - that is, to $52 million. However such a situation would be reached only if (a) the major contributor paid at least the amount assumed in my report - that is, $143 million - and (b) the other Member States that have not yet paid the equivalent of their 1986 assessment did so fully in the months ahead. There are areas of uncertainty. Whether these conditions are fulfilled will only be known late in 1986.
In these circumstances the need for the further economy measures I have proposed is all too evident. If approved by this Assembly they could reduce the cash shortfall by another $30 million, leaving $22 million still to be covered. Thus, notwithstanding the recent positive developments, further action is required by this Assembly and by Member States in order to ensure that the Organization will be able to meet its obligations in 1986.
I hope it is clear from these remarks that the immediate financial crisis of the United Nations can be managed without bankruptcy this year. But this will be possible only if the Assembly at this session approves economy measures yielding
some $30 million in additional savings and if there is a further response to my call for the provision of additional funds either through more arrears payments,voluntary contributions or advance payment by Member States of part of their 1987 assessment.
I do not wish in any way to underestimate the value of the response which has been made so far to the emergency and to my appeals. The prompt payment by 26 Member States of their full assessment has alleviated the cash-flow problem, which is particularly difficult in the absence of reserves. The payment of arrears and the provision of a substantial voluntary contribution directly assist in reducing the cash shortfall which, as I point out in my report, would remain even after the economy measures I have proposed are approved. The simple fact is that more is still needed. The amount could well increase if arrears should again mount before the end of the year. This must be carefully monitored.
I should like to say a final word of caution with regard to the package of economy measures I have put to this Assembly. It constitutes a fragile balance. Certain measures will be found objectionable by one or more Member States, while different measures will be found equally objectionable by others. We have sought to apportion the curtailments as reasonably as possible among programmes and activities. It will be extremely difficult to achieve the requisite savings if the balance is upset. I would urge that, in dealing with all aspects of the immediate financial crisis and, later on, the larger, long-term problem of the budget, all Member States be guided by the overriding importance of preserving and strengthening the capacity of the United Nations.
Mr. SIDDIKY (Bangladesh): We are meeting here today at the request of the Secretary-General to discuss what he has called the most serious financial crisis in the history of the United Nations. We do so with serious concern and genuine frustration. Only a few months ago we commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations through the expression of strong support for
(Mr. Siddiky, Bangladesh) this world body personally conveyed at the highest levels. Today we are facing a situation which is threatening the viability and the very integrity of the United Nations itself.
The Secretary-General has very rightly icted under Article 99 of the United Nations Charter. At the conclusion of the main segment of the fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly he warned us of the gravity of the problem. In such a situation one tends to become philosophical, particularly if one is in my position. Scores of Member States like us who face serious resource constraints have seen it appropriate to live up to their Charter obligation, and you find it inexplicable why a few who are well endowed in all respects fail to keep such an obligation, which they themselves incorporated in the Charter in the first place.
However, we believe that the current financial crisis of the United Nations needs much more than a philosophical approach. We need to have a hard-nosed look at the situation both in its shorter- and longer-term implications. My delegation believes that the statement by the Secretary-General on Monday and his report, along with the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) and other supporting documents available before this resumed session, will facilitate our examination of the matter and an agreement regarding possible solutions.
While addressing the question my delegation would like first to convey our full support for the statement made by the Chairman of the Group of 77 yesterday. The United Nations has been facing liquidity crises of one sort or the other since the 1960s, but never on such a scale as to have profound implications for the viability of the Organization. My delegation cannot help regretting that an item of this sort has been on the agenda of the United Nations year after year despite there being repeated appeals by the General Assembly inviting Member States to
comply with their financial obligations - all the more so because the solution of the problem does indeed remain very much within the reach of the Member States in the sense that faithful adherence to the Charter leaves no room for such a financial emergency as the United Nations faces today.
The present crisis is one of insufficiency of funds arising out of an accumulation of deficit over the years. The deficit is due to the withholding of assessed contributions by some Member States in utter disregard of their Charter obligations to bear financial responsibilities as determined on the basis of the principle of capacity to pay.*
* Mr. Makeka (Lesotho), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The present deficit of the United Nations has reached such a stage as to make it impossible to overcome by having recourse to various reserves such as the Working Capital Fund and the Special Account. Such a situation cannot continue. While in the short run we are to address the problem of meeting the immediate financial requirements of the world body to run its day-to-day administration, we cannot be oblivious of the broader problem of disagreement among Member States on how to finance and utilize the Organization. To our mind, the crisis that the United Nations faces today is symptomatic of a deeper problem born out of an erosion of faith in the concept of multilateralism. It would, therefore, be pertinent to term the present problem political rather than financial.
As the present crisis is primarily the consequence of default committed by a large number of Member States in payment of their dues to the United Nations, it should be viewed more as a problem emanating from state decisions than a problem of finding resources. My delegation believes that the crux of the problem is the apparent unwillingness of some Member States to comply fully with their financial obligations as determined by the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 17 (2) of the Charter. There is a tendency on the part of some Member States to assign precedence to the exercise of national discretion over the obligation arising out of the Charter in matters of payment of dues to the United Nations. One cannot lose sight of the fact that by virtue of the very exercise of national discretion these States became parties to the Charter in the first place. Once a State is party to the Charter, obligations arising thereunder should, in our view, be the overriding principle guiding State actions vis-à-vis the United Nations. Collective security, the principle for which the United Nations stands, follows from an acceptance by all parties of collective responsibility, including financial responsibility. We believe that there is no room for responding to these
(Mr. Siddiky, Bangladesh) responsibilities selectively, contrary to what some Member States would have us believe.
As we reiterated in the Fifth Committee last November, Bangladesh has always taken a principled stand in matters of obligations arising out of its being a party to the United Nations Charter and I believe this is the case with most of us present here. In our view, the solution to the problem lies in the perception of Member States as to the kind of priority to be assigned to the matter of dues payable to the United Nations. We view this obligation to be indivisible from any other obligations arising out of the Charter. What is inadmissible is the fact that some Member States are withholding their assessed contributions to the United Nations on the grounds of national positions of principle, or as a result of decisions taken at the national level, which is directly in contravention of the Charter.
My delegation is quite aware of the fact that there is a serious disagreement among Member States with regard to the budgetary process of allocation and utilization of the resources of the United Nations. But this disagreement can only be sorted out through negotiations. It cannot be solved by unilateral action, by withholding dues, thereby disrupting the budgetary process of the Organization. It is, therefore, imperative that a constructive dialogue develop to find a lasting solution to these problems. In this context, my delegation looks forward to the outcome of the work done by the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts established by the General Assembly to review the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations and hopes that some practicable solution will be found. We believe that it would, therefore, be imprudent to pass a verdict on the administrative and budgetary matters of the United Nations without first having seen the results of such a review process come to fruition.
Let me emphasize at this point that my delegation strongly supports the view that programme budgeting in the United Nations should aim at maximum cost efficiency. In our statement last October in the general debate on the United Nations budget for 1986-87, we stated that the Secretary-General's policy of "maximum budgetary restraint" could be conceded exclusively as a measure to improve resource management and not as a basis for curtailment or deferment of the mandated programme. Furthermore, given the fact that the budget was prepared within the strict parameters of the medium-term plan, there could hardly be any scope for redeployment by definition. Even if there were, it should be limited and not go beyond the point at which one has to seek additional resources. An activity which is duly mandated cannot summarily be deferred or terminated simply because of lack of resources or for any other technical reasons. If we are true to our commitment to the Charter, our concern need not be the size or rate of growth of the budget, but the extent of benefit that is derived from the programmes.
As to the measures which are urgently required to be taken so as to procure the necessary funds to tide over the current liquidity crisis, we endorse the actions suggested by the Secretary-General in paragraph 36 of his report. We would also like to join in the appeal made by the Secretary-General to those Member States that have not yet settled their account to do so expeditiously.
As to the measures proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 20 to 25, we think it would be appropriate to have detailed information so as to facilitate decision-making by the General Assembly. Apparently the report contains, as it were, a package. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) has also recommended that these proposed measures "should be seen as a package". We, however, believe that any judgement on our part should be based on a thorough and well-considered examination of all the measures proposed, particularly
(Mr. Siddiky, Bangladesh) taking into account other possible options or alternatives. One of these, we believe, would be to apply for loans in the commercial market. Another could be to borrow for a short period from other organizations of the United Nations system which have a better liquidity situation at the moment.
While offering my delegation's full support to the President's efforts and those of the Secretary-General to meet the present financial crisis, my delegation would like to emphasize the point that support for the United Nations or absence of it should not be guided by narrow and perverted considerations. To the contrary, we strongly believe that a broader and overall viep of the goals, objectives and usefulness of the United Nations system as a whole should guide our deliberations here. We should be pragmatic in our approach and practical in our recommendations. A spirit of constructive co-operation is what is badly needed by this Organization which we are all committed to support. Our failure today will have far-reaching implications for tomorrow - much beyond our comprehension. So let us act together for the best interests of this Organization.
Mr. MOYA PALENCIA (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): Before addressing the substance of my statement, I should like to convey the distress of the Government and people of Mexico on the death of Mr. Raul Prebisch, the eminent Argentine economist and statesman, who contributed so much to the cause of developing peoples, particularly those of Latin America. Through the delegation of Argentina I should like to convey to the Argentine Government and people the condolences of the people and Government of Mexico.
Similarly, I should like to associate myself with the earlier statements of solidarity addressed to the delegation of the Soviet Union with respect to the tragic consequences of the recent regrettable incident involving one of its nuclear
reactors.
It is appalling; at a tine when the world is beset by so nany grave problems, so nany threats to peace and the security of States and individuals, by a severe economic crisis hitting hardest the developing countries, by famine in many countries and an accelerated decline in the quality of life in others, by persistent theatres of conflict .and tension in various regions and other emerging hotbeds, by such grave issues as the external debt, finances, apartheid, disarmament and terrorism, that we, the Member States of the United Nations, find ourselves obliged to give priority to the current financial crisis of our Organization.
My country would like to place on record its agreement with the Secretary-General that this crisis is, in his words,
"above all a political crisis. It arises ... from disregard for obligations flowing from the Charter", (A/40/PV.124, pp. 4-5)
and has its origin in a deliberate turning away from multilateralism on the part of certain States, accompanied by their evident lack of political will to negotiate in this forum and be a part, with all the consequences intrinsic to democracy, of a community of sovereign nations.
We also agree with the opinion of the Western European nations, an opinion shared by the majority of other States, that the financial obligations assumed within the United Nations system cannot and must not be revoked unilaterally by the States that contracted them, and that it cannot be claimed that a responsibility that is international in nature can be annulled by domestic decisions.
It also seems inexplicable that we should be meeting here today to adopt and approve cut-backs in programmes of action in the amount of $76 million because of a unilateral reduction in contributions, and this in a year in which the industrialized countries, which, as a matter of justice, bear the major burden of financial responsibility towards the Organization, are making savings of from $50 billion to $60 billion as a result of the drop in the price of oil.
We share the Secretary-General's serious concern about the current internal financial crisis, its origins and its implications. As the Minister for External Relations of Mexico stated at the fortieth commemorative session of the General Assembly:
"Rather than facing a problem of efficiency, we face that of the efficacy of the united Nations system. Rather than facing questions regarding the organization and management of resources, we face vested interests and new
(Mr. Moya Palencia, Mexico) problems that undermine the decisions necessary to prepare, resolve and make progress." (A/40/PV.46, p. 58) We associate ourselves with the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at the recent ministerial meeting held at New Delhi, who stated their concern
"at the increasingly frequent attempts to weaken and restrict the role of the United Nations and to erode the principles of sovereign equality and democratic procedure upon which it is based" -
in other words, those very principles on the basis of which we established this Organization 40 years ago: to maintain international peace and security, to develop friendly relations among nations, to achieve international co-operation and to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of the world community. Those are daunting tasks, and in seeking to discharge them we draw upon a budget that is far from excessive, particularly when compared to the expenditure on armaments and the growth in national budgets in the past decade, or to the abundant economic benefit generated by the Organization and by the diplomatic community in the Headquarters host city.
We repeat that a thoroughgoing solution to the problem requires political will, respect for obligations and a willingness to negotiate. It is based on those principles that Mexico is participating in the Group of 18 High-level Intergovernmental Experts set up to study the United Nations long-term administrative and financial problems, but the conclusions reached by that Group cannot make up for the evident lack of political will on the part of certain States.
The current situation calls for a pragmatic approach. The delegation of Mexico would like to express its support and gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for the devotion with which he is tackling the
(Mc* Moya Palencia, Mexico) situation and, in general, for the steps he has taken in exercise of his competence to solve short-term problems.
However, we should like to express a number of ideas on the content of the measures to be adopted by the Assembly, which should be quantitative as well as qualitative and regarded as temporary or exceptional.	•
In general, we take the view that such measures should not restrict the Organization's ability to carry out its tasks in accordance with the mandate given it under the San Francisco Charter and that they should have as little effect as possible on the interests of the developing countries, without limiting assistance or co-operation programmes and safeguarding the possibility for those countries to participate effectively in the various organs of the United Nations system.
The reduction or postponement of the activities of certain meetings and working groups should be provisional, and the organs affected should be asked to participate in the rationalization of their activities so that the savings achieved can truly contribute to the solution of the financial crisis and so that postponements and temporary reductions not work to the detriment of the activities of the United Nations. In this connection, we are particularly concerned with the activities of the Working Group on the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant workers and Their Families, a Group that is unique of its kind in the Third Committee, whose important legislative work is well advanced and whose meetings scheduled for the spring, the cost of which is minimal, should not be cancelled.
We should also like to note that, despite the serious economic situation in our country, we shall soon be paying the remainder of our 1985 assessment so that in future we shall have to amortize only the contributions relating to this year. We note that this type of economic effort on the part of the developing countries, an effort that has a relatively heavy impact on some of them, is in striking
contrast to the less co-operative attitude of other States with greater economic wherewithal.
Through the will of the majority the United Nations will survive in spite of the financial obstacles it is now encountering. It will thereby once again demonstrate that the true importance of the Organization lies in concerted action and in the opportunity it affords for reconciling positions, and not in the specific weight exerted by any particular Member. It will also become clear that, proportionately, the poor countries contribute a markedly higher amount to the Organization's work than do certain industrialized States and that we have not lost faith in this institution of the international community that has has done so much for peace, decolonization, development and co-operation in the world. If the United Nations did not exist, it would have to be invented.
We know that the Organization is not perfect but that it is perfectable, and that its procedures and operation, like those of any human organization, must be subject to constant and careful review in order to increase its productivity and direct its system towards achieving its goals in the best possible way. We are also convinced that this essential task must not weaken the United Nations or allow isolated opinions to prevail over the opinion of the majority.
We believe that from the crisis that is facing the United Nations today the Organization should emerge with new strength, we believe that it is a test of the political will of every one of its Member States and the juridical and ethical substance of their international conduct. We believe that, together with the budgetary cutbacks and emergency measures we are adopting, we must should also increase our efforts to achieve more effective and responsible participation, better thought out and more dynamic in nature, in implementing the mandate of all United Nations organs and subsidiary bodies.
EMS/10
Moreover, we should simultaneously begin a vigorous campaign to publicize what the United Nations is, and what it has meant for world peace and development, for the codification of international law, for establishing dialogue among States, for safeguarding human rights, and for improving mankind's quality of life, all with the aim of averting final catastrophe. The goal of that campaign would be to prolaim that that task is all-essential, that it is of the highest priority and value, that it cannot be renounced, that it must be shared by us all, and that no political or economic effort is either too great or too small to contribute to its material needs so that it can live up to its purposes and principles. Mexico fully endorses those purposes and principles, in exercise of its sovereign will and in a peaceful spirit of understanding and universal co-operation.
Mr. TSVETKOV (Bulgaria) (interpretation from French): The People's Republic of Bulgaria attaches great importance to this resumed session of the General Assembly, convened to consider the financial problems of the Organization, which are, in the words of the report of the Secretary-General, of such magnitude "as to have profound implications for the viability of the Organization and its present and future effectiveness in furthering the vital objectives for which it was established". (A/40/1102, para. 1) Only a few months ago the international community solemnly commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations. In their statements on that outstanding occasion, the majority of delegations reaffirmed the role and importance of the United Nations as the sole international forum with the principal task of seeing to the strengthening of international peace and security and the development of friendly relations among peoples. It was unanimously recognized that the United Nations enjoys great prestige as the most appropriate organization for the consideration of and the search for solutions to the world-wide political,
(Mr. Tsvetkov, Bulgaria) economic and other problems confronting mankind, and as an effective instrument for carrying out various programmes of assistance to developing and underdeveloped countries. Having said that, we are all convinced that the United Nations is far from having used its full potential, and that it should play an even more effective role in international life.
The financial difficulties now besetting the Organization make it imperative to examine the question of the effectiveness of the United Nations in playing that role. That question has an even greater political dimension in the light of the importance of the tasks before the United Nations and the recent extremely tense international situation. The spiraling arms race, especially in the nuclear field; the constant attempts to militarize outer space; open interference in the internal affairs of sovereign countries; the whipping up of regional conflicts; the continued carrying out of nuclear tests: all these problems demand effective action and urgent responses from the United Nations. Other, no less important, problems for the United Nations to resolve concern the elimination of the economic problems of developing countries, the establishment among States of equitable, non-discriminatory trade, economic, scientific and technological relations, and guaranteed economic security for States.
In other words, today more than ever before the role of the United Nations must be strengthened in the process of placing international peace and security on a solid foundation. There is no doubt that to carry out all these tasks the United Nations must have a stable financial basis and a solid organizational structure. That is why we believe the question of the financial problems of the United Nations to be an important political question.
It is clear that the main cause of the present deterioration of the financial situation is the unilateral decision by the United States of America substantially
ems/io
(Mr. Tsvetkov, Bulgaria) to reduce its contribution to the Organization's regular budget. That arbitrary action by the United States, which ignores the lofty purposes and tasks before the Organization and the programmes it has adopted, can be seen only as a flagrant violation of the obligations of Member States under the Charter of the United Nations.	.
The delegation of the People's Republic of Bulgaria fully shares the Secretary-General's deep concern about the critical financial situation of the United Nations and believes that appropriate action must be taken to improve it. We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to make effective use of existing resources and to increase the effectiveness of the world Organization's activities within available funds. Moreover, the Bulgarian delegation commends the initiatives taken by Member States in response to the Secretary-General's appeal. In this connection we view as particularly positive the initiative of the USSR to make a voluntary contribution of $10 million to the United Nations Special Account.
My country too has responded positively to that appeal, and has paid $1 million into the regular budget, representing more than 95 per cent of our 1986 contribution. My Government is now studying the possibility of Bulgaria's making a voluntary contribution to the United Nations Special Account.
The Bulgarian delegation has taken note of the report of the Secretary-General (A/40/1102), and appreciates the Secretary-General's efforts within the limits of his powers to devise concrete measures and means to ameliorate the present situation. Those efforts make additional resources available to the Organization to cover a large portion of the anticipated United Nations deficit. My delegation believes that the reductions proposed in the report should focus especially on obsolete programmes which are no longer effective and which have thus become
(Mr. Tsvetkov, Bulgaria)
Having said that, the Bulgarian delegation believes that it is inappropriate to reduce or eliminate progrartines adopted within the framework of the European Economic Community (EEC). In our view these programmes are particularly important not only from the point of view of developing East-West relations but also because they benefit many developing countries.
As regards staff-related measures, we believe that a recruitment freeze in the United Nations and the specialized agencies of new staff members to replace those whose temporary contracts have expired is a step which would cause a serious imbalance with regard to equitable geographical representation of Member States, something which runs counter to decisions taken in General Assembly resolution 35/120.
In conclusion, I should like to stress that my delegation is convinced that the United Nations will not cease to exercise a positive influence on international life. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria is ready to work, as it did in the past, within its means to enhance the prestige and effectiveness of the United Nations in keeping with the Charter. That position was stated at the recently concluded thirteenth Congress of the Bulgarian Communist Party, as follows:
"Bulgaria will constantly support the United Nations, and it will seek to live up to the commitments it has undertaken as a member of the Security Council."
Mr. RANA (Nepal): We are meeting in resumed session to discuss the financial crisis of the United Nations, while the ringing commitments to the purposes and principles of the Charter made at its fortieth anniversary are still echoing in our minds. Strange though this may seem, the fact remains that the United Nations is facing the most serious financial crisis in its four-decade history. It now behoves us all to translate our commitment into a concrete line of action to lead the United Nations out of its current financial impasse.
(Mr. Tsvetkov, Bulgaria)
Having said that, the Bulgarian delegation believes that it is inappropriate to reduce or eliminate progranrnes adopted within the framework of the European Economic Community (EEC). In our view these programmes are particularly important not only from the point of view of developing East-West relations but also because they benefit many developing countries.
As regards staff-related measures, we believe that a recruitment freeze in the United Nations and the specialized agencies of new staff members to replace those whose temporary contracts have expired is a step which would cause a serious imbalance with regard to equitable geographical representation of Member States, something which runs counter to decisions taken in General Assembly resolution 35/120.
In conclusion, I should like to stress that ray delegation is convinced that the United Nations will not cease to exercise a positive influence on international life. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria is ready to work, as it did in the past, within its means to enhance the prestige and effectiveness of the United Nations in keeping with the Charter. That position was stated at the recently concluded thirteenth Congress of the Bulgarian Communist Party, as follows:
"Bulgaria will constantly support the United Nations, and it will seek to live up to the commitments it has undertaken as a member of the Security Council."
Mr. RANA (Nepal): We are meeting in resumed session to discuss the financial crisis of the United Nations, while the ringing commitments to the purposes and principles of the Charter made at its fortieth anniversary are still echoing in our minds. Strange though this may seem, the fact remains that the United Nations is facing the most serious financial crisis in its four-decade history. It now behoves us all to translate our commitment into a concrete line of action to lead the United Nations out of its current financial impasse.
Fortunately, this otherwise daunting assignment has been greatly facilitated by the objective overview and incisive analysis provided by the Secretary-General in his report on the current financial crisis of the United Nations, contained in document A/4O/11O2. That report - together with the Secretary-General’s lucid introductory statement on the subject on 28 April - correctly diagnoses the financial malaise afflicting the United Nations. The report also documents a number of economy measures already taken on the Secretary-General’s initiative. The savings are estimated at 830 million and these measures have the unqualified support of my delegation, which well recognizes the urgency for the United Nations to overcome the current crisis.
Similarly, we welcome other schemes to reduce expenses as proposed in the Secretary-General's report. Estimated savings in this category amount to another 330 million.
However, these are ad hoc emergency measures my delegation supports as a composite package, given the need to tide over the immediate and dire cash-flow problems the United Nations faces. Should this package become untied, my delegation reserves its right to offer other suggestions, particularly with regard to those concerning the least developed countries.
As stated earlier, welcome as such measures are in the context of the current financial crisis facing the Organization, it is quite clear that we must have recourse to other measures. In this category, the most obvious - and most urgent -is to ensure that Member States in arrears pay up their dues while all Members pay their assessed contributions promptly, that is to say, that contributions be paid as early in the year as possible. Indeed, as far as my delegation is concerned, we are prepared to go along even with the suggestion to assess Member States on the basis of the full initial appropriation for the biennium - or a major part thereof - in January of the first year of the biennium.
In this context I feel constrained to say that, if a least developed country like Nepal has no arrears and pays its assessed contributions proEptly, there cannot be any excuse for others to drag their feet, especially those generously endowed in terms of resources and in an advanced stage of development.
Let me come back to the familiar malady of long-standing arrears of some Member States - and I of course refer to those States that are not facing any critical economic situation. It is clear that remedies for the failing financial health of the United Nations have to be found and implemented. That is all the more urgent because the situation has now been compounded - in contravention of the Charter obligations, I might add - by resort to sudden and selective withholdings by major contributors.
As we see it, the real problem is not that some countries cannot pay their arrears or that others have to resort to withholdings to make a point or two. What all this underlines is the plain - and unfortunate - fact that there appears to be a dangerous slide in the political commitment of some countries to the United Nations. The lack of adequate political will in meeting internationally recognized obligations has indeed been discernible since the 1960s, when the financial problems of the United Nations surfaced for the first time. It does not require much imagination to note a correlation between a steady erosion in such political will on the part of some Member States and progress in the process of decolonization resulting in the welcome and spectacular increase in the membership of the United Nations after the 1960s.
I how recall the Secretary-General's observation regarding the implications of the financial crisis facing the United Nations and the viability of the United Nations. In particular, I draw attention to its impact on financing United Nations peace-keeping operations. As the representative of a troop-contributing country to United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), I would be remiss if I failed to
(Mr. Rana, Nepal) point out that to a very great extent it is the troop-contributing countries, such as mine, that have to bear the financial burdens of the United Nations as a result of withholdings by some. We welcome the improvement in the position of certain Member States in this regard and we hope others will follow suit. This would enable the United Nations to carry out its essential responsibilities in the area of peace-keeping.
Regarding medium- and longer-term measures that can help in ensuring the financial and administrative health of the United Nations, we believe that the recommendations of the 18-member Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts examining these issues will be of special relevance. There must also be identified such measures as would help to ensure a greater degree of financial stability and predictability about United Nations programmes and operations, including those of peace-keeping, to which I referred earlier and in which my country continues to be closely associated.
In any case the uncertainty in which the United Nations operates must be ended. Towards that laudable end it has now become imperative to reduce the possibility of one nation, or a small group of nations, holding this Organization hostage. Though understandably sensitive, a new look into revising the current scale of assessments from that point of view may be necessary. We believe that it could be thoroughly examined by the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts, if it has not already done so.
To conclude, as a small and peace-loving nation deeply committed to the aims and ideals of the United Nations, it is only natural for us to be greatly concerned about the present critical situation facing the United Nations. We are, however, equally perturbed that, when the need for the United Nations has perhaps never been more urgent than in today's unsettled times, there should be what appears to be a growing tendency at undermining the effectiveness of the United Nations system.
It is our belief that in our collective efforts to overcome the present financial crisis we should not overlook other factors or causes contributing to an erosion of the Organization's effectiveness and image. While fully supporting the Secretary-General's efforts to put the United Nations financial house in order, we assure the Assembly of our fullest co-operation with and support for any measure designed to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations.
Mr. DJOUDI (Algeria) (interpretation from French): All those who knew Mr. Raul Prebisch and were familiar with the work he did in the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA) and continued with equal success in establishing and strengthening the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) remember him as a great champion of humanity and of the ideals of the United Nations.
We therefore very much regret his passing, in particular as it has come precisely at a time when the very fate of the United Nations and the basic principles it embodies are at stake.
I should like, through the delegation of Argentina, to convey to the Government and the people of Argentina and to the bereaved family our most sincere condolences.
The rationalization of the work of the United Nations was the centre-piece of the debates at the fortieth session of the General Assembly. The thoroughgoing discussions we then had clearly attested to the unanimous will of the Member States to continue the process of improving the functioning of the Organization.
The Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts that was established precisely with that in mind was instructed to define, within the framework of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, long-term solutions to overcome the financial instability of the Organization and improve its functioning.
Similarly, the Secretary-General's statement on 18 December 1985 at the fortieth session of the General Assembly was basically an appeal to Member States to refrain from any unilateral measures to withhold contributions to the regular budget of the Organization so that the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts could unperturbed fulfil its mandate without any constraints.
It is therefore particularly regrettable that neither the positive spirit that prevailed in the discussions at the fortieth session nor the Secretary-General's appeal have enabled us to prevent the current financial crisis, which has required the urgent reconvening of the fortieth session.
Indeed, the serious discussions that emerged on ways to improve the financial and administrative efficiency of the United Nations, as well as the particularly commendable efforts of the Secretary-General, have not spared the Organization continued financial pressures. This shows clearly that the current financial crisis is political in nature.
There is no need to recall that these financial pressures are accompanied by requirements that are incompatible with the principle of the sovereign equality of States. The idea of weighted voting not only challenges the democratic functioning of the Organization but also runs counter to the spirit and letter of the Charter.
These regrettable developments have inevitably given rise to very serious concerns in the international community. Thus the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at the recent ministerial meeting held in New Delhi objected strongly to the attempts to weaken and restrict the role of the United Nations system and to undermine the principles of sovereign equality and democratic functioning on which the Organization is based.
The Ministers pointed out that these attacks had recently taken the form of using financial power to jeopardize the very functioning of the United Nations.
This deliberate policy aimed at driving the Organization into a financial impasse is certainly incompatible with the obligations of Member States under the Charter and poses a serious threat not only to the effectiveness but, above all, to the very existence of this irreplaceable instrument for promoting peace and development.
These considerations must provide the backdrop to our deliberations on the cash-flow problems brought to our attention by the Secretary-General and to the proposals contained in his report.
We pay a particular tribute to the Secretary-General for his perspicacity and for his numerous efforts and his dedication in contributing to mitigating the effects of a crisis which, there is no need to recall, is not the doing of the Secretariat or of the staff but of certain Member States.
Since they were drafted in difficult circumstances in order to respond to an urgent situation, the Secretary-General's proposals are bound to be stop-gap, interim measures. They certainly cannot constitute a precedent in our efforts to find political solutions for the long term.
Failure by a State to meet its obligations and the worsening of the financial situation that has resulted have compelled the Secretary-General to undertake two series of economy measures principally with regard to staff expenditures. Moreover, he had to contemplate deferral of the implementation of certain programmes and a reduction in the length of the next session of the General Assembly. Unless the practice of withholding assessed contributions is abandoned, the deferrals proposed might have to be repeated in 1987, thus further reducing the Organization's work over the long term.
Member States must help the Secretary-General to avoid such a situation, which would inevitably accelerate the erosion of multilateralism.
Pending the conclusion of the work of the High-level Group of Intergovernmental Experts, the validity of mandates for activities whose implementation might have to be deferred until next year should not be called into question.
Like the delegation of Yugoslavia, whose representative spoke on behalf of the Group of 77 - I take this opportunity to state my delegation’s support for his statement - we should be grateful to the Secretary-General for additional information about the most recent financial developments in the crisis and the scope of certain proposals relating to programmes, to enable us better to determine our contribution to the short-term consideration of the crisis besetting the Organization.
The first two series of measures within the Secretary-General's direct competence under the Charter, together with a large number of new proposals - such as the general reduction in purchases of furniture and equipment, certain rearrangements of the schedule of meetings of subsidiary bodies and a reduction in the publications programme - should be applied as a priority in order to make possible the maintenance, in the light of financial developments for 1986, of the existing schedule for the main bodies, as well as other activities crucial to the attainment of the Organization's fundamental purposes. To that end, the Fifth Committee might seek, in consultation with the Secretariat, to identify other less essential activities whose postponement could be considered.
We are convinced that, above and beyond the economy measures proposed by the Secretary-General, the short-term financial crisis can be overcome only through an unswerving commitment by Member States to discharge fully and in good time their financial obligations to the Organization.
The process of improving the functioning of the United Nations cannot be brought about by a policy of financial pressure. That process, which is now in hand by the High-level Group of Intergovernmental Experts, should in no way be hindered by the perpetuation of such unilateral attitudes.
The present financial crisis was artificially created for distinctly political purposes. The General Assembly’s reaction is bound to be political in essence. The need for strict compliance by Member States with their financial obligations under the Charter should be vigorously reaffirmed.
Algeria will continue fully to meet its responsibilities as a Member State. Despite the financial constraints that it suffers, in common with all the other developing countries, Algeria has always tried to pay its contributions to the regular budget on time. As for our contribution for 1986, all the necessary measures have been taken to ensure that it is paid as soon as possible.
The Secretary-General has fully shouldered his responsibilities as chief executive officer of the Organization, and therefore we assure him of Algeria’s support and solidarity. It is especially incumbent now on Member States to shoulder their responsibilities and join their efforts with those of the Secretary-General to respond to the challenge facing the Organization.
Mr. BARNETT (Jamaica): I wish to begin by expressing our condolences to the families of those who died in the disastrous accident at the nuclear power plant in the Ukraine. We must also state our deep concern about the possible effects in neighbouring States, which so far have been deprived of adequate data to allow them to take appropriate and timely action to safeguard the health and well-being of their citizens.
For the second time in its short history the United Nations is faced with a crisis which, though denominated in financial terms, stems from unilateral decisions of Member States which question one of the fundamental bases of our
Organization - the principle, embodied in Article 17 (2) of the Charter, that all Member States have a collective responsibility to bear the expenses of the Organization, as apportioned by the General Assembly.
The unfortunate precedent was set just over 20 years ago, when some Member States, on the basis of their own interpretation of the Charter, decided to withhold portions of their contributions to the United Nations budget. The fact that that interpretation was rejected by the International Court of Justice and the General Assembly did not alter their decision. Now we find that the practice is engaged in by some 18 Member States. The situation has been compounded by the anticipated withholding flowing from the national legislation of one Member State. That is another dangerous precedent, which, if emulated, would seriously threaten -the very existence of the United Nations.
My delegation therefore agrees that the crisis cannot be seen simply in financial terms. We believe that any lasting solutions must be based on the continued commitment of all Member States to
"fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance with the ... Charter."
We believe that the United Nations is an important instrument for helping to manage the international environment, and we all have to ensure that we so conduct ourselves that faith in this body does not dissipate. As we look at the short-term crisis, we should not lose sight of the wider political implications. As the leader of the Jamaican delegation to the recent Non-Aligned Movement ministerial meeting in New Delhi stated:
"The continued viability and vitality of the United Nations in attempting to help in an orderly and effective management of global affairs now stands in jeopardy. The crisis itself is bound to inhibit the execution of the main
(Mg. Barnett, Jamaica)
programmes and activities of the Organization as well as the performance of its functions in responding promptly and effectively to new situations of conflict which threaten international peace and security. It is also symptomatic of the extent to which the principles of the Charter have been seriously eroded as a result of the lack of a firm commitment by Member States."
Hence the continuing forbearance and understanding of the troop-contributing countries are all the more commendable. They have our abiding appreciation.
How we handle this crisis will have long-term implications for the future of the Organization, we must commend the Secretary-General for his strenuous efforts to suggest solutions to the problems facing us and for the steps he has already taken within his area of competence.
We must also commend the staff of the Secretariat for their co-operation in ensuring the effectiveness of the measures already implemented by the Secretary-General. We wish to take this opportunity to express appreciation for the dedication of the professional international civil service, to whose continued high competence and integrity we attach great weight.
My delegation finds it less than fair that the burden should be put on the Secretary-General to provide solutions to amelicrate a crisis which the Member States themselves have caused.
The Secretary-General alone cannot be expected to come forward with acceptable proposals for the deferral, postponement or deletion of programmes, when these programmes have emerged from agreement among Member States.
My delegation is willing to support a balanced package of proposals that takes into account the collective interests of Member States and that in no way undermines the purposes and principles of the Charter.
We have studied carefully the report of the Secretary-General (A/40/1102) and the related comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) (A/40/1106). We welcome the recent payments by some Member States. Notwithstanding, the crisis appears to us to be somewhat understated in financial terms. This has been reinforced by the Secretary-General's coiranents this morning. The ACABQ has termed the estimates of payments in 1986 optimistic and noted that, given the alarming severity of the situation, the measures proposed by the Secretary-General appear to be less than comprehensive.
As representatives of Member States we have to ensure that any short-term measures we may adopt do not imply a regression of the crisis and postponement of pending chaos. There is no point in buying short-term comfort with long-term disaster. We need to consider carefully the consequences for the work programme of the Organization of deferrals and suspensions which will have to be dealt with in 1987, nor should the present situation become an excuse to redesign the functioning of the Organization.
Against this background we wish to thank the Secretary-General for the proposals in his report. It would, however, be useful for additional information to be provided to a committee of this General Assembly in order to lay the groundwork for a decision by consensus. It is important, for example, that we have further information on the programmatic measures proposed so that Member States may be assured that these will be minimal long-term consequences, especially since we have been told that "systematic and rational analysis has suffered in meeting the precipitate requirements for immediate and extensive savings".
We would prefer to find a way to avoid curtailment of the duration of the forty-first session of the General Assembly, a session which will have before it the report of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts established to identify measures for further improving the efficiency of the Organization's administrative and financial functioning which would contribute to its effectiveness in dealing with political, economic and social issues.
We agree that the work of the General Assembly needs to be streamlined and rationalized. But curtailing the duration of the session, if that results in meetings outside of scheduled hours and increases overtime, for example, will not achieve the desired results. We also need to examine ways to reduce documentation and to limit the duration of interventions. We hope that the General Committee of the forty-first session will address these issues.
My delegation will support all measures necessary to achieve a lasting solution to the financial and other problems facing the United Nations. All of us will benefit from an efficient and effective Organization that serves the interests of the international community and is able to deal with the challenges which confront us.*
Mr. ALAOUI (Morocco) (interpretation from French): We have given close attention to the Secretary-General's report on the current financial crisis of the Organization as well as the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) in this regard.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco fully endorses the assessment given in those two documents with respect to the seriousness of the present situation.
In addressing the Assembly this morning, the Secretary-General confirmed that, despite recent developments as regards contributions, the crisis remains serious. As a result the international community can only be perturbed when it is told that the financial problems are of such a magnitude as seriously to jeopardize the viability of the Organization and its capacity to carry out its tasks and programmes in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter. For this reason we can only be pleased that the Secretary-General has taken the initiative of proposing the resumption of the work of the fortieth session to discuss this question and to take the necessary steps.
Wb note with interest that in doing so he has invoked the prerogatives stemming from the spirit of Article 99 of the Charter. We might also note that, far from waiting for the situation to become so grave that it is on the point of
* The President returned to the Chair.
(Mr. Alaoui, Morocco) doing irreparable damage, the Secretary-General has already taken a number of economy measures within his competence. Thus it is quite normal for Member States now to be called upon to build upon the action already taken and to decidce on measures to safeguard the Organization that fall within their competence.
While admittedly it is the financial aspect of the present crisis that is most evident, it is first and foremost a political crisis. It is also of very long standing, for the financial difficulties first began to emerge at the beginning of the 1960s, when certain Member States began to withhold portions of their contributions to the regular budget. Such unilateral measures, characterized as unlawful by the International Court of Justice, were viewed with disapproval at that time.
For the same reasons as in the past, we can today only express regret that, far from shrinking, the list of States wilfully refusing to meet their financial obligations under the Charter is in fact lengthening. We believe that all States must in good faith accept the financial consequences of their international obligations, which they freely entered into by treaty. The permanent members of the Security Council have a special responsibility in this respect. Yet it remains a fact that, since it is in essence political, the solution to the current financial crisis can only be political, consisting of a broad agreement on the part of all with respect to the use of resources, the budgetary process and the distribution of expenditures in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
(Mr. Alaoui, Morocco)
For our part, we are open to dialogue and ready to negotiate with a view to finding responsible and lasting solutions which will enable the Organization to operate efficiently and to discharge its mandates deriving from the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
The report of the Secretary-General calls our attention to the gravity of the immediate situation. The assessment and the forecast it contains relate only to 1986. Admittedly, that is where there is the most urgency, and it is quite normal that, faced with an exceptional situation, States Members should be urged to take exceptional measures. Such measures as proposed by the Secretary-General to tackle a special situation should in no way set a precedent; neither should they prejudge the results of the work of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts established to review the administrative and financial viability of the Organzation in the long term. We shall not fail, at the forty-first session of the General Assembly, to state our views on the Group's conclusions. In the meantime, we feel that the measures described in the report of the Secretary-General should be regarded as having time limits and as not adversely affecting programmes adopted by the Organization. This is why we have serious reservations with respect to the postponement of the implementation of important priority decisions previously taken by the Assembly, such as that relating to the meeting of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories and the holding of conferences on the questions of Palestine and Namibia.
We also believe that the freeze on recruitment will have a negative effect on the composition of the Secretariat. Such a measure would run counter to the targets which the General Assembly set the Secretariat with respect to the ecruitable geographic distribution of staff members.
(Mr. Alaoui, Morocco)
We ate also opposed to any future staff-reduction attempts, and we note with satisfaction that the Secretary-General has not, in fact, made any such proposals. Nevertheless, we can in no circumstances consent to the suggestions made to this effect by a limited number of delegations.
The measures proposed do call for certain comments. We have deliberately confined our remarks to the most important ones. However, in response to the appeal made to the Assembly both by the President and the Secretary-General, and despite the serious reservations which we have about certain of the proposed measures, we feel that it is important for the international community to accept the recommendations of the Secretary-General and to give him our support so as to bring us through a period which all, quite rightly, have recognized as especially difficult.
A major forum for multilateral co-operation and the reconciliation of differences, this Organization owes it to itself to overcome its current difficulties through the co-operation of all. Adequate political resolve, something we are all called upon to display, will enable us to take the necessary decisions and will also enable us to renew our deep commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to inform the Assembly that at the end of the meeting, and before adjourning it, I shall make an important announcement.
Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): Before I make my statement on the matter which we are discussing today, there is another short statement I should like to make. It is not my country’s habit to take advantage of a deep human tragedy to try to make some political point or other. The United States Government shares the sorrow of the Soviet Union over the accident at the Chernobyl atomic energy station. We ernestly hope that casualties and material damage will be
minimal, both in the Soviet Union and elsewhere. The United States is prepared to do whatever it can to be of assistance to the Soviet Union, by making available humanitarian and technical assistance to help in dealing with this accident.
We sincerely hope also that the Soviet Union will provide complete information about the accident in a timely manner and join us and other nations in an effort to prevent such incidents from happening anywhere in the future.
Nuclear power is an important and necessary source of energy for all mankind. Working together we can ensure its benefits for mankind in a safe and secure manner. This accident, affecting many people from different countries, emphasizes the interdependence of all nations and points clearly to the importance of international co-operation through multilateral institutions, such as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the United Nations. As we search for solutions to the United Nations reform crisis, let us not lose sight of this fundamental truth: we are common travellers on a single planet, and co-operation is our only alternative.
In spite of the obvious and profound difficulties which beset the United Nations, our presence here today signals our commitment to address these problems and to revitalize an institution to which we maintain our dedication. There can be no doubt that the United Nations is a troubled Organization. But there can also be no doubt that the lofty goals and purposes for which the United Nations was founded are as relevant today as they were four decades ago. The United States Government recognizes the vital importance of international co-operation and is committed to its improvement.
The Secretary-General has convened this resumed session of the fortieth General Assembly because, in his words, "The United Nations faces the most serious financial crisis in its history". (A/40/1102, para. 40)
The cumulative effects of late payments by a majority of Member States, withholdings on questions of principle by a substantial number and recent legislation in the United States have combined to put the Organization in a position where it will not be able to carry out all planned activities in the current year. Resolving this crisis has both short-term and longer-term aspects, and while the specific purpose of this session is to deal with the short-term problems of 1986, my Government believes that we must keep in mind the longer-term aspects of the crisis, as well as' its underlying causes, as we go about our work.
As important and pressing as the financial issues facing us are, let us not overlook the fact that what we face is, in the words of the Secretary-General, "above all a political crisis" (para. 1). The Secretary-General is correct in describing this political crisis as arising from the lack of agreement among Member States on means and purposes for financing the Organization. The crisis, however, goes much deeper than that. Why are Member States unable to agree on the means and purposes of financing the Organization? The reason is that the United Nations is facing a crisis of confidence.
Member States remain committed to the ideals of the United Nations - we saw this clearly in statement after statement at the fortieth anniversary session of the General Assembly - but Member States no longer have confidence in the United Nations as an institution for effectively serving those ideals. The Secretary-General and Member States share responsibility for rebuilding a sense of confidence in the Organization.
The resumed session of the General Assembly is an important test to see if such confidence can be restored. A serious effort among Member States, with active guidance and assistance from the Secretary-General, to deal with the short-term financial problems now confronting the Organization will be of great importance in rebuilding that confidence in the United Nations. This, in turn, will lay an encouraging foundation for addressing the long-term fundamental reforms which must be agreed upon at the forty-first session of the General Assembly. Our failure at this resumed session to deal constructively with the short-term financial issues now before us would serious jeopardize prospects for success over the longer term.
The current cash shortfall has been building up over a long period of time. According to the Secretary-General’s report, shortfalls in the payment of assessed contributions began at the end of 1956 and reached serious proportions as early as 1960. The General Assembly has taken a number of steps since then to address the problem and has looked at an agenda item called "The Financial Emergency" every year since 1976. This financial emergency has existed because some Member States have declined to pay part oi their assessments owing to disagreements with certain programmes - such as peace-keeping - and because other States Members have failed to stay current with their assessments.
The Secretary-General’s report of 12 April on the current financial crisis indicates that, as of 31 March 1986, 80 countries - a majority of United Nations Members - had all or a portion of their 1985 assessments still unpaid. For 1986, only 14 Member States had paid their current assessments in full by the end of March. This situation reflects the pattern of recent years. The Organization has managed to continue operations because of its reserves, made up of the Working Capital Fund and the Special Account, and because the United States, which is assessed 25 per cent of the Organization's expenses, has contributed virtually its full assessment to the Organization each year.
(Mr. Walters, United States) This year, because of two recently enacted laws, the United States finds itself unable to pay its full assessment. The fact that the arrearages of other Member States have totally depleted the Organization's reserves suggests that the United States shortfall becomes the straw that breaks the back of the camel. The $76 million shortfall described by the Secretary-General, in fact, is very close to the projected United States arrearage for 1985 and 1986, which we estimate currently at about $80 million. One could say cynically that the United States is being blamed now because it is late in joining the Member States that have not paid their assessments in the past. I might add that such cynicism may not be misplaced in this Organization, where countries that have for many years deliberately withheld substantial amounts from the United Nations budget refer to the United States withholdings as a policy of "financial diktat and blackmail". More to the point, however, the financial crisis is not the responsibility of any one Member State, but the result of years of withholdings and late payments by a majority of countries.
Let me now turn to the two laws that are causing the United States to fall short in its assessed payments. The first is the Kassebaum Amendment, which limits United States payments to the United Nations and specialized agencies to 20 per cent of their budgets unless the organizations institute a decision-making system for budgetary matters providing voting strength proportional to the size of the contributions. This law reflects dissatisfaction in the United States Congress over the fact that countries that contribute the great majority of the organizations' money have little to say on how it is spent. The Secretary-General has pointed out that Member States that contribute 70 per cent or 80 per cent of the United Nations regular budget have not been able to vote in favour of any of the last three biennial budgets of the United Nations.
The United States delegation made it clear at the fortieth session of the General Assembly that a Charter amendment to produce so-called weighted voting was not the only way in which the intent of the Kassebaum Amendment could be addressed. We were pleased that the General Assembly approved the establishment of the Group of 18 to examine the adminstrative and financial functioning of the United Nations, and we note that one element of the Group's agenda is to look at the procedures for reaching a broad agreement on the Organization's budget. We are hopeful that the Group's deliberations will produce recommendations to the forty-first session of the General Assembly which, when acted upon, will strengthen the Organization and will provide a basis for seeking modification of the Kassebaum Amendment.
The other law is the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Deficit Reduction Act, which requires that the total United States Federal budget deficit be progressively reduced to zero over the next five years. To the extent that targets are not met by directed programme cuts, the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act requires a pro rata sequestering or cutting of virtually all Federal programmes. That law has resulted in the sequestering of a portion of of the United States 1985 United Nations assessment and could potentially require an additional sequestering of part of the 1986 payment as well. The Graram-Rudman-Hollings Act is not specifically directed at the United Nations or at international organizations, but its effects are being felt by them. The future of Gramm-Rudman Hollings is unclear, but the need to reduce the Federal budget is sure to remain a high priority for the United States Government. We hope that the deficit ceilings specified by this law will be met through directed programme reductions so that across-the-board cuts will not be needed in future years.
To turn to the current situation, given the existence of large, cumulative arrears and the inability of the United States to make its full payment this year,
(Mr. Walters, United States) the United Nations is forced to cut its expenses now. The Secretary-General has already undertaken administrative measures which he believes will save $30 million, and he is asking this resumed session of the General Assembly to approve an additional. $30 million of programme deferrals and suspensions. The delegation of the United States has carefully reviewed these measures. We regret the curtailment of some of the activities proposed for deferral and, more important, we believe that administrative savings and programme deferrals should be more directly aimed at improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness of Secretariat operations. Nevertheless, we conclude that it is most important to keep the Secretary-General’s proposals together as a package. We believe, therefore, that the Secretary-General’s proposals represent a constructive first step to address the financial shortfall, and we support their approval as a package.
The United States is concerned that the Secretary-General’s savings proposals do not equal the projected shortfall. A gap of some $46 million is to be filled by voluntary contributions or other measures to be decided upon by Member States, such as commercial borrowing or further increasing the Working Capital Fund. The United States delegation opposes these last two proposals, as we have in past years.
We are also concerned that the Secretary-General’s projection of the 1986 shortfall may be somewhat optimistic. For one thing, the projection assumes that, except for the United States, payments to the regular budget will be almost equal to the amount assessed for the current year. Such performance is possible, but would require a substantial departure from past practice. We would hope, therefore, that the Secretary-General will monitor the United Nations financial situation closely throughout the year and be prepared, if necessary, to propose additional savings measures.
A related concern is that the Secretary-General's proposals only cover 1986. We are aware that the Group of 18 is considering a number of proposals for cost
(Mr. Walters, United States) reduction and increased efficiency whose effects would be felt in 1987. The beginning of each year, however, has been a time when few payments are received. This situation is likely to be more critical next year, because the Secretary-General has proposed that Member States advance a portion of their 1987 payments into 1986 and defer 1986 programmes into 1987.
EMS/17
The united States has always been the largest financial supporter of the United Nations and fully intends to continue its support. The current financial crisis has resulted in part from substantial arrearages spread among many Member States, and partly from frustration on the part of the United States and, we believe, other Member States that feel that their views on the level and content of the Organization's budget are not taken seriously. As we indicated earlier, the United Nations faces a crisis of confidence. This resumed session is not intended to resolve the basic problems that have brought the Organization to this point. Those problems can be addressed only by candid discussions among Member States over the coming months, assisted by thoughtful and serious recommendations from the Group of 18. The United States delegation stands ready to participate in any and all such discussions.
For now, our goal must be to assure the continued functioning of the Organization until a broad consensus on the future budget and programme of the United Nations is obtained. As I indicated earlier, the United States delegation believes that the Secretary-General's savings proposals should be accepted and that he should be asked to monitor the short-term financial situation carefully.
The decisions we take at this session can have a profound effect, positive or negative, on the future of the United Nations. I urge that the Member States work together to ensure that the effect is a positive one, because the future of the Organization is of great importance to all.
In closing, let me renew the commitment that Secretary of State Shultz made when he spoke on the occasion of the anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco, on 26 June 1985. He said:
"I want to leave you with one clear message: The United States is going to stick with it. We will fight for peace and freedom and for our interests -in the united Nations as we do everywhere else.
"And we will do our part to make the United Nations work as a force for security, for human rights and for human betterment." ■
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to inform the Assembly that, following consultations, it has been proposed that the Fifth Committee be reconvened, with the understanding that it will deal with clarification of technical questions relating to agenda item 150. May I consider that there is no objection to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAI,
A/41/PV.33 13 October 1986
ENGLISH
Forty-first session GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THIRTY-THIRD MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 10 October 1986, at 3 p.m.
President;
Mr. CHOUDHURY
(Bangladesh)
-	Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations (161
-	Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations [38] :
(a)	Report of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations
(b)	Note by the Secretary-General
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Asaembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
86-64248/A 1583V (E)
Th« meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
AGENDA IT® 16
APPOINTMENT OF THE SECRETARY-GEN®AL OF THE WITED NATIONS
(a)	LETT® FROM THS PRES ID ®T OF THE SECURITY OOUNCIL TO THE PRES ED®T OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY (A/41/696)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/41/L.1)
The PRESID®T: The Assembly has before it a letter dated 10 October 19S8 from the President of the Security Council to the President of the General Assembly (A/41/696). That letter reads as follows:
“I have the honour to inform you that the Security Council, at its 2714th meeting, held in private on 10 October 1986, unanimously adopted rKolutia 589 (1986) concerning the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The resolution reads as follows*.
"'The Security Council,
"'Having considered the question of the recommendation for the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
"'Reoomaends to the General Assembly that Mr. Javier Pires de Cuellar be appointed Secretary-General of the United Nations for a second term of office from 1 January 1987 to 31 December 1991.
"(Signed) Mohammad Hussain AL-6HAALI
"President of the Security Council"
In connection with the recommendation of the Security Council, the General Assembly has before it a draft resolution submitted in document A/41/L.1 by Australia, Bulgaria, China, Congo, Denmark, France, Ghana, Madagascar, Thailand, Trinidad and fobago, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Pirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
JP/v»
(The President)
States of America and Venezuela» That la the only document before the Aawably on which action is required.
I call on the representative of the United Arab Emirates, Mr. Mohammad Hussain Al-8haall, who is also President of the Security Council.
Mr. AL-SHAALX (United Arab Emirates) (Interpretation from Arabic): In my capacity as President of the Security Council for thia month, I have the honour and the privilege to address the General Assembly on the occasion of a notable event -the appointment of the Secretary-General - at a critical time in the life of our Organisation.
At its 2714th meeting on 10 October 1984, the Security Council adopted unanimously resolution 389 (1988), which you, Mr. President, have just read out.
Pursuant to that unanimous recommendation of the security Council, a draft resolution submitted by the members of the Council (A/41/L.1) has been circulated, and I should like now to Introduce It, on their behalf, to the General Assembly.
The draft resolution proposes that the General Assembly of the united Ration# should appoint Mr. Javier Peras de Cuellar as Secretary-General of the United Mations for a second term of office of five years, beginning on 1 January 1987. In so doing, the Security Council has taken note of the outstanding qualities of Mr. Peres de Cuellar, his dedication, impartiality and effectiveness in serving the highat Interests of the international community and his unique contribution to an •nlightenad peremption of the potential of our Organisation during his first term of office as Secretary-General of the United Ration®. Indeed, the great negotiating skill, sharp vision and unwavering sense of duty and scrupulous respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter which he has displayed throughout Kis long and multi-dimensional experience in the service of the Organisation are well known and appreciated by its members.
EHS/4
(Mr, Al-Shaali, United Arab Saira tea)
It is our conviction that at a time when renewed efforts are required to strengthen and revitalize the Organization, the outstanding qualities of laadtrtiip demonstrated by Mr. Perez de Cuellar during his first term of office will enable the Organization in the days ahead to rise to the challenge and find viable solutions to the problems confronting the United Nations.
I hope that, in accordance with the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council, the General Assembly will adopt unanimously the draft resolution which the 15 States members of the Council have submitted to it. That would be a renewed expression of the support that Member States intend to give bo Mr. Perez de Cuellar in discharging the extremely complex responsibilities of the Secretary-General of the Wilted Nations.
The PRESIDENT: The President of the Security Council has just proposed that draft resolution A/41/L.1 be adopted unanimously. May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt that draft resolution by acclamation?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation (resolution 41/1) •
The PRESIDENT: Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar has been appointed by acclamation Secretary-General of the united Nations for a second term of office, beginning on 1 January 1987 and ending on 31 De cento er 1991.
Mr. Aly Teymour, Chief of Protocol, escorted Mr, Perez de Cuellar into the General Assembly Hall.
The PRESIDENT: Your Excellency, I have the honour to inform you officially that the General Assentoly has appointed you Secretary-General of the United Nations for a second term of office, beginning on 1 January 1V87 and ending on 31 Decentoer 1991. I congratulate you most sincerely and invite you to address the General Assembly.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish):I wish to express My profound gratitude to the members of the Security Council for their spontaneous and unanimous decision to recommend my appointment for a new mandate as Secretary-General of the United Nations, and to the General Assembly, for having appointed me by acclamation. I personally consider rotation in this high office desirable for many reasons. Nevertheless, I have complied with the decision of the Member States, which does me particular honour in view of its spontaneous and unanimous character.
The especially difficult situation of the Organization at this time has also weighed in my decision. To decline in such circumstances would have been tantamount to abandoning a moral duty towards the United Nations, with which I have been linked for many years and in whose permanent validity I have unshakeable faith. It would also have meant ignoring the creative opportunity for renewal and reform which the current crisis may provide.
I now reaffirm, with pride, my oath of office:.
I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the functions entrusted to me as Secretary-General of the United Nations, to discharge these functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of the United Nations only in view, and not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from any Government or other authority external to the Organization.
The present moment calls not for oratory but for clear vision and effective action. With this in mind, I would like to make these brief observations.
First, the character of my appointment guarantees the membership that, throughout my renewed mandate, I shall continue to discharge the functions which have been entrusted to me with absolute independence and impartiality. It is only


if these qualities are recognized and respected by Menber States that the
Secretary-General can contribute effectively, and in harmony with the other organs
of the united Nations, to the search for just and viable agreements on political,
economic, social or administrative problems.
Second, it is my hope that the consensus both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly on the appointment of the Secretary-General will serve to encourage a sense of common intent in the working of this Organization. The Office of the Secretary-General is an integral part of the United Nations and not something separate and discrete. It is, to my mind, of highest importance that the same harmonization of wills and viewpoints should .be achieved in relation to the great substantive issues on the agenda of the Organization. We need to act with unity and resolve to accelerate the solution of some of the long-enduring conflicts which threaten international peace and security.
Third, we stand at a juncture critical for multilateralism, a concept still strange and awkward to some, but an inescapable corollary to the growing in tier dependence of all nations on this planet. The United Nations, constituted by you, the representatives gathered here, is the dynamic enbodiment of this concept. The reality of interdependence is underlined by all major threats to international order and civility which characterize the present age and tdiich it would be naive to try to face unilaterally or bilaterally.

Fourth, I wish to point to an urgent need: for the proper functioning and the good name of this Organization, all Member States should abide strictly by their obligations under the Charter, which is a binding international treaty, and comply with those obligations which derive from such resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council as have an obligatory character. I will begin my new mandate confident that I can count on the commitment of the Governments of all Member States represented here to strengthen the integrity and enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations. As far as the Secretariat is concerned, I know that the men and women who compose the Organization will do their part to make this instrument less bureaucratic, more integrated and more efficient. I cannot fail to mention here how deeply I have been impressed by the devotion to duty shown by the staff at this difficult time. Their faithfulness to the Charter is also a requisite for the success of the Organization.	
My fifth observation refers to the indissoluble link between peace and development and social justice. It is necessary for the more affluent Members of the Organization to understand that their high degree of development cannot be isolated from the welfare of all peoples of the globe. Greater co-operation between them and the developing countries is an imperative so that the latter may reach, within the shortest time possible, economic and social standards consistent with human dignity. The persistence of underdevelopment in more than 100 States Members of the United Nations is one of the greatest challenges to which solutions must be found before we enter the new millennium. Social justice is not only a matter of economic development; its other essential component is respect for human rights. We still witness egregious violations of human rights, the most
Allow me, finally, an anguished reflection. Throughout the ages, the human species has feared the unpredictable visitations of natural calamities and the terrible and uncontrollable blows dealt by them. Now, the species fears even more the forces it has itself unleashed, superior in horror to the fury of nature. We have found the diabolical means to destroy the human race and all its works.
How can we defend ourselves from such an unparalleled threat if we do not give supreme priority to our common survival? Have we perhaps lost the most primary form of compassion, which is compassion for human life itself?
The peoples of the United Nations, in whose name this Organization was created, must oppose such insanity with overwhelming solidarity and indomitable firmness. They must demand of the Governments of States which possess nuclear weapons that they reflect upon their responsibility to their peoples and to the planet itself and pursue policies that will lead to the elimination of these weapons.
There are new opportunities to reduce substantially the nuclear threat, to co-operate in overcoming the deadly dangers posed by terrorism and illegal drug traffic, to renew productive international dialogue on issues of great significance to all countries, and to strengthen this Organization so that it can make its full contribution to a peaceful world. We look with hope even now to the forthcoming meeting of two statesmen who will talk together in Reykjavik about problems affecting the whole world which they can do much to help resolve.
These opportunities impose the obligation that they be fully seized for the sake of the future of humankind. I shall participate with you in this effort to the utmost of my ability, as is required of me by my human instinct, by my conviction and by the mandate of peace which you have just entrusted to me.
The PRESIDENT: I thank His Excellency Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar for his statement.
Mr. Secretary-General, it is a great pleasure and honour for roe to be the first officially to congratulate you on your reappointment. It ia not only the greatest pleasure I have had as President of the General Assembly, it is without doubt the greatest pleasure I diall have during my term of office.
Witness to your past meritorious service to the United Nations, and to the service of mankind and its aspirations for peace, is the fact that this body has reappointed you by acclamation. There never was a likelihood of any other person being considered for the high post you are again to assume once Lt was clear that your health was such that you were prepared to take on again the arduous office of Secretary-General. The energies of those who have now reappointed you were always focused on ensuring that your great talents would remain available to us for another five years. It is our good fortune that you have accepted and bowed to our unanimous wish.
It is also particularly fortunate that your leadership will be available at this crucial juncture in the fortunes of the Organization, and that your pertinent comments will be made with renewed authority as we begin, appr opr ia tely, immediately after this warm ceremony, the review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations. At this time we need your wisdom, experience and clarity of view, and I know that I speak for the whole membership and the peoples they represent in stating that your reappointment
at this moment is felicitous.
(The President)
But your task is one extending far beyond the running of this house. Your reappointment is testimony that the membership continues to put their trust in you and that it continues to extend specific mandates in the search for solutions to the questions that are vexing the international community and taxing the patience of mankind, potentially or actually, issues of peace and war and the security of our planet.
(The President)
In several instances, you and your office are not only the focal point of efforts for a solution - you and your office are the only point of focus. This is a reflection of both the indispensability of the United Nations and the trust placed in you personally not only by the membership but by the parties in conflict - a trust not easily given and, more importantly, not readily retained. That this trust is unimpaired must surely have been a vital factor in the easily achieved unanimity regarding your reappointment.
In making this brief but heartfelt congratulatory speech, may I personally extend to you not only my best wishes, but my thanks for your unselfish sharing of experience and modestly extended guidance in the fulfilment of my functions.
I now call upon the representative of Benin, who will speak on behalf of the African Group.
Mr, OGOUMA (Benin) (interpretation from French): Five years ago in this very Hall, on the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council, we elected at the head of our Organization a talented diplomat, a son of the third world, a man of culture and of humanism. The work he has since done, as well as the aualltles that distinguish him, suggested that we once again show our confidence in him by investing him with the very great responsibility of guiding our Organization during another term of office.
I am therefore most gratified at the honour bestowed on me, both as the Chairman of the African Group for this month and as the Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of Benin, of expressing, to Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar our feelings on this most memorable occasion.
They are first and foremost a sense of pride at seeing a son of the third world, specifically of Peru, a member of the Non-Aligned Movement which shares the destiny of the African States, preside over the activities of our Organization.
SK/6
(Mr. Ogouma, Benin)
Who could better understand the profoundest aspirations of peoples, of the disadvantaged, towards a world of justice, prosperity and peace than this worthy son of that great civilization - the civilization of the Incas?
Next a sense of gratitude in recognition of the work he has done. The praise heaped on him by all delegations during this session reflect the great appreciation of States for his physical courage, moral and intellectual will and the heightened awareness that motivates him in carrying out his heavy responsibilities, which are both terribly difficult and extremely sensitive.
Mr. Secretary-General, in your role as a messenger of peace, you have spared neither time nor energy. Thus, from Bolivia to Haiti, from the Middle East to southern Africa, from Washington to Moscow, from Stockholm to Nairobi, from Afghanistan to Iraq, from Central America to Iran, you have proposed solutions which were most adequate and most likely to bring our world out of the crises that have beset it, crises which endanger international peace and security.
Your commitment to the Africans was a no lesser one. Never have you failed to use the means available to you to help the African continent resolve its most pressing problems. Here, we should merely like to mention your trip in 1984 to several countries in West Africa - particularly to my country, Benin - and the one you made to Ethiopia in 1985, where you saw for yourself the effects of drought. We also would not want to forget the establishment of the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, whose positive contribution was greatly appreciated. It is thus only natural that the Heads of State of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) decided once again, during the twenty-second summit of the organization held at Addis Ababa, to renew their confidence in you.
(Mr. 0goum> Benin)
We should like to express our sense of hope, finally, although the challenges still facing our Organization today are numerous and the problems complex. The most just and equitable solutions should be found for all of them.
Who could promote and implement solutions to those problems better than you -a highly experienced diplomat? Who would be able once again to reinstil faith in our Organization better than you, for everyone speaks of its shortcomings and w all are ready to propose solutions that would harm no one's interests.
Africa remains confident that, as in the past, you will be able to assist Africa in its struggle against poverty and oppression, its struggle against colonialism and neo-colon ialism and its struggle for the total and immediate eradication of the shameful system of a par theid and for the immediate Independence of Namibia. We are convinced that, as in the past, you will he at our side in the struggle for an Africa free from hunger and malnutrition and for a prosperous Africa that fully participates on an equal footing with other nations in building a world free from fear and the threat of nuclear holocaust - a world of peace, prosperity and dignity for all.
In renewing our wishes of good health to you, Sir, we are convinced that Mme. Perez de Cuellar - whose presence here among us we are pleased to note - as in the past, will give you the assistance and strength you need in your difficult but high office.
Mr. KIKUCHI (Japan): It is a great honour and privilege for me, on behalf of the Asian Group, to extend sincere congratulations to Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar on his reappointment as Secretary-General of the United Nations.
As chief administrative officer of this Organization for the past five years, he has made invaluable contributions to United Nations endeavours to achieve a better world. He has spared no efforts in his attempt to bring about peaceful settlement of the numerous regional conflicts and, in the process, has travelled to the four corners of the world. His unique auiet diplomacy in quest of peace has enjoyed the support not only of the Governments of Member States but of the entire international community of nations.
In the tragic conflict between Iran and Iraa, the untiring efforts of the Secretary-General represent a ray of hope in the darkness. On the question of Afghanistan, the Secretary-General has painstakingly kept open the channel of dialogue in the form of proximity talks in Geneva. Last January the Secretary-General came very close to a settlement of the problem of Cyprus. He remains actively committed to international efforts to restore peace and independence in Kampuchea. Moreover, he is one of the focal points in the pursuit of a just and lasting settlement to the problems in the Middle East, in Lebanon and on the Korean peninsula. The Secretary-General has been a patient and staunch interlocutor with South Africa on the independence of Namibia.
The list of his noble efforts and achievements in ouest of peace in his first term goes on and on. Suffice it say here that, while walking through a minefield of international conflicts and contentions, he has been a truly effective agent of peace. Through his careful efforts, he has made considerable progress on all fronts.
(Mr. Kikuchi, Japan)
The Secretary-General has also been instrumental in promoting international co-operation in the field of economic and social development. We vividly remember the appeals he made two years ago, which successfully mobilized world-wide efforts to rescue the victims of economic and natural disasters and social upheavals in the African continent.
More recently, the Secretary-General has devoted his energies to tackling knotty cruestions of the administrative and financial functioning of the world body. Especially in regard to the financial crisis that has come to threaten the very existence of the Organization, the Secretary-General has undertaken commendable efforts, including the economy measures introduced in the course of this year, it is to be noted that his annual report to the fortieth session of the General Assembly clearly set forth the difficulties concerning the imminent financial crisis and identified the need to undertake far-reaching adminstratIve and financial reforms.
We firmly believe that the United Nations will overcome its financial difficulty and regain the confidence of the international community under his leadership, because we are firmly convinced that the Secretary-General will persevere in his endeavours to bring about administrative and financial reforms during his new tenure.
We rejoice in the reappointment as chief administrator of this body of this man of wisdom, devotion and foresight, for it is precisely those qualities that are needed in this troubled world. The members of the Asian Group trust that Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar will continue his tireless search for world peace and prosperity for all our brethren.
I wish on this occasion to assure him once again that he will have the full co-operation and willing support of the Asian Group at this juncture, as he embarks upon his renewed assignment that entails such difficult but noble duties to mankind.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) ( interpretation from Russian): It is with particular satisfaction that I extend congratulations to you, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, on your unanimous reelection to the post of Secretary-General of the United Nations. I am proud of the fact that I do so on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
The States of the socialist community have unswervingly favoured the enhancement of United Nations activities on the basis of its Charter and recognize the authoritative role the Secretary-General of the Organization is called upon to play in implementing the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. Your reelection as the Organization's chief administrative officer attests to our recognition and positive assessment of your past activity as Secretary-General from 1 January 1982.
I personally have participated in the work of the United Nations with all five of the men who have served as Secretary-General of the Organization, and I know the kinds of problems and difficulties your predecessors encountered. There have also been many problems during your own tenure, and you have duly succeeded in coping with them. This can be explained to a great extent by the fact that, from the very outset, you had a correct view of the Organization's objectives. Upon your election to your post on 15 December 1981, you stated:
"the United Nations is a body of States gathered together for purposes and ends which go beyond and above purely national motives." (A/36/PV.98, p, ID You also correctly assessed the responsible role of the United Nations Secretary-General, who must, in your words,
(Mr. Gurinovich, Byelorussian SSR) "become the advocate of the causes of common interest. ... His sole guiding star must be the promotion of causes favourable to the progress of all, for the benefit of all, on the basis of international peace and security and unswervingly directed towards justice, in conformity with the mandate given him by the Charter." (A/36/PV.98, p. 12)
Today, once again, you have reaffirmed your dedication to the ideals of the United Nations. The States of the socialist community wish you success in your work.
Your reelection takes place in a period when the United Nations, like the entire world, is passing through an extremely critical stage in its history. We are all faced with the pressing and urgent problem of creating an effective, operational and comprehensive system of international peace and security that will ensure eoual security for all. In accomplishing this, it is necessary to make consistent progress in the sphere of disarmament, to prevent the spread of the arms race to new spheres, to eradicate the vestiges of colonialism, to wipe out racism and apartheid, to ensure eoual economic security for all states, to strengthen the political and legal bases for a lasting peace and to achieve co-operation on an equal footing.
(Mr. Gurinovich, Byelorussian SSR)
It is also important to strengthen the United Nations itself to ensure that the rights and legitimate interests of any Members of the Organization or any groups of States are not harmed under the pretext of reorganization. The United Nations must become an effective instrument in strengthening peace and developing international co-operation.
We are convinced that your vast knowledge, wealth of experience and tireless dedication to the cause of peace and justice will continue to be devoted to the service of the interests of the United Nations and. will promote a constructive solution for all these pressing problems, without which the quality of life of mankind, and indeed its very existence, will be endangered.
I very much value our personal friendship, and I wish good health to you and to your wife who, although she does not have obligations under the United Nations Charter, shows a concern for our joint work that is commensurate with her position.
In conclusion allcM me to reiterate the readiness and wish of the States of the socialist community to continue our manifold and fruitful co-operation with you and with all United Nations Member States to achieve victory for the cause of peace, security, justice and progress on earth.
_^e PRESIDENT! I now call on the representative of Mexico, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American States.
Mr. MOYA PALENCIA (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish)*. The representatives of the regional groups that have preceded me have expressed to you, Ambassador Javier Perez de Cuellar, their pleasure and congratulations at your election with the unanimous support of Member States for another term as Secretary-General of the United Nations, but that pleasure turns to joy in the case of the latin American and Caribbean Group, to whose region you rightfully belong.
We who compose continental latin America and the Caribbean basin, know that in you we have a worthy, intelligent and effective representative of our aspirations,
concerns and interests with idiom we are at one in respect for the purposes and principles of the United Nations set forth in the Charter. Those principles guide the community of nations in maintaining international peace and security*, in developing friendly relations among nations based on the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples; in achieving international co-operation in solving problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting human rights; in joining together to settle their common problems in conformity with the rules of international law, with respect for the sovereignty and integrity of all States, while seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes and avoiding the threat or use of force and intervention; and in understanding peace not merely as the absence of war but rather as the broadest range of cultural and material conditions for the complete development of all people without distinction as to creed, race or ideology.
It is a source of genuine pride for us that you, Ambassador Perez de Cuellar, have once again commanded a consensus by the nations represented here to renew their trust in you. This undoubtedly means your status as a universal man is based on your status as a true son of Peru and Latin America. We extend our most sincere congr atulations.
But that legitimate pride and profound satisfaction are heightened because the Member States of our Group are convinced, as they stated to you a few days ago in the document that supported your candidature for office, that you have accomplished magnificent work at the head of the Secretariat during the five years of your first term of offioe, giving eloquent evidence of steadiness, integrity, dedication and prudent and wise management. That has won you a reaff irna tion of the unreserved suPP°rt you had already obtained from the international coimnunity.
The skill with which you have dealt with difficult and critical issues, some of them deeply distressing, that the United Nations has been faced with in the past
five years, and your negotiating skill in achieving consensus, in resolving or reducing conflicts, and in acting as a decisive factor striking a balance between opposing criteria and interests, without ever losing sight of the essential principles of the United Nations but rather affirming and implementing them, have enabled you to give a faultless performance that has won you enthusiastic support for the renewal of your important mandate by acclamation.
As you begin a new stage of management, you are facing, together with the difficult problems on our substantive agenda so vital to the peace, security and economic and social development of the world, a severe financial crisis at the United Nations, You yourself have described it as a political crisis that puts to the test once again the will and good faith of Menber States in keeping alive and effective the Organization we established over 40 years ago, which has suffered an unjust and prolonged campaign of discredit instigated by powerful forces that wish to undermine the fulfilment of its purposes or to divert it from its objectives with no thought of its vital importance to all mankind.
Your office is now, as never before, Mr. Secretary-General, neither easy nor comfortable. Rather it is one that requires, in addition to your characteristic sense of balance, your proven management skills in overcoming obstacles and helping the United Nations live up to its responb ill ties and rise above its detractors, with their selfish interests.
We have elected you in a process that demonstrates once again that democracy is viable in our Organization and that through it we can arrive at agreed results, and the best way of shewing our support for you is for all of us without exception to give firm support to your work in the Secretariat by strengthening the good reputation, the operative and financial capacity, and the efficiency and productivity of the United Nations.
Your task would be infinitely less complicated and dangerous if the political will of States were to be clearly expressed, if it were understood that international law is the only possible framework for our coexistence, and if multilateralism were recognized as the irreplaceable instrument to save mankind from uncertainty, to settle its disputes and project it towards peaceful development. It is in this spirit that the States members of the Latin American and Caribbean Group now again assure you of our fullest co-operation, based on the lofty principles of the San Francisco Charter and the need for the United Nations to play its essential role with increasing effectiveness.
In this age of speedy technological progress and of now untenable social and economic contrasts, when all of the world's peoples are genuinely peers, the privileged and the dispossessed, the role of the united Nations as a communicator, and the harmonizing work that Mr. Perez de Cuellar is accomplishing as the head of the Secretariat, will be decisive factors in mankind's choice between concord and conflagration, confrontation and detente, uncertainty and security, poverty and development, the survival of our organized community or global anarchy, between the affirmation of its highest values and the conversion of our culture into radioactive dust.
In this challenging but inspiring task, the Latin American and Caribbean countries join ranks within the United Nations at this time to support the Organization firmly, constructively and institutionally. They join also in supporting you, Mr, Perez de Cuellar, as the newly re-elected Secretary-General of the United Nations as you continue your struggle for freedom and peace, sowing the seeds of unquenchable hope for the peace and development of mankind.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. LAUTENSCHLAGER (Federal Republic of Germany)’. Mt. President, it is a particular pleasure and high honour for me to extend, on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States, through you to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, the most cordial congratulations on his re-election. It gives us great satisfaction that also in future years he will head the world Organization to which he has given so much in recent years and for which he has worked so successfully. We are grateful that we shall be able to rely on him also
in future for his advice, his judiciousness, his experience and his prudent
(Mr. Lautensch lager , Federal Republic of Germany) determination, which he has displayed so convincingly in the past five years in the service of the world Organization. Especially at the present difficult juncture it is both comforting and reassuring for us to know that he will continue to hold his office, the dignity and esteem of which he has enhanced in recent years.
The Secretary-General is, I am sure, fully aware of the burden he is about to shoulder once again. His decision to comply with the wish of all Member States that he should continue in office may not have been an easy one. He always held that the office of the Secretary-General should not be a subject of controversial debate and that no one should make promises that were impossible of fulfilment. Rather, Mr. Perez de Cuellar told the Member States what he expected them to do for the Organization in order to make it work. In this noble way he has given us the opportunity to demonstrate today our full and sincere confidence in him. The members of the Group of Western European and other States consider it their duty and their privilege to assist him in the discharge of his tasks to the best of their abilities.
The unanimous election of the Secretary-General today reaffirms the confidence that all Member States place in him. It is our hope that this confidence may ease the burden of his office. At the same time, it will enable him also in his second term of office to assist us all in finding the common path that will lead the United Nations into a secure future.
During the general debate of past weeks, representatives of many countries have voiced their high appreciation of the Secretary-General and his work. This appreciation gives expression to the sentiments we also share today. In a major address which the Secretary-General delivered at Oxford on 13 Itoy 1986, he spoke about the pitfalls of his office) about the Scylla of inflating the role of the Secretary-General and the Charybdis of the desire to avoid controversy.
(Mr. Lautensch lager , Federal Republic of Germany)
I think we are all agreed that in the years past the Secretary-General has always shown and taken the right way - a way that has also won him admirati.cn, recognition and confidence.
Mr. Secretary-General, thorny tasks lie ahead of you. Nobody is more fully aware of them than you yourself. We wish to thank you for all you have done for us in the past and we wish you the best of success for your second term of office. We, the menbers of the Group of Western European and other States, pledge you our unreserved support as you continue to fulfil your responsible tasks of safeguarding peace, of supporting the Member States in co-operating among themselves, of promoting respect for human rights all over the world, of advancing economic and social progress, and of strengthening the United Nations and thus enhancing its ability to meet the challenges of our time, with regard to the United Nations, you once said:
"The United Nations system, while imperfect as any human undertaking must be, offers almost unlimited potential for the creation of a strong and durable foundation for peace and for the well-being of the world’s population."
May it be granted to you, relying on the confidence and the co-operation of us all, to translate this grand vision into real achievements in the years ahead.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Oman, who will speak on behalf of the Arab states.
Mf • AL-ANSI (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic)'. On behalf of the members of the Arab Group at the united Nations, it gives me great pleasure to extend our sincere congratulations to Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar on his unanimous re-election today by the Menbers of the international Organization in both the Security Council and the General Assembly to continue in his important post as Secretary-General of the United Nations for another five-year term.
(Mr. Al-Ansi, Oman)
We are fully satisfied with the way in which Mr. Perez de Cuellar has discharged his duties in the service of the international community and in promoting the principles of the Charter during his five-year tenure. He has with unparalleled devotion and sincerity made important attempts to respond to the urgent needs of the international community through his efforts on various levels to contribute to the maintenance of the prestige, legitimacy and high objectives of this international Organization. He has also sought strenuously to bring closer the points of view of its Members and to participate effectively in the ongoing attempts to settle the numerous regional and internal disputes, especially those in the Middle East and in occupied Palestine and as a consequence of the continuing war between Iran and Iraa. He has done all of this in addition to playing a humanitarian role to mitigate the sufferings in some parts of the world as a result of a flood of refugees and the adverse affects of desertification and drought and to promote a new, just international economic order.
The Arab States collectively are extremely pleased to know that he will be occupying his high position for the next five years. The close historical and cultural links between the Arab States and the States of Latin America, and between the Spanish culture and the Arab culture in general, and the mutual ties between the Arab delegations and Mr. Perez de Cuellar have been and will remain excellent.
On behalf of the Arab delegations to this international Organization we congratulate the Secretary-General on the confidence placed in him by the Member States which have called upon him to assume the burden of international responsibility for another term of office. We also congratulate ourselves on his accepting those onerous functions in good health and firm determination to maintain a sound performance of benefit to all, without exception.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of the United States of America, the host country.
Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): On behalf of the United States, in its role as host country to the United Nations, I warmly welcome the reappointment of Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar as Secretary-General of the United Nations. During his first term the Secretary-General displayed not only dedication to the ideals of the Charter but also consummate skill in attempting to put those principles into practice. The Secretary—General *s willingness to continue his extraordinarily demanding work demonstrates his devotion to this Organization. Hli unchallengeable personal integrity and his deep devotion to the ideals that this Organization embodies have won for him the acclaim of the whole world and that admiration and respect have been expressed here today by his reelection by acclamation as Secretary-General of the Organization.
His activities in the case of peace and justice for humankind have brought honour to him personally, to Peru, to the Western hemisphere and to the United Nations. We appreciate his efforts, public and private, in the vital area of peacekeeping.
In his capacity as chief administrative officer the Secretary-General has also taken on the immense task of fiscal and administrative reform of the United Nations. His commitment to that reform will enable the Organization to cope more effectively with the political, economic and social challenges of the coming decades.
I congratulate the Secretary-General and extend my warmest wishes for his future success. He enjoys our deepest respect and admiration and he can count upon the co-operation of the Government which I represent.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has concluded its consideration of agenda
item 16.
AGENDA ITEM 38 REVIEW OF THE EFFICIENCY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE UNITED NATIONS
(a)	REPORT OF THE GROUP OF HIGH-LEVEL INTERGOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS TO REVIEW THE EFFICIENCY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE UNITED NATIONS (A/41/49);
(b)	NOTE BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/41/663)
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now begin consideration of agenda item 38, "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations".
In this connection the Assembly has before it the report of the Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts to review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations (A/41/49) and the Note of the Secretary-General (A/41/663).
I would draw the attention of the Assembly to the decision taken at its third plenary meeting, on 20 September, relating to the organization of its work, to the effect that item 38 will be considered in plenary meetings of the General Assembly and that during the course of that consideration the Fifth Committee will, within the scope of its responsibilities, undertake a factual examination of the report of the Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts and submit its findings to a plenary meeting.
Before calling upon the first speaker, I propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed on Monday, 13 October, at 5.00 p.m.
If a hear no objection, I shall take it that it is so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I request representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names as soon as possible.
(The President)
I now call upon the Chairman of the Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations, Mr. Vraalsen of Norway, Uio will also make a statement as representative of Norway.
Mr. VRAALSEN (Norway), Chairman of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Btperts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations: Let me first take this opportunity to offer my Government's and my personal congratulations to the Secretary-General upon his reappointment. For almost five years we have had the privilege of having Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar as Seer e tar y—Gen er al of our Organization. Throughout that period he has shown leadership and wisdom. With the highest dedication, professional skill and personal integrity, he has guided our efforts to attain the objectives of the United Nations and make this world of ours a better and more secure place for all of us to live in. I am convinced that in the years to come the Secretary-General will vigorously continue his efforts to promote multilateral co-operation and strengthen the United Nations.
Mr. Secretary-General, we particularly need your wisdom, skill and experience at this time, when the United Nations faces serious problems and challenges of an administrative, financial and political nature. I assure you of my Government's and my own fullest co-operation in discharging your duties as Secretary-General.
In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the Uhited Nations, I have the honour to introduce the Group's report (A/4 1/4 9).
In its resolution 40/237 of 18 December 1985, by which it established the Group, the General Assembly requested it to conduct, in full accordance with the principles and provisions of the Charter,
"a thorough review of the administrative and financial matters of the united Nations, with a view to identifying measures for further improving the efficiency of its administrative and financial functioning, which would contribute to strengthening its effectiveness in dealing with political, economic and social issues", (resolution 40/237, para. 2 (a))
Mr. Vraalsen, Chairman, Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations
In the spirit of that resolution, the members of the Group agreed from the very beginning of their work that they should not deal with the immediate financial crisis of the united Nations, which was the responsibility of the General Assembly , and that their primary objective was to submit recommendations aimed at improving the Organization's medium-term and long-term administrative and financial functioning. The Group also noted that it had been requested to consider only the administrative and financial matters of the united Nations and its subsidiary bodies, and that the relationship between the Organization and the specialized agencies, as well as system-wide co-ordination and co-operation, thus fell outside its mandate.
The Group held four sessions between 25 February and 15 August this year and met for a total of eight weeks. During that period of very hard work it endeavoured to examine all the topics on its agenda thoroughly, giving equal emphasis to all of them. On several occasions the Group had the privilege of hearing the Secretary-General, who offered his full co-operation and gave his views on a number of topics as requested by the Group. The Group also heard the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the Chairman of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and a limited nunber of high-level officials of the Secretariat, who clarified some of the more technical issues before us.
e Group s repart contains 71 recommendations under six different topics, dealt with in sections II to VII« "The intergovernmental machinery and its functioning , "Structure of the Secretariat", "Measures regarding personnel", Monitoring, evaluation and inspection", "Planning and budget procedure" and
Mr. Vraa Isen, Chairman, Group of High-level intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations ”
"Implementation of the Group's recommendations". As can be seen from the report and the recommendations it contains, the tasks entrusted to the Group were both comprehensive and in many cases extremely complex. Within the limited time available it was not possible for the Group to examine in depth every aspect of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations. As a result, the Group felt that a distinction should be drawn between*.
"(a) Those questions on which it was possible for it to submit precise recommendations that might be taken into consideration by the General Assembly upon the submission of its report"
and
"(b) Those questions that merited and required examination in greater depth and with regard to which it had to be satisfied with defining lines of approach and suggesting methods for subsequent research." (1/41/49, para. 13) I do not think it would be appropriate for me as Chairman of the Group to make comments in that capacity on the various recommendations now before the General Assenbly. May I say, however, that those recommendations are the result of long and thorough deliberations and that, in ray opinion, they form a well-balanced text consisting of equally important elements.
Despite the many points of convergence, the Group was unfortunately unable, owing to lack of time, to reach a consensus on the question relating to the planning and budget mechanism. May I, nevertheless, point out that, with the exception of two recommendations on which reservations were made, all the recommendations contained in the report were unanimously approved by the Group.
Mr. Vraa Isen, Chairman, Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations
I wish to take this opportunity to express my deep appreciation to the ment) er a of the Group for their endurance, their spirit of co-operation and their firm determination to bring the Group's work to a successful conclusion.
Let me underline that, as stated in the introduction to the report, the Group performed its work on the basis of full respect for the principles and provisions of the Charter. The Group was convinced that the measures it had reco mended would contribute to improve further the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the Group was convinced that it had only begun a reform process. That process must now be carried further by other intergovernmental bodies and by the Secretary-General. The Group considered that it had fully discharged its mandate and concluded its work with the submission of its report.
On behalf of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts, it gives me great pleasure, as Chairman of the Group, to commend its report to the General Assembly.
(Mr. Vraalsen, Norway) Having introduced the report of the Group of 18, I should like to make a few observations and comments as the Permanent Representative of Norway and as someone who for a year now has been intimately involved in the efforts to improve the administrative and financial situation of our Organization.
The Norwegian Prime Minister, Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, in her statement to the Assembly in this very Hall less than three weeks ago, reaffirmed Norway’s deep commitment to multilateralism and to a strong United Nations. In emphasizing the need for reform to restore faith and confidence in the Organization, the Prime Minister said:
"The task of renewing the effectiveness of the United Nations is basically political in nature. It requires that Werber States manifest the political will to place the financing of the Organization on a viable basis and provide the Secretary-General with the mandate and the support he needs to carry out the major organizational, staffing and budget changes which will reduce costs, improve effectiveness and restore confidence. At this forty-first session we have a unique opportunity to do exactly that. It is an opportunity we must not miss." (A/41/PV.5, p.57) It is indeed encouraging to note that the great majority of the political leaders who addressed the General Assembly spoke in the same terms, stressing a reaffirmation of their conrni tanent to multilateralism and the United Nations accompanied by strong support for organizational, financial and administrative reforms. It was also gratifying to note the many favourable comments which were made on the report of the Group of 18 and the agreed recommendations submitted by the Group. I wish in this connection to cite one such statement, that made on 2 October this year by the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert Mugabe. He said*.
EMS/12
A/4 VPV. 33
47
(Mr, Vraa Isen, Norway)
"In the same vein, I wish to commend for its good work the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts .... The Group's observations, analyses and recommendations as contained in its report, thich is submitted to the Assembly ... are a realistic attempt to find solutions to the problems besetting our Organization, and I sincerely trust that the Assembly will see them in that serious light." (A/41/PV. 21, p. 12) That expression of political support, and many others of a similar character from the highest levels of Government authority from all over the world, should guide us in our consideration of this item in coming days.
At the risk of stating and possibly repeating the obvious, I cannot but stress - and stress again and again - the overriding importance of the subject matter now before us. what we decide upon at the end of our discussion will have a direct bearing upon the future viability of this Organization. This being the case, I trust that all Member States will be guided by the same spirit, by the san# desire, as guided the 18 menbers of the Expert Group*, that is, to improve the functioning of the United Nations, to make it into a truly effective forum for global co-operation and to provide the international community with efficient machinery, a place where nations can meet as equals seeking to harmonize their policies and actions in the political, economic and social fields. It is the hop« of ny delegation that the Assembly's consideration of the report will end with the sending of a strong political message in support of those goals. Such a message would be fully in line with the many statements made by our political leaders.
The matter before us is of direct concern to each and every Me fiber State. It is not an East-West issue, it is not an issue between opposing forces from the North and from the South, between developing and developed countries, between regional groups or between the major contributors to the United Nations system and the rest of the menber ship, it is a matter of common interest and common concern.
Either we succeed together or we fail together. I therefore sincerely hope that we shall have a constructive exchange of views and that each delegation will approach the problem with an open mind, make its own evaluation and pass its own independent judgement on the important questions before us.
During the past months I have sensed that among some delegations there continues to be a lingering feeling of doubt and uneasiness about the reform process, in particular regarding the efforts to develop improved machinery and procedure for planning and prograrane budgeting. I really hope that during the forthcoming debate we can put those concerns firmly to rest. The authority to decide upon the content and level of the budget of the United Nations is entrusted to the General Assembly and its Fifth Committee. Voting procedures for taking decisions pertaining to budgetary matters are firmly established. I should like to make it very clear that, as far as my delegation is concerned, any new and Improved budgetary machinery and procedure will have to be based upon full respect for the principles and provisions of the Charter and the authority of the General Assembly and the Fifth Consnittee. This has been our firm principled position throughout the process in the Expert Group, and all delegations can rest assured that it will continue to be so.
However, this position does not prevent my delegation from actively seeking and actively supporting budgetary reforms that can improve upon the present budgetary procedure. The present planning and budget procedure Is inadequate. It does not give Member States - and here I mean all of us, all Heater States - the possibility to exercise the necessary intergovernmental leadership, particularly in setting priorities within the resources likely to be available. Reforms in that area would serve the interest of us all. Nobody will benefit from holding on to a procedure which is clearly deficient.
On the question of the budgetary process, I wish to quote two paragraphs from the Secretary-General's note of 1 October 1986;
"The work done by the Group of Experts on the budgetary process is of major importance to the future of the United Nations. While full agreement was not reached, exploration of the subject was extensive and there is evident agreement on several central points, including the need for an improved intergovernmental machinery that can deal more thoroughly with questions related to the budget*, the advisability of earlier participation by Member States in the programme and budget process*, the importance of co-ordinated programme planning and programme budgeting*, and the need for early establishment of guidance by the General Assettbly on the level of resources within which expenditures during a biennium would be acconinodated.
"This measure of congruence, especially when seen in the context at the vital interests of the organizations that are involved, would suggest that with a further effort by the General Assembly agreement on this subject can yet be reached. The authority of the Assembly to determine the size of the budget, the establishment of priorities and the apportionment of expenses as provided for in the Charter should, of course, be preserved. T believe improved intergovernmental machinery, with adeauate time, continuity and expertise to give comprehensive consideration to programmes, priorities and resources, could be of much assistance to the Assembly and its Fifth Committee in reaching timely budgetary decisions - decisions that would enjoy the broad support that the health of the Organization reauires. There is need for a practical procedure that can facilitate and encourage broad agreement on the budget notwithstanding political differences on substantive issues that may persist among Member States." (A/41/663, paras. 6 and 7) By auoting the Secretary-General as extensively as I have done on this point, T wish to convey to all representatives the following with a strong sense of urgency: that we must during this session of the General Assembly develop a practical procedure that can facilitate and encourage broad agreement on the budget; that the report of the Group of 18 provides a good basis for shaping such a procedure; and that we must start working on this Question now. We have no time to lose on this.
Before concluding, allow me to put forward one other very important point. We have been talking about restoring the financial soundness and viability of our Organization, and about reforms to this end. Let us be very clear about this: whatever measures of reform we undertake, the financial viability of the United Nations can be fully restored and secured only if all Member States pay their
assessed contributions in full and on time. Anything short of that is a violation of their obligations under the Charter. Anything short of that makes orderly management of the Organization virtually impossible. Withholdings at the level which we are experiencing at present, if allowed to continue, will threaten the very existence of the Organization.
I urge those Members which are behind in their payments to settle their accounts. Such action on their part would convey a much desired and much needed message of support for the United Nations and for the efforts now under way to make the Organization leaner, more focused and more effective.
Finally, I express my sincere hope that the Assembly will endorse the agreed recommendations of the Group of High-level Experts and will reach agreement on a new planning and budgetary procedure. By doing so the Assembly would take an important political step - a step which would be extremely significant for the future of the Organization. The Assembly would thus make a beginning on a reform process - a process which will be painful, which will be gradual, and which will make great demands of the leadership of the Member States and the Secretary-General. Once again a clear sense of direction is emerging here and an honest attempt is being made by the Assembly to turn things around to the benefit of all. At this critical juncture the United Nations deserves and needs the full support of all Member States, with all its admitted limitations, the Organization - the United Nations - still remains our finest, our indispensable, forum for global co-operation.
I can assure you, Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, and all my fellow representatives in this hall that my delegation will spare no effort in trying to contribute to a successful conclusion of the consideration of the item now before
us.
Mr. MACIEL (Brazil): First, allow me to join preceding speakers in congratulating the Secretary-General on his reappointment for a second term. I congratulate Mr. Javier Perez de Cuillar but, having studied carefully the report of the Group of 18 high-level experts, I do not envy him. All I can say is that I promise him my most enthusiastic support, and the firm support of my delegation and my Government.
The item before us today has undeniably come under the central spotlight of the forty-first session of the General Assembly. And appropriately so, since it relates directly not only to the efficient administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations, as its title indicates, but also to its survival as an integral, universal and democratic Organization.
The Group of 18 did not have a mandate to deal with the Organization's immediate financial crisis, as the Group itself points out in paragraph 8 of its report; however, we are all very much aware of the degree to which this Question has permeated all others. This is very much the case with the report of the Group of 18. Our deliberations on this item, therefore, besides being crucial to the Organization's structure and modus operand! in the medium and long term will also have a direct bearing on the outcome of the present financial crisis. We all hope that it will have a positive bearing, and we are convinced that this goal can be
achieved if we reach a consensus agreement - or at least a broad-based agreement.
With this in mind, my delegation engages in these deliberations with flexibility and a constructive approach. We may even be prepared to sacrifice some of our objectives for the benefit of such an agreement. We are convinced that this approach is not naive, for we believe that many delegations share our sentiments and that flexibility shown by some will be reciprocated by others.
We also believe that Member States have already given a clear demonstration of the importance they attach to these issues. We cannot, of course, anticipate at this point the final conclusions we shall reach at the end of our deliberations, but if we maintain a flexible and constructive approach to the end we shall also be demonstrating collective responsibility and avoiding an impasse or the imposition of the views of some upon all others.
That propitious climate would be further enhanced if Member States that are witholding their assessed contributions and therefore not complying with their financial obligations to the Organization in accordance with the Charter would follow the examples of others and fulfil their obligations, so as to give the United Nations some breathing space and to dissipate some of the grave uncertainties we are at present experiencing.
I now wish to say a few words relating to the scope and procedure of our deliberations. There are two essential documents to be considered: the report of the Group of 18 itself (A/41/49), and the note by the Secretary-General (A/41/663). Any subject not discussed in either of those documents should not, in my view, be considered under this item, for, although there may be other related areas of interest, the item is complex and comprehensive enough as it is. Recommendations that are not the object of profound controversy should be adopted without lenghty debate.
After careful consideration of the report of the Group of 18, my Government has come to the conclusion - which I am sure is shared by most others represented
(Mr» Maciel, Brazil) here - that the Group has performed a very difficult task and that, even if that task was not complete, we are all indebted to the experts who made up the Group. In general, my Government is prepared to accept most of the recommendations proposed, with any technical adjustments that may prove necessary.
On the other hand, there are clearly different levels of accuracy, appropriateness and validity in the proposed recommendations. Some, such as recommendations 20 and 30, are extremely vague or only restate previous recommendations, others are either excessively specific or excessively rigid - recommendation 3 (e) is an example. Still others are poorly elaborated or based on insuffient information or inadeouate premises, such as recommendation 25 (2), in regard to which I have serious reservations. Despite these shortcomings, however, the general lay-out of the report and the bases underlying its work are sound and consistent.
The note by the Secretary-General, although of a general nature, contains some thoughtful observations which deserve our special attention. In particular, his analysis of the work done by the Group in regard to the budgetary process of the Organization coincides with our own assessment to the extent that, despite the lack of final agreement, there was a wide convergence of views. I do not wish to enter into details at this stage, but two examples of this fact merit immediate attention: first, the need to ensure the participation of Member States at an early stage of the budgetary process, with due respect for the responsibilities of the Secretary-General; and secondly, the introduction of the concept of a budgetary envelope that would encase, with some adjustments to the current definition of add-ons, the totality of resources available for a biennium.
This latter concept still requires some refinement, specifically in relation to the procedure for the determination of the envelope and the related contingency
fund, but the basic agreement is already there. My delegation does not deem it appropriate, however, that we should limit ourselves to the three choices presented by the Group of 18 when considering this item. We would prefer a broader discussion, that would not necessarily impose the selection of one of three choices, which the Group of 18 itself could not make. One possibility, for instance, would be to combine some elements from the first and second choices, with specific provisos for the clear and appropriate division of responsibilities between the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and with the maintenance of current rules pertaining to the decision-making process.
I shall refrain from making remarks concerning specific recommendations as I believe we shall have the opportunity to do so at a later stage, either in the Fifth Committee or when the plenary meeting considers this item again. I should like, however, to indicate two areas dealt with by the Group which we feel should be examined very closely in order to dispel some concerns, which I am sure are shared by other delegations.
The first relates to the recommendations directed to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other, similar organizations subsidiary to the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly. Owing to the specific characteristics of those organizations, some recommendations directed primarily st the United Nations proper but applicable to them as well should be agreed upon only after careful consultations have been carried out with all directly interested parties.
This is also true of those recommendations concerning the absorption by those organizations of activities at present undertaken by others. UNDP has already prepared an informal document containing the Administrator's comments to the
(Mr. Macie1, Brazil)
Secretary-General, and I am sure these will be very helpful to us in our deliberations.
The second area that we feel should be closely examined is that of personnel. The Group of 18, appropriately, devoted a great deal of attention to this issue and has formulated 22 recommendations in the relevant chapter of its report. In addition, one further recommendation - number 15, is in the chapter devoted to the structure of the Secretariat, but nevertheless has a direct bearing upon personnel.
The Group of 18 concurred as to the need to ensure that more equitable and selective methods of recruitment be applied to improve the standards of efficiency, competence, independence and integrity of the Secretariat. The Group also agreed that reduction of the number of staff members would be desirable and could be attained without hampering the current level of programme activities of the thited Nations. These two sets of recommendations, although distinct, have the same objective, namely, more efficiency, agility and responsiveness in the Secretariat.
My delegation fully shares these objectives and believes that the recommendations, with the necessary adjustments, should be accepted and implemented. There is, however, a pervasive objective sought by some, which is sometimes clearly spelt out, sometimes disguised behind other goals. I refer to the idea of indiscriminate reduction of expenditures. We are concerned at the level of the United Nations budget, and my own country's assessed contribution is not paid without some sacrifice. But we cannot accept the idea that this concern should be the determinant factor in undertaking alterations or restructuring. We therefore agree with the Secretary-General's observation in his note when he states: "To seek the solve the Organization's financial difficulties at the expense of staff entitlements would be extremely short-sighted and counter-productive and would have adverse implications for the common system." (A/41/663, para. 9) Ibr that reason, we have severe reservations with regard to the present formulation of recommendation 61.
In conclusion, I would like to say that my delegation believes that the report of the Group of 18 should be considered an initial and important first step in the reforms we have to undertake in seeking to strengthen the United Nations and give it a more compact structure and more adequate basis for its every-day operations.
The General Assembly must now take a second, crucial step. It must reach an agreement that will allow for the transformation of recommendations into mandates. Thereafter, the third step and subsequent steps should be the Implementation of all the decisions taken and the elaboration of the several reviews, studies and reports that will be necessary. The task will require the constant attention of the General Assembly in the next few years and will represent a heavy load for the Secretary-General. We are confident, however, that, with his devotion and the support of Member States, reinforced today by his new mandate, he will be able to continue to carry it out with renewed energy, in the best interests of the Organization. In spite of any agreement we might reach and all the efforts of the Secretary-General, we shall have made no progress if Menber States do not feel bound to the Charter and to the financial commitments deriving from the Charter.
Mr. PETROVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation fro« Russian)*. I should like first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union, to congratulate Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar most warmly on his unanimous election to a second term as Secretary-General of the United Nations. We express the hope and our confidence that, in carrying out his responsible tasks under the Charter, Mr. Perez de Cuellar will continue to make comprehensive efforts to enhance the role and effectiveness of the Organization in performing its principle roles of maintaining international peace and security, saving mankind from the scourge of war and improving social progress and the standards of life of the people of our planet.
Given the present at once contradictory and interdependent structure of international relations on all levels, the United Nations is the important integral element without which the direction of vastly different processes into one coonon channel and the uniting of the various efforts of the different States to preserve
(Me. Petrovsky, USSR) peace on Earth for present and future generations would be unthinkable. In spite of all its shortcomings and weaknesses, the United Nations has in the past demonstrated that it can make a tangible contribution to the cause of preventing nuclear war, curbing the arms race and promoting the development of inter-State co-operation in various fields.
The role and significance of the United Nations are therefore all the more important in today's nuclear space age, when the very existence of civilization on Earth is at stake. This is a crucial period for mankind, in whirl) there is an ever greater awareness of the need for new ways of thinking in order to take fully into account the realities of the present-day world and to view peace as man's highest value. The essence of this new political thinking is the realization, while recognizing the diversity and interdependence of today's world, in which all States and peoples share a common destiny, that there is a need for firm and responsible action to ensure the triumph of reason and realism, to reaffirm the democratic foundations of international relations and to create a system that will ensure a just and safe life on our planet.
The process of restructuring political thinking should be based on concrete, positive events now occurring. The unilateral Soviet moratorium on nuclear explosions has been in effect for more than a year and this has created conditions favourable to the initiation of a process of practical limitations on the means of waging war. A serious impetus towards progress on such important issues as the limitation and cessation of the arms race, first and foremost the nuclear arms race, must result from the imminent meeting in Reykjavik between the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Sergevich Gorbachev, President Ronald Reagan of the United States.
The successful conclusion of the Stockholm Conference, the signing in Vienna of conventions laying down the basis for an international regime for the safe development of nuclear energy, and progress in banning chemical weapons, the fruitful consideration at the Geneva Conference on the Convention banning bacteriological warfare - all attest to the extremely positive role multilateral diplomacy plays in the reaffirmation of new political thinking. Not replacing but rather reinforcing bilateral diplomacy, multilateral forums are irreplaceable instruments for the interaction of States on a collective basis.
In this regard a special role belongs to the United Nations, which represents not merely the sum total of the States that conprise its membership, but a qualitatively new phenomenon in the system of international relations. It represents a unique centre for agreement among States on their actions for the sake of shared universal objectives. This Organization has a special place in the formation of the collective reasoning and will of the international oonsnunity. Therefore we have the greatest respect for the United Nations and we see the objective not only as its preservation but - and I should like to emphasize this*, it is the most important element - its comprehensive strengthening and development.
In the present situation the United Nations sees ahead of it new and favourable opportunities to use its collective authority to make the world a juster and safer place for all peoples. In fact much has been said here on this topic in the general debate, which concluded today. The concrete consideration of numerous pressing problems at this session will require all States to manifest goodwill and reason so that declarations and words may be turned into practical actions. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist in overcoming the negative confrontational tendencies that have been growing in recent years; to facilitate the curbing of the nuclear arms race on earth; to prevent a nuclear arms raoe in space; and to bring about a general reduction of the danger of war and establish confidence as an inalienable component of relations among States.
The United Nations has an even greater responsibility in connection with the objective of creating a comprehensive system of international peace and security encompassing the military, economic and humanitarian fields. We are convinced that the creation of such a system would be in keeping with the interests of all States. The bases proposed for security for all are in keeping with the principles of the united Nations Charter and must promote the implementation of those principles in regard to the specific nuclear and space conditions of our time. Ths United Nations will have to play a constructive role not only as the chief architect of a comprehensive system of security but also as the major guarantor of its functioning in a future non-nuclear world. It is necessary to realize that there is only one alternative to the activities of the united Nations*, chaos in international relations, the helplessness of States in the face of the arbitrary expression of will, and the anarchy of force.
The Soviet Union, like all countries that are dedicated to the purposes and principles of the united Nations Char ter, is seriously concerned regarding the recent attempts to diminish the significance of the United Nations on the part of those who, instead of having universal goals, are guided by their own strictly selfish interests, their own egoistic interests, those who would replace a	!
multilateral approach to the resolution of acute International problems with	I
unilateral attempts to dictate their will to sovereign States, using economic and military power to that end.
Indeed, instead of ensuring that, in accordance with existing international agreements, necessary conditions are provided for the work of the united Nations/ they create obstacles to the normal functioning of representatives of States accredited to this Organization*, they undertake illegal steps to limit the privileges and immunities of representatives of United Nations Member States*, and they put forward illegal demands regarding the reduction of the n unto er of persons of the missions of those countries. They do not shrink from financial manipulate
(Mr. Petrovsky, USSR) to channel the activities of the United Nations into a direction useful to them. It seems to us that that is the only way in which to describe the unilateral attempts being made to determine the size of their contributions to the United Nations budget.
However, it is obvious that attempts to take over the United Nations, to force Menti er States obediently to follow the policies imposed on them, are doomed to failure.
The majority of delegations that spoke during the general debate pointed out that the present financial crisis of the united Nations is political in nature. They called for the strengthening of the authority of the Organization and enhancement of its effectiveness.
In that connection, significant attention was also paid to the problem of putting in order the administrative and financial activities of the United Nations. The Soviet Union has an attitude of great responsiblity towards the issues of enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations activity, inter alia in the administrative and budgetary sphere, based on its principled assessment of its role in world affairs. In his response to the recent message of the united Nations Secretary-General, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet union, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, pointed out that:
"The Soviet Union unswervingly attaches great significance to the United Nations as an important instrument in the struggle for peace and international security. Moreover, in so doing it believes that the critical problems facing the united Nations can be solved only through strict compliance with the United Nations Charter and ensuring a healthy budgetary and administrative basis for the Organization.
"At the same time, the Soviet Union rejects any attempt to use the financial difficulties of the Uhited Nations to exert political pressure on it or to hinder the activities of the Organization."
The Soviet Union is in fact demonstrating its readiness to participate in the constructive search for a solution of those difficulties new being experienced by the United Nations. In answer to the request of the United Nations Secretary-General in connection with the present financial crisis of the Organization, the USSR has accelerated the payment of its contributions, and it has fully paid its contributions to the regular budget for 1986 and for the financing of the United Nations forces. It has also made a voluntary contribution amounting to S10 million to the special account created to overcome the financial difficulties of the United Nations.
Since it favours enhancement of the effectiveness and economical management of the United Nations and the limitation of unproductive expenditures, at the fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly the USSR supported the proposal regarding the establishment of the Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts to review the efficiency of the administrative and financial activity of the United Nations, and it took an active part in its work.
A/41/PV. 33
71 (Mr. Petrovsky, USSR) In our view, on the whole the results of the activities of the Group can be assessed positively. The majority of its reconinendations can serve as a basis for effective practical measures to rationalize the work of the united Nations, enhance its efficiency and ensure economical management. The recommendations concerning limiting the number and length of meetings of united Nations bodies and reducing the volume of the documentation, and so on, seem useful. Nor can there be any doubts regarding the recommendation on a study of the structure of the Secretariat in order to simplify and streamline it and improve co-ordination among various subdivisions, in particular in the social and economic sphere. The recommendation on reducing the number of United Nations personnel by IS per cent and the number of higher-level employees by 25 per cent is also of great significance.
Of course, steps must be taken to ensure that these reconinendations are put into effect under the strict control of the General Assembly and that the Uhited Nations activities in the fundamental areas laid down by its Charter are not harmed.
At the same time, it should be noted that some of the problems considered by the Group were not resolved and a number of questions were simply beyond its scope. Thus, for example, the Group was not able to reach agreement on the extremely important problem of reorganization of the planning and make-up of the United Nations budget in such a way as to ensure the maximum effective use of means available to the Organization and prevent unjustified growth of the Organization's expenditures.
It should also be noted that the report of the Group of 18 contains a number of recommendations on which agreement was not reached, which in our view is totally unacceptable. Ebr example, one recommendation which was not agreed upon in the Group, but was included in the report, states that not less than 50 per cent of
the nationals of any State working in the Secretariat should have permanent contracts. This can only be described as a cynical reoomnendation aimed at strengthening the over-representation in the Secretariat of cne group of States and even further aggravating the under-representation of another group. We are profoundly convinced that such an approach runs counter to the objectives and purposes of the United Nations. It is understandable that we firmly reject this kind of recommendation. There are other recommendations on personnel issues which impede the implementation of the principle of just geographical distribution in staffing the Secretariat. In the view of the Soviet delegation, recommendations on personnel matters should be referred to the International Civil Service Commission for further stuty.
On the whole, however, the Soviet delegation is ready to support the majority of the recommendations of the Group after appropriate clarification and explanations in the Fifth Coram it tee.
In ooncluslon, the delegation of the USSR wishes to emphasize that the work of the Group of 18 represents an important stage in the activities designed to improv« the functioning of intergovernmental machinery and the executive apparatus of the United Nations. This important objective is cne towards which the Seer etary—Gen er al has personally been working for the past five years, as noted in his memorandum of 1 October 1986.
In his statement during the general debate, a member of the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, Edward Shevardnadze, pointed out that
"The (hited Nations is on the verge of serious changes. It is impossible to restructure relations among States without taking into account altered realities." (A/41/PV.6, p. 62)	*
(Mr. P>trw*y, B8R>
A great any unresolved questions have accumulated concerning »• activities of the Organisation. Xt would sees to us that, in connection with many of these problew in the daily activities of the united Nations, it would be worth holding a special discussion, with the participation of all interacted parties. M we see it, the point of such a discussion would be to strengthen the Organisation and create the necessary conditions for the resolution of the couples international problems of our tines. It is tins to put into effect all the as ch in er y available to the united Nations and to make use of all ita powers in the Interests of strengthening the peace and security of all States. The delegation of the Soviet th ion is ready to co-operate constructively with all Interested parties in establishing an appropriate dialogue.
The meting rose at 5.50 pja.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/41/PV. 42 22 October 1986
ENGLISH
Forty-first session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-SECOND MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 20 October 1986, at 10 a.m.
President:	Mr. CHOUDHURY	(Bangladesh)
-	Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Samora Moises Machel, President of the People's Republic of Mozambique
-	The situation in Kampuchea [2 5]
(a)	Report of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
8 6-64 3 02/A 19 4 7V ( E)
EH/ad
The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF HIS EXCELLENCY MR. SAMORA MOISES MACHEL, PRESIDENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
The PRESIDENT; Before beginning the consideration of the item on the agenda for this morning, it is my sad duty to inform the General Assembly of the tragic death of the President of the People's Republic of Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. Samora Moises Machel.
He was a valiant freedom fighter and a statesman of world stature. He led a liberation movement whose victory is seminal to the final eradication of one of the last major bastions of the colonial era, southern Africa. . His victory against great odds remains an inspiration to those who are still struggling for their freedom. He raised the great people of Mozambiaue to heights of glory. We recall his gracious presence and his words of wisdom in this Hall last year during the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. We were impressed by his inspirational commitment to the Charter of the United Nations.
The death of President Machel is a loss not just to his country and people, not just to Africa, but to the world.
I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of President Samora Moises Machel.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): It is with great sorrow that I address my most sincere condolences to the people and Government of Mozambioue, to the family of the deceased and to the Mozambican delegation to the United Nations on the tragic death of Mr. Samora Moises Machel, President of the Republic of Mozambique.
In him Africa loses one of its most outstanding leaders, who was at the same time a fighter, a man of action and of dialogue; Mozambioue loses its leader and source of great inspiration in the heroic days of its fight for independence; the United Nations, which he regarded as the depository of the hopes of all developing peoples, loses a Head of State who always gave it his enthusiastic support; and I personally lose an admired and respected friend.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Benin, Mr. Simon Ifede Ogouma, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. OGOUMA (Benin) (interpretation from French): Africa has just learned with bitterness of the tragic death of one of its true sons, Samora Moises Machel, President of the FRELIMO Party and President of the People’s Republic of Mozambioue. He died in an air accident in the company of his closest comrades. He died carrying out a mission for the people of Mozambique and for Africa, a mission which is part of the struggle conducted by the people of southern Africa for independence and sovereignty, against apartheid and for peace in the region.
President Samora Machel was known in Africa and internationally as an intrepid leader, and a faithful son of the people of Mozambioue, faithful to its cause, faithful to its needs and faithful to its struggle. With his death we have lost a hero of the national liberation struggle of Africa, to which he devoted his entire life, in the service of the liberation of the continent and in particular
(Mr. Oguma, Benin) of Mozambiaue. He was known to all. He was with us last year to deliver his message of peace and hope in this very Hall when we commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the united Nations.
Today, the situation in southern Africa must be the focus of our attention and we must take further steps to put an end to the racist apartheid régime.
On this sad occasion, we offer our condolences to our brothers and friends in Mozambiaue, to the people of Mozambiaue as a whole, and to our colleagues in the Permanent Mission of Mozambiaue in New York.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on Mr. Riyoaki Kikuchi, representative of Japan, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. KIKUCHI (Japan): On behalf of the members of the Asian Group, I wish to extend sincere condolences to the People's Republic of Mozambiaue on the tragic death of its beloved President, Mr. Samora Moises Machel, and others who perished in the accident. It was a great shock to learn that 37 people lost their lives along with those distinguished statesmen when the aircraft in which they were flying crashed near the borders of Mozambiaue, Swaziland and South Africa.
President Machel had guided his great country with courage and determination since he led it to independence in 1975. As the first President of his country, he devoted his great energy and talent to the development of Mozambiaue. Conseauently his death will be a great loss not only to the people of Mozambiaue but also to the people of Africa and, indeed, the whole world.
As far as the Japanese Government and people are concerned, we are especially grieved, because just this past summer the late President Machel paid an official state visit to Japan and the leaders of our two countries deepened mutual understanding.
(Mr. Kikuchi, Japan)
I wish to express again my deep sympathy to the wife of the President and the bereaved families and to the people of Mozambiaue.
The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Anatoly Mardovich of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. MARDOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): On behalf ( ' the States of Eastern Europe, I should like to express to the people and Government of the People's Republic of Mozambique our heartfelt condolences on the tragic death of their President, Mr. Samora Moises Machel. A valiant fighter for peace, freedom and justice has died. Under the guidance of the FRELIMO Party and its President, Samora Moises Machel, the people attained independence and is now building a new society based on the principles of freedom and social progress. That work was carried out in conditions of the intensified opposition of outside forces.
In international affairs Mozambiaue is conducting an anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist and anti-racist policy to consolidate the forces of peace and social progress, help bring about a cessation of the arms race and improve the international climate, and is working actively within the Organization of African Unity and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
BBS/fans
(Mr. Mardovich, Byelorussian SSR) Once again we should like to express our profound condolences to the people of Mozambique and to the family and friends President Samora Mases Machel. We express the conviction that the people of Mozambique and ERELIMO will successfully attain their revolutionary goals and move along their chosen path. The people of Mozambique can, as in the past, count on our full solidarity.
The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Mario Maya Palencia of Mexico, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American States.
Mr. MOYA EALENCIA (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish); On behalf of the Ta tin American and Caribbean Group of countries, we express to the people and Government of Mozambique our great sorrow and profound solidarity on the occasion of the tragic death yesterday of its President, Mr. Samora Moises Machel. The peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean once again today join with the heroic people of Mozambique, as they did when they supported its struggle for national liberation and hailed its admission in 1975 to the community of nations as an independent State under the guidance of its leader, Mr. Same»:a Machel.
We saw President Machel personally for the last time at the recent meeting in Harare, where he reiterated the political and social principles of the Non-Aligned Movement, condemned apartheid and banditry supported by the Government of Pretoria, fully in keeping with what he was throughout his life, a constant heroic fighter for freedom and the equality of all people.
The death of President Samora Machel, the causes of which must be fully clarified, is an irreparable loss for Mozambique, for the peoples of Africa and for the whole United Nations. But his example lives on and will continue to stimulate the efforts of the world on behalf of peace, political liberation and economic development.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on Mr. Hans Werner Lautenschlager of the Federal Republic of Germany, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. LAOTENSCHLAGER (Federal Republic of Germany) It is indeed with deep regret that the members of the Group of Western European and other States learned this morning of the fateful accident that took the lives of the Head of State of the People's Republic of Mozambique and other members of the Government of the People's Republic of Mozambiaue, as well as other members of the Mozambican delegation. On behalf of the members of the Group of Western European and Other States, I should like to express to the people and Government of the People's Republic of Mozambiaue, as well as to our colleagues in the Mozambican delegation, our sincere sympathy.
We all had come to feel a deep respect for that great statesman whose loss will be felt not only by his own country but also by the whole world. We all know that President Samora Machel was a charismatic national leader of great stature.
The members of the group of Western European and Other States share the grief of the people of Mozambiaue, their Government and the bereaved families over their sudden and painful loss.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on Mr. Saoud Bin Salim Bin Hassan Al—Ansi of Oman, who will speak on behalf of the Group Arab States.
Mr. AL-ANSI; (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Group of Arab States, I extend sincere condolences to the people and Government of Mozambiaue on the tragic death of President Samora Moises Machel, President of the People's Republic of Mozambigue and of FRELIMO, and his innocent comrades in the distressing airplane accident.
(Mr. Al-Ansi, Oman)
President Samora Machel was a militant in the service of freedom and an outstanding statesman who led the struggle of his friendly country, Mozambique, in its triumph over colonialism and in building the free People’s Republic of Mozambiaue. His contructive contribution to the struggle against apartheid, against the policies pursued by the Pretoria régime, whether within his country, in ço-operation with African front-line States or other African States or States of the world in general, has exposed the racist policy of that régime.
We all extend our condolences to the family of the late President and to the families of his comrades, the martyrs of freedom.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on Mr. Joseph Verner Reed of the United States of America, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. REED (United States of America): On behalf of the President of the United States of America, the people of the host country and the entire delegation of the United States mission to the United Nations, I should like to express our profound condolences and regret at the sudden and tragic death of the President of the People's Republic of Mozambiaue.
We extend to the people of Mozambiaue and its delegation accredited to the United Nations and to the families of those who were lost, our expression of fortitude in what we know and understand to be a difficult time.
We recall President Machel's visit to the United States during the fortieth anniversary session of the General Assembly. President Machel was a leader calling for peace and hope. A visionary, he worked to build his nation. President Machel understood the urgent need for co-operation in the interest of peace in southern Africa. He worked to improve relations between Mozambiaue and the United States of America. The President led his people with courage and unfailing determination in the struggle for the independence of Mozambiaue.
(Mr. Reed, United States)
Again we express our profound condolences to the people of Mozambique and to the family. President Machel will long be remembered by his people and his friends around the world.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the entire General Assembly I request the representative of Mozambique to convey our condolences to the Government and people of Mozambique and to the bereaved families.
Mr. DOS SANTOS (Mozambique): Mr. President, I wish most sincerely to thank you, the Secretary-General, the Chairmen of the regional groups and the representative of the host country for their very kind words. They are so touching and yet so comforting. You will understand that, at this moment of great grief for my people and country, I have no words to reciprocate. I shall convey your kind message to my Government and to the bereaved families. With your support, we shall be able to surmount this irreparable loss and these difficulties and to continue our struggle. A luta continua.
AGENDA ITOI 25
THE SITUATION IN KAMPUCHEA
(a)	RETORT OF TIE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/41/707)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/41/L. 2)
The PRESIDENT: The report of the Secretary-General, agenda item 2 5, is contained in document A/41/707. A draft resolution has been circulated in document A/41/L. 2.
Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed today at 12.30 p.m. May I take it that there is no objection to this proposal?
It was so de ci ded.
The PRESIDEWT: I now call on the first speaker in the debate on this item, Mr. Sarre of Senegal, who will also speak in his capacity as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea.
Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French): After the tribute that has been paid by the international community to an outstanding son of Africa, President Machel, I should like humbly to add the sincere condolences of the Head of State and Government and the people of Senegal and to ask our colleague from Mozambioue to be kind enough to convey them to his Government.
At its fortieth session the General Assembly adopted, for the seventh consecutive year, a resolution calling for the ending of the suffering of the people of Cambodia. At the same time our Assembly unecuivocally condemned the foreign occupation of that country. It is regrettable that today no political solution has yet been found, despite the initiatives undertaken this year in that area. Once again, at a time when we are observing the International Year of Peace, a historic opportunity will have been lost. The General Assembly at the forty-first session is once again called upon to be mindful of the need to find a political settlement of this cuestion. First I should like to recall that, for my country, Senegal, which is a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and of the Ad Hoc Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea, there is no doubt that the prolongation of this tragedy can only worsen the already tense climate in international relations and incurs the risk of increasing the danger that persists in that region.
However, we should recall that the principles and the basic modalities for a comprehensive political settlement were clearly defined at the International Conference on Kampuchea held in July 1981. These principles comprise, on the one hand, respect for the right of the Khmer people freely to decide their own future, the restoration of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kampuchea and, at the same time, the total withdrawal of foreign troops from that
(Mr. Sacre, Senegal)
country. The Conference also took account of the legitimate concerns of all the countries of the region with regard to their security.
My country considers that the conflict in Kampuchea is the result of a violation of those principles, which are in keeping with the principles of the Charter and of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. As the international community pointed out at the very outset of the conflict, there cannot be any authorization under any pretext whatsoever of the use of force to overthrow the Government of a neighbouring country. Allowing that to happen would bring the risk of compromising the security of many States and first and foremost that of small States that have no military resources. That would be tantamount to acknowledging that might is right.
Since the adoption of the most recent General Assembly resolution, the situation in Kampuchea has, unfortunately, shown no encouraging signs, despite all the steadfast efforts and the recent diplomatic initiatives undertaken by certain parties concerned. Among others, we have noted the recent eight-point proposal made by the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea on 17 March 1986. In our view, that initiative contains positive elements, since it has the advantage of taking account of the interests of all the parties concerned. We should have liked that initiative to have been given at least some consideration by the other p^rty, which would have facilitated the beginning of serious negotiations conducive to a just and lasting settlement of the Question of Kampuchea. Unfortunately, the rejection of that proposal has only increased the risk of an escalation of that conflict. We wish also to note the various diplomatic initiatives undertaken by the countries of the Association of South-East Nations (ASEAN) to promote a comprehensive political settlement of the Question of Kampuchea. In this regard, we wish to recall the positive elements contained in the recent communiaui of the ASEAN countries at their 19th ministerial meeting, held in Manila at the end of
June.
(Mr» Sac re, Senegal)
Furthermore, Indonesia, as the ASEAN interlocutor, has continued the contacts it undertook in 1984 with Viet Nam to establish the basis for a mutually acceptable broad dialogue.
At the beginning of this year the President of the International Conference on Kampuchea, Mr. Leopold Gratz, made a tour of the region, and talked with the main parties to the conflict. Again, the aim of that mission was to seek to establish a dialogue among the parties concerned.
I cannot fail to mention the major contribution made by our Secretary-General to the efforts to find a political solution to this problem. The work he has been engaged in and points for consideration put forward in his report to this session attest to his dedication to the cause of peace in this region. Senegal sincerely hopes that Mr. Perez de Cuellar and his Special Representative Mr. Rafeeuddin Ahmed will continue to work for a comprehensive political settlement to this question.
At the military level, despite the relative calm along the Kampuchean-Thai border the situation of the Canbodian civilians established in the border region remains precarious, which increases the already heavy burden on the Thai Government. I should like once again to pay a tribute to the Thai authorities for the humanitarian spirit they have demonstrated in helping Cambodian civilians displaced by the hostilities. I also wish to congratulate the united Nations and the other international humanitarian organizations concerned for the effective work they are doing and for the support they are giving the refugees.
In keeping with its mandate, the Ad Hoc Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea, over which Senegal has the honour of presiding, has undertaken consultations this year with a number of interested Governments. The object of those consultations is to reaffirm the abiding concern of the international community at the situation in Kampuchea and to secure the broadest
(Mr. Sarre, Senegal) possible support for efforts to resolve this problem. The Committee has stated repeatedly that one of its basic objectives, is to help bring about negotiations among the parties concerned in keeping with the declaration adopted by the International Conference g Kampuchea in 1981. On behalf of the members of the Ad Hoc Committee I should like once again to express our gratitude for the understanding that has been shown to us and for the encouragement we have received in the various countries visited by the Ad Hoc Committee.
Finally, I wish to draw the General Assembly's attention to the annual report of the Ad Hoc Committee (A/O0NF.109/11), dated 24 Sep tenter 1986, in which the Committee reiterated:
"its appeal to those Member States which did not participate in the International Conference to co-operate in any suitable way with the efforts to achieve the goals of the Declaration on Kampuchea and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. It also appeals to all parties concerned to consider steps to overcome the obstacles that have, thus far, stood in the way of a truly constructive dialogue. It is the hope of the Committee that, in order to facilitate this process, all parties concerned will refrain from taking any action that would further complicate the situation in Kampuchea and jeopardize the chances for a fair and peaceful solution of the problem." (A/CONF.10 9/11, para. 2 8)
Senegal hopes sincerely that this appeal to reason will finally be heeded. My country is convinced that the adoption of a negotiated settlement leading to an independent, neutral, non-aligned Cambodia will undoubtedly be of benefit to all parties to the conflict, while taking into account their best interests. Such a settlement will also make it possible to provide the necessary means and conditions
P*r, Sac re, Senegal) for the lasting peace r'd stability, foe which the countries in the region have for so long hoped.
It can never be over-emphasized that the attitude of the international community on this natter does not arise from any hostility to a country or group of countries, but rather emanates from its determination to find an honourable solution to this conflict in keeping with the united lotions Charter and the rules of international law.
These are the principal objectives of draft resolution A/41/L. 2, on which the Assembly has been asked to take action and which my country has agreed to support. We hope that this will facilitate the search for a solution which, if implemented, will without doubt lead to peace and stability in that region.
Prince Korodom SIHANOUK (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretation from French): The announcement today of the tragic and brutal death in an air accident of President Samora Moises Machel of Mozambique and several of his colleagues has plunged us all into the deepest sachess. I had the honour to establish ties of friendship with President Machel more than 10 years ago in Peking and we saw each other again about four years ago in Pyongyang. Therefore it is my privilege to pay a glewing tribute to him personally and to the heroic people of Mozartbique, whose historic and victorious struggle for national liberation synbolized gloriously the liberation struggle of other oppressed peoples. As an old fighter for the independence of my own country, Canbodia - Kampuchea in Khmer - and a fervent and loyal friend of Africa, I weep for the loss of ny brother and companion-at-arms, President Samora Moises Machel. On this sad occasion, I extend to the Government and the friendly people of Mozambique, to the bereaved families of the victims of this accident and to the President of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) the brotherly sympathy and most heartfelt condolences of my delegation.
In January 1979, when it invaded Kampuchea, my country, with an army of more than 100,000 men backed by an armada of tanks, heavy artillery pieces and other sophisticated war materials provided by the Soviet Union, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam already proclaimed total victory. It arrogantly and solemnly declared to the world at large that its fait accompli was irreversible and that, consequently, there was no problem of Kampuchea.
Today, after almost eight years of war and occupation in Kampuchea, Viet Nam is inextricably bogged down, admits that it is hopelessly getting entangled in increasingly serious economic, social and political difficulties, and suffers from a growing isolation in the international arena.
This development is the result of the combined pressure increasingly exerted on the ground by our people and our national resistance forces whose resolve and patriotism have constantly been galvanized by an ever-growing generous support granted to their just cause by the international community which, through an ever increasingly overwhelming majority of the Member States of the United Nations, votes every year in favour of the resolutions on "The Situation in Kampuchea". This emphasizes the importance of the annual debates and resolutions on the agenda of the General Assenbly. Indeed, they have greatly contributed to prevent the illegal occupation of Kampuchea from becoming a fait acconpli, and the violation by Viet Nam of the Charter from being condoned.
These past eight years of war imposed upon us by Viet Nam have been for all our compatriots, whether at home or abroad, as many years of the most trying ordeals in our history, but also rich in experiences and lessons for the present as well as for the future of our nation, through which our national unity has been forged and tested in the fire of the resolute and dogged resistance against the Vietnamese ambition to eliminate our national identity and to annex our country.
AP/act
A/41/PV. 42
27
(Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Democratic Kampuchea)
Those who have followed our struggle for national survival recognize that continued progress has been made despite the many and difficult obstacles we have had to overcome. This year, more than in previous years, the armed forces of our coalition governemnt have achieved significant progress. In my address on 30 September last, I had the honour to brief the General Assembly on that favourable development which w^ and continues to be echoed widely and unanimously by the media.
In point of fact, the large-scale Vietnamese attacks launched during the 1985 dry season along the western border, with a great number of reinforcements from Viet Nam and materials provided by the Soviet Union, have not broken the backbone of our resistance. Not only did the Vietnamese forces meet with a total fiasco in their scheme to seal the border so as to stifle and wipe out our forces operating deep in the interior of the country, but, what is more, they are now irremediably bogged down and harassed day and night throughout the country, in particular in the most fertile and densely populated central regions, in the Tonle Sap Lake area and around the capital city, Phnom Penh. OUr forces are now operating openly and not clandestinely. Our attacks are conducted by units in uniform stationed permanently around Phnom Penh and the main provincial towns.
The major aim of our attacks is to dismantle the enemy’s administrative, political and military apparatus at all levels in order to liberate the population and the Khmer soldiers and civilians forcibly enlisted by the enemy to serve their colonialist war. Our successes have gradually deprived the Vietnamese occupiers of the human and material resources they need to hold on to Kam pi ch ea. Those successes have encouraged the population and all, whether military or civilian, who have been forced to serve the Vietnamese colonial regime in Phnom Penh, to rise up and join our forces. Day by day, through our military actions on the ground, our
national unity is developing, expanding and strengthening under the motto: "Khmers do not fight Khmers" and "Khmers unite to drive out the Vietnamese occupiers". If our national resistance forces have been able to intensify their attacks which have become more accurate and more deadly deep inside the country and even as far as to the borders with Viet Nam, it is precisely because of the support, assistance and active participation of the population, Khmer soldiers and civil servants of the puppet Phnom Penh administration, who inform and guide them.
The balance of forces on the ground is changing in our favour. Although far less numerous and less well-equipped than the enemy, our forces have the advantage of several favourable factors: they are endowed with a lofty spirit of patriotism and are resolved to carry out their struggle for national survival} they are given growing support and active co-operation by the whole population and by an increasing number of Khmer soldiers and civilians of the puppet Phnom Penh administration.
It is with a view to coping w ''A the politico-military situation which has been developing more and more against it that the Vietnamese military high command has been forced to transfer a significant part of its forces from the western border to the interior of the country, and to replace the Khmer soldiers of the puppet regime it no longer trusts, by Vietnamese forces in order to defend Phnom Penh which is now within striking range of our forces. For the first time since 1979, the Vietnamese forces have been unable to launch their annual dry season offensive. These are as many indications that they have been lasing their conbat initiative. Moreover, the morale, health and material situation of their soldiers keep worsening. According to a report broadcast on 14 August 1986 by Hanoi Radio, the Vietnamese soldiers fighting in Cambodia are "dressed in rags, poorly fed, and mostly disease-ridden ...", the Vietnamese aircraft "have to fly through unsafe
skies; ... and have difficulty in finding landing sites ..., to say nothing of the difficulties arising from the shortage of fuel ...", while "eneny activity is aggressive ..."
The fundamental factor of this happy development and the main characteristic of the current situation in Kampuchea have been the strengthening and broadening of national unity among all Cambodians as such on the level of patriotic awareness as of action against the Vietnamese occupiers, and bh every level of the national community, both at home and abroad.
In the country, the population in all provinces has been exasperated by almost eight years of Vietnamese crimes and oppression/ Every day, they see that the Vietnamese occupiers are their worst enemy, and that the danger of "Vietnamization* of our country is deadly for our nation, culture, civilization and national identity.
It is because they are well aware of this deadly danger that more and more among the population and even among those working in the puppet Heng Samrin administration have been granting their multiform support and assistance to the armed forces of our Coalition Government, and that Khmer patriots forcibly enlisted by the Vietnamese into the Heng Samrin army rebel, revolt and mutiny, often by whole units, and desert every day.
I wish at this stage to ouote only a few glaring facts. On 15 December 1985, at Leach in the province of Pursat, 700 Khmer soldiers from the first and second regiments of the second Division of the Phnom Penh régime mutinied against the Vietnamese, captured two.Vietnamese tanks and eliminated several Vietnamese soldiers and officers. Two days later, they were joined by 150 more of their fellows. After they ended their mutiny, which was given active support by the population, they returned to their native villages or joined our forces. On 21 April 1986, Heng Samrin's Battalion 507, stationed at Siemreap-Oddar Meanchey, joined our forces with arms and matériel. According to the deserters themselves, the number of deserters in many units reaches 50 per cent.
The more the Vietnamese persist in occupying Kampuchea, the more will the antagonism of the population towards the Khmer soldiers and civil servants of the puppet régime they have installed in Phnom Penh worsen and increase. Whatever they may do, the Vietnamese will never be able to gag the nationalist and patriotic feelings of the Cambodian people, and still less oppose the dynamics of national resistance, dynamics engendered, sustained and accelerated by the very persistence of their occupation of Kampuchea.
The trend of national unity against the Vietnamese occupation, which i~ now irresistible is shored up by continued strengthening of mutual understanding and
(Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Democratic Kampuchea) reciprocal confidence, which have led to the uniformity of views and actions within the tripartite Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea. On the ground, the armed forces of the three components of our Government have consolidated their co-operation in their attacks against the enemy. In the heat of their combat against a common enemy, the three patriotic forces, sharing weal and woe, weave their fraternal ties, which are the tokens of our victory.
The repeated manoeuvres of our enemies aimed at sowing dissension within the tripartite Coalition Government have only strengthened its conviction that national unity and reconciliation are vital for the survival of the nation, both at present and in the future. The eight-point proposal of 17 March 1986 which I had the honour to present to you in detail in my address of 30 September testifies to this conviction that has led to an identity of views on the political solution to be brought to the problem of Kampuchea and on the future of our country as well. This proposal testifies to our magnanimity, to the utmost limits of our concessions, to our moderation, and to the spirit of conciliation not only among all Cambodians irrespective of their tendencies, but also towards Viet Nam, our aggressor, as well. It constitutes our national charter at the present time, and for the future as well. It depends entirely on Viet Nam - through its agreement to stop its invasion and occupation and to withdraw all its forces from Kampuchea - to clear the way for the participation of the Heng Samrin group, set up and maintained by force by Viet Nam in Phnom Penh, in a Quadripartite coalition government of Kampuchea, which would organize free general elections under United Nations supervision. It also depends entirely on Viet Nam whether our two countries, placed side by side for eternity, establish once again sincere relations of friendship and co-operation based on the five principles of peaceful coexistence, on an eaual footing, and with mutual respect and reciprocal interests.
In the course of the general debate at the current session of the General Assembly, a great many delegations were kind enough to do us justice and grant support to our peace plan. It is fa me a privilege and a pleasure to express to them, on behalf of the Coalition Government and of my people, as well as on my own behalf, our profound and heartfelt gratitude for this noble support, which has greatly encouraged us to persevere in the achievement of our national charter.
The outright rejection of our peace plan by Viet Nam does not at all mean that this plan is not realistic and hence without any useful purpose. This is but new proof that the leaders in Hanoi want at all costs to absorb Kampuchea, along with Laos, into an "Indo-China Federation". Testimony to this Vietnamese ambition, conceived and worked out by the Vietnamese Communist Party ever since 1930, is more than sufficient. Despite the repeated denials by Hanoi, each day that passes brings new evidence of this insatiable Vietnamese expansionism. On 28 June last, Heng Samrin, the puppet chief installed in Phnom Penh, stated*.
"We are proud to recall that our Party has taken its roots in the Indochinese Communist Party ... ."
Moreover, in the parlance used by Viet Nam in every article, in every statement, there is a reference to the "three Indochinese countries", to the "Indochinese bloc" or again, to the "Viet Nam-Kampuchea-Laos special relations" - terms that are all only euphemisms for the Vietnamese "Indo-China Federation". The Hanoi authorities, acting as the master, organize and decide everything. The "Conference of Indochinese foreign ministers" or other meetings are but masquerades staged by Viet Nam in which the other two act as faithful lackeys, repeating whatever is said by their lord and master.
It is with the objective of achieving this baleful "Indo-China Federation" that the Hanoi leaders are clinging to Kampuchea at all costs, at the cost of the
mourning and ruin they have sown in Kampuchea and in Viet Nam as well. Having failed for the past eight, years to achieve this end through military means, the Hanoi leaders have been desperately and shamelessly trying to achieve it through diplomatic manoeuvres, with the aim of dividing and conquering, namely, dividing and weakening the national resistance forces so as to compel them to capitulate and acknowledge the Vietnamese fait accompli in Cambodia, and also dividing and weakening the international support for our struggle.
In that respect, Viet Nam speaks of "negotiations for a peaceful settlement", of "national reconciliation between Cambodians", of "respect for the right to self-determination of the Cambodian people", of "an independent, neutral and non-aligned Cambodia", of "annual partial withdrawal" and even "total withdrawal of its occupation forces by 1990", and so forth. It tries to make people believe that it is sincerely conciliatory and flexible and that it has been brought to its senses and agrees at last to comply with the call of the international community for a political solution to the Kampuchean problem. But serious consideration of those statements proves the contrary and shows the perfidy of Viet Nam, which in this case uses the same language to cover up a complete divergence of views by the parties to the conflict.
By "negotiations for a political settlement", the Hanoi authorities mean negotiations between what they call "the three Indo-Chinese countries" - that is, the Vietnamese Indo-China Federation - and the members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), as a third party. That is a trap which the ASEAN countries could never fall into. Moreover, one cannot but ask how Viet Nam will be able to reach a political solution to the problem of Kampuchea while it obstinately refuses to negotiate with the only party against which it is fighting - namely, the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea.
Viet Nam speaks of "national reconciliation between Cambodians", but it demands that one of the three components of our Coalition Government be eliminated in advance and that the leaders of the other two surrender, hands in the air, to the so-called People’s Republic of Kampuchea". This Vietnamese-style national reconciliation actually aims at destroying the Government which has been recognized by the United Nations and the international community as the sole legal and legitimate Government of Cambodia. If Hanoi were to succeed in carrying out this
manoeuvre, Viet Nam and its allies could assert that henceforth there was no reason for the United Nations to continue considering the problem of Kampuchea and that, conseouently, the seat of Kampuchea at the United Nations should ipso facto revert to the puppet Phnom Penh régime. The Vietnamese manoeuvre is therefore manufactured out of whole cloth and cannot deceive international public opinion.
The Vietnamese statement about "respect for the right to self-determination of the Cambodian people" is only vain rhetoric, for that people will be able to exercise that inalienable right only after the withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces from its country, Cambodia.
As for the Vietnamese proclamation that the "People’s Kampuchea" of the Phnom Penh puppets is "independent, neutral and non-aligned", the least we can say is that Viet Nam has a notion of values that is cuite different from that of the international community. For everybody is aware of the links which chain this puppet régime to the "Vietnamese chariot", within the framework of "special solidarity" and "special friendship" - euphemisms for the Vietnamese "Indo-China Federation".
Lastly, Viet Nam’s statements on an annual partial withdrawal and a total withdrawal of its forces by 1990 are mere propaganda which can no longer deceive anyone. We have said on many occasions - and world public opinion agrees with us -that the annual partial "withdrawals" not only are troop rotations but, even more, are stratagems to conceal annual reinforcements of troops sent from Viet Nam to make up for the increasing number of casualties and even strengthen the Vietnamese occupation army in Kampuchea, now facing the irresistible rising tide of Khmer national resistance. As for the so-called total withdrawal by 1990, the magazine Asiaweek in its issue of 3 August 1986 contained an article entitled "Viet Nam's 1990 Question", from which I quote the following:
(spoke in English) "As the 1986 rains get under way, this year’s offensive seems to have achieved much less than the last, and the four-year pull-out deadline for the Vietnamese looks ever more questionable", (continued in French)
Hoang Bich Son, the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, recently told Asiaweek: (spoke in English)
"We will conclude our withdrawal by 1990, but we have all along said that if the situation reouires it and the Kampuchean Government" -that is, the puppet régime in Phnom Penh -
"deems it necessary, we will discuss the coming back of our troops. ... And we have made a promise that we would come back if recruested". (continued in French) t I have already had occasion to point out that Viet Nam has not yet left Cambodia but it is already preparing its return. In the past, the Vietnamese leaders have shown the world that, for them, making promises and keeping them are two different things. Indeed, they have never k|pt their commitments, whether signed or "solemnly pledged". This is testified'to by the agreements signed in Geneva in 1954 and in 1962, on Laos, and in Paris in 1973; by the "solemn" declaration made in 1967 to respect the territorial integrity of Kampuchea within its present borders; and, again, by the promise made by Pham Van Dong in September 1978 to all the ASEAN member States that Viet Nam would not invade Cambod ia.
Viet Nam’s solemn promises and commitments have shown that, for Hanoi, diplomacy is only a means to serve its strategic military objectives, within the framework of its expansionist policy. Today, under the growing and combined
(Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Democratic Kampuchea) pressure of the national resistance forces and the international community, it is in Viet Nam's interest to make such promises in an attempt to deceive world public opinion. But Viet Nam is not ready, nor will it be ready between now and 1990, to give up its ambition to absorb Kampuchea into its "Indo-China Federation", unless it is finally compelled to do so by the struggle of the people of Kampuchea and by international pressure.
The Soviet Union can lend its assistance to the achievement of that end, for it is well known today that Viet Nam would not have been able to carry on its aggression against and occupation of Kampuchea without the huge amount of Soviet aid. That is why we ask the Soviet union, a permanent member of the Security Council, responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security under the United Nations Charter, to heed the call of reason and bring Viet Nam to its senses. In Asia and the Pacific - more especially in South-East Asia - until the Soviet Union abandons its support for Viet Nam's policy of aggression and expansion, and in particular for Viet Nam's occupation of Kampuchea, it will never succeed in convincing anyone c its desire to establish friendly relations and remove what it calls "sterile suspicions and mistrust". It is not by repeating the same rhetoric about peace, disarmament, friendship, and so forth, that it will prove its good faith. And it is not by evading the problem of Kampuchea created by the Vietnamese invasion and occupation that it will contribute to restoring peace, security and stability in South-East Asia.
In o'rder to perpetuate the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea and consolidate its "Indo-China Federation", Viet Nam has been conducting a large-scale propaganda campaign aimed at discrediting the patriotic Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea and at glorifying the puppet Heng Samrin régime installed in Phnom Penh. This campaign of disinformation ceaselessly praises the marvellous rebirth of what is called the People's Republic of i.mpuchea, its "economic, cultural and social development" and peace and security prevailing throughout the whole country - that is the "whole cake" as called by the Vietnamese minister Nguyen Co Thach, which is placed under the control of the Quisling Phnom Penh régime.
Reacting to this campaign of disinformation, any person of common sense wonders why, if that is the case, the Hanoi authorities refuse to withdraw from Kampuchea about 200,000 of their soldiers who for eight years have drained all huma?! and material resources of their country and turned Viet Nam, once a model in the struggle for national independence, into an outcast of the international community. Why should the Soviet Union continue to bear this burden of aid to Viet Nam, which year after year becomes heavier and heavier? Viet Nam will never be able to answer that Question without contradicting itself, for the truth is auite different.
I would not mind t'/ arrogant claim of the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, that the Phnom Penh puppets control the Cambodia "cake", for everyone knows that they control nothing at all, not even themselves, everything being decided and made by Vietnamese advisers and the Vietnamese army of occupation, yet the latter control only the main towns and some sections of lines of communication, along which they have forced Khmer villagers to live in strategic hamlets surrounded by several mine-infested barriers, which prevent the inhabitants
from engaging in agricultural production through fear of coming into contact with our resistance forces.
Mme. Marie Alexandrine Martin, a French ethnologist and naturalist at the National Centre for Scientific Research in Paris, presented the situation in Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia in a nutshell:
"In the countryside, as well as in the cities, arrests are daily occurences. Torture (beatings, electric shocks, plastic bags over the head ...) is the rule. It is impossible to estimate the number of political prisoners in Kampuchea today. In Phnom Penh, between 1980 and 1984 no less than 6,200 people were imprisoned in the two jails belonging to the Ministry of National Defence and 16,800 in the six jails run by the Ministry of the Interior. In both cases the real directors of the jails are Vietnamese with •puppet' Khmer directors to keep up appearances ..."
Those facts were confirmed by the New York based Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights and Amnesty International of London, which in its September 1986 file on torture issued a detailed report on the widespread practice of torture, including torture by Vietnamese "experts", in Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia.
Mme. Marie Alexandrine Martin further said:
"Last year, Khmer peasants arriving at the Thai border were crushed by extreme poverty, despair and grief. 'Today it is worse', say newcomers.
"The town-dwellers, many of them from Phnom Penh, flee their country because it is now so easy to become a 'suspect'. All it takes is an 'inappropriate' gesture or the inadvertent use of the wrong word. One is always under the threat of the unlikeliest denunciation. Civil servants also flee their homeland because they do not want to die while being sent away to forced labour. Refusal to participate in the work for 'National Defence’ as
forced labour along the Thai-Kampuchean border is called in Phnom Penh, means imprisonment. People from Phnom Penh who are privately employed pay enormous taxes. They, too, are coming to the border in large numbers after closing their stalls in the market, or the little shop set up in their home. 'It is no longer possible to earn one's living unless one has a relative who travels and trades at the border. Even so it is hard, so very hard ...', they say.
"Vietnamese settlers do much better. They pay low taxes; they are not enlisted for forced labour. Their ethnic origins.put them above the law in any quarrel or dispute with the Kampucheans. They are the privileged citizens in a country whose very own people feel more and more alienated ...
"In 1985 a new identity card was imposed all over the country. It was supposed to prevent independent workers from settling illegally in the cities. Phnom Penh is protected by an important Vietnamese garrison and inhabited by at least 250,000 Vietnamese civilian settlers.
"As for the Khmer civil servants, their number will drop further as auite a few of them keep fleeing to the border and are replaced by Vietnamese. That is already the case at the Ministry of National Defence. Little by little, low-ranking Khmer bureaucrats have been sent to the army and replaced by Vietnamese. Several high-ranking posts in various ministries are held by Khmers who fled to Hanoi in 1954, after the Geneva Agreement. They are fluent in Vietnamese, and are married to Vietnamese women ...
"... This two-fold increase of Vietnamese experts which was under way at that time seems to be effective almost everywhere ... Any project prepared by a Khmer must be scrutinized by Vietnamese experts, who correct it and give it the final touch prior to any approval by the Prime Minister and President of the Republic - respectively, the puppets Hun Sen and Heng Samrin installed in
Phnom Penh. Even for festivities in pagodas permission must be given by Vietnamese advisers in charge of festivities and entertainments. At the central office of Vietnamese experts, known as Office A-50, it is the expert in charge of Party Affairs who has the last say, even over the Chairman of the Office, Le Dinh, formerly President of Ho Chi Min City, whose main task is to execute the (Vietnamese Communist) Party's orders."
Since 1984 the Vietnamese have rounded up and every year sent hundreds of thousands of men and women to the western border to carry out for a period of two to three months para-military labour, such as transporting foodstuffs and ammunition for the Vietnamese forces, clearing forests, building roads, detecting and laying mines, digging trenches, raising wall barriers with a view to cutting off our supply lines and stifling our forces in the interior of the country. Several tens of thousands of Cambodians, men and women, have thus been killed by mines or have died from malaria and other diseases, and several thousands of others have returned mutilated to their villages.
That forced labour has disastrously diverted the larger part of manpower from rice production. Actually, the "miraculous rebirth" of Cambodia placed under Vietnamese domination means the transformation of a rice-exporting country into an international rice beggar. In 1984 the Food and Agriculture Organization estimated the rice shortage as being as high as 177,000 tons; in 1985 the World Food Programme estimated it at 400,000 tons.
The Vietnamese propaganda machine is cynical, for it is not ashamed of the contradictions that reveal its perfidy. In its attests to legalize its invasion and occupation of Kampuchea, Viet Nam speaks of "miraculous rebirth". But when it needs aid to feed its occupation forces, it spreads the news that the people of Kampuchea face a serious rice shortage and orders the Phnom Penh puppets to beg for international aid. Should it be granted, this aid would feed only the Vietnamese occupation troops for, as in previous years, it would not be distributed to the needy Khmer population.	■
Forced labour, famine and the most savage forms of repression, in addition to Vietnamese attacks, have in the past eight years already claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians and forced hundreds of thousands more to flee their ancestral lands and native villages to seek protection in the areas controlled by our Government, or refuge on Thai territory. To replace them, the Hanoi authorities have already sent more than 700,000 Vietnamese to settle on the most fertile land, in towns and along the rivers. The objective is to raise this number to 2 million within the next four or five years. Thousands of new families keep arriving every month. According to Mne. Marie Alexandrine Martin*.
"Senior civil servants report that the new settlers from Viet Nam come in during the night" - as was reported by refugees last year - "in large groups, without the knowledge of the Khmer (puppet] authorities. The appropriate department of the Revolutionary People's Committee in the capital has to hold meetings in the middle of the night to decide immediately where they should go so that other people do not know where they have come from. The inhabitants, if at first unaware of these arrivals, soon realize the situation when they see ths new houses in which the Vietnamese live, which are built on what a few days earlier was waste ground. In the spring of 1985, people living in Phnom
Penh were simply driven away from their houses and replaced by the Vietnamese. They were sent into the countryside. Some of them managed to escape and reach the border. New identity cards have been in circulation since the last census*, identification checks and raids are frequent. Everything seems to be planned gradually to turn Phnom Penh into a Vietnamese town with only the necessary Khmer administrative personnel.”
I would add that the names of the main streets and squares in Phnom Penh have already been changed or translated into Vietnamese.
Lastly, several so-called agreements and treaties have allegedly been signed between the Vietnamese boss and his Phnom Penh lackeys in all fields - economic, financial, social, cultural, technical, frontier, and so forth. Those "agreements" and "treaties" are actually farces of the same type as the "meetings" or "conferences" of the three so-called Indochinese countries, aimed on the one hand at showing the world the legitimacy of the puppet Phnom Penh regime and on the other at laying the so-called legal foundations of the gradual absorption of Kampuchea by Viet Nam. A concrete instance was provided by the 1983 so-called border agreements which shifted the maritime border between Kampuchea and Viet Nam as indicated since 1939 by the Brevié line and gave Viet Nam a large tract of the well-known oil-bearing Khmer maritime territory. As for the land borders, the Hanoi authorities have since the beginning of the invasion shifted the boundary marks from 3 to 5 kilometres within Kampuchea.
That is the actual situation in Kampuchea this year. Viet Nam has proclaimed that the situation is Irreversible, namely, that it has not the slightest intention of ever allowing the people of Kampuchea to exercise their right to self-determination or ever allowing Kampuchea once again to become an independent, free, united, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country. However, since 1979,
despite Soviet aid estirated at SUS 6 million a day, the Vietnamese forces have been irremediably bogged down in Kampuchea. To say the least, the situation does not appear to be as irreversible as Viet Nam claims.
Despite the ever-increasing and inextricable difficulties it is facing in Kampuchea, at home and in the international arena, Viet Nam remains intransigent and inflexible. This stand shows that Viet Nam is in Cambodia, as it is in Laos, with the intention of remaining there for ever, in keeping with the expansionist, colonialist tradition of North Viet Nam, which, in its. insatiable southward thrust in quest of ever greater "vital" space to serve its economic and "nutritional" interests, already in the past absorbed the Islamic Kingdom of Chanda to form the present Central Viet Nam, and then 65,000 square kilometres of our territory of Lower Cambodia to form the present South Viet Nam. Because of this Vietnamese strategic anbition, we foresee a long struggle, filled with sacrifice, similar to our past struggle against colonialism, particularly since this new imperialism is much more savage and perfidious.
In the face of the vital stake of the survival of our people, our nation, our culture and our civilization, whose wondrous monuments of Angkor have become the heritage of mankind, we, the Khmer, have no other means of salvation than to unite and continue our patriotic struggle. Freedom is the supreme value to which every individual, people and nation has an equal right. Viet Nam cannot, and will never be able to, deny Kampuchea this right, much less the sacred right of its people and nation to wage its struggle by every means available to it, including the use of arms, in order to recover this supreme and inalienable value.
For the sake of our survival, we are resolved to persevere in our efforts constantly to develop and strengthen our national unity and achieve national reconciliation by rejecting the elimination of anyone or any party, least of all
one of the present three partners in our Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea. Moreover, the three partners are more than ever determined to strengthen their unity and, after their nation is liberated, devote themselves together, in national union and reconciliation, to the tasks of the development and defence of Kampuchea. From now on we are ready to welcome new partners, including those which today are installed by Viet Nam, but which, as soon as the Vietnamese forces withdraw, will agree to work together with us for the restoration, development and prosperity of an independent, united, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea, with a liberal and democratic regime that respects human rights.
National inion is and will be our major weapon against the enemy and the essential factor of our victory, that is, of our national survival for the present as well as for the future. It is not surprising that the enemy continues to manoeuvre to prevent its development. We will never let the enemy achieve those aims or those manoeuvres to succeed, for they would undermine not only our efforts in the struggle, but also the restoration of peace, security and stability in South-East Asia. We consider our policy of national union both as a national patriotic duty and as an obligation to the international community.
If there is an irreversible element in today's Kampuchea situation, it is precisely the development and the consolidation of our national unity. And, whether Viet Nam likes it or not, we will succeed in building up an independent, united, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea, within the framework of national reconciliation, for this is a vital issue for all of us Cambodians.
Our eight-point proposal has demonstrated our sincerity in this act of faith and also our will to go as far as we can along the road leading to conciliation and peace, for we want a political settlement to the Kampuchean problem, a settlement that will be just and lasting for all - for us, the victim, as well as for Viet Nam, the aggressor. We believe that magnanimity consists in doing justice and not in asking for justice. As a natter of fact, although the Vietnamese leaders are, by their aggression against Kampuchea, war criminals, just as were Hitler and his Nazi disciples, we will not ask for revenge, punishment or war damages - I emphasize, no war damages. Rather, we propose to establish with them good relations based on peaceful coexistence for the well being of our two peoples. It is not possible for us to go beyond the concessions already made unless we accept to offer our country to Viet Nam on a silver platter, which would be a total negation of eight years of struggle which has been developing very favourably for
(Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Democratic Kampuchea) us, thanks also to the substantial contribution of all peace and justice-loving countries, peoples and personalities throughout the world, and this United Nations General Assembly, who have given us their continued and enduring support.
To all of them, I should like to renew once again, on behalf of our people, our Coalition Government and on my own behalf, our deepest gratitude. Never will we forget this noble and invaluable support granted us at the most difficult time in our history. Every year, the ever growing nunber of statements on the problem of Kampuchea, both in the general debate and during its consideration, the ever-increasing number of co-sponsors of draft resolutions and the increasingly overwhelming majority of votes in their favour have greatly contributed to maintaining at an ever-higher level the morale of our people and our fighters. In the unequal struggle they have been waging with heroism against an enemy far more powerful, cruel and cunning than the former colonialists and imperialists, a good morale is a sharp and effective weapon and an important factor for victory.
I am particularly happy to renew the expression of our deep and eternal gratitude to the six member States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) which, through their noble and strong support for our struggle, have given proof of initiatives and perseverance in the search for a just and lasting solution that would lead to the end of the Vietnamese aggression and occupation in Kampuchea, would allow Kampuchea again to become an independent, united, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned State, would contain Vietnamese deeply rooted expansionism and turn South-East Asia into a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. Today and in the future, Kampuchea and its people will continue to develop their cordial ties of friendship and solidarity with the ASEAN countries and to bring their active, partici pation to the achievement of that noble goal.
We feel that we cannot reiterate enough' our most profound and cordial gratitude to our neighbour, the Kingdom of Thailand, which has greatly contributed to the survival of our nation by showing its generosity and compassion with which it welcomes in refugee camps hundreds of thousands of our fellow nationals fleeing the massacres and repressions of the Vietnamese occupiers. Neither the pressures and intimidations from Hanoi nor the massacres and destructions perpetrated by the Vietnamese occupation forces in Kam pi ch ea against the Thai border population during their numerous and annual incursions into Thai territories have succeeded in shaking this extan pl ary generosity and compassion. Quite the contrary, they have only strengthened the sincere and fraternal ties of friendship between our two Governments, countries and peoples, Kampuchea and Thailand, which are very close to each other in terms of their history, civilization, culture, language, religion and customs.
We would also like to express our deepest gratitude to the People's Republic of China for its strong, unconditional and permanent assistance without which our struggle could not have developed so favourably. The sincere and many-faceted aid it has been granting to our struggle against the Vietnamese expansionist designs testifies to its determination to work for peace and security in Asia and in the world. This has strengthened our conviction that Viet Nam will never be able to realize its dream of absorbing Kampuchea into an "Indo-China Federation".
To our Secretary-Geier al, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, whose recent unanimous reappointment is gratifying to us all, I wish to reiterate our warm congratulations and our profound gratitude for his tireless and deserving efforts in performing with dedication the mandate entrusted to him by the Charter and the relevant resolutions on the situation in Kampuchea. If he has not yet been successful, it is not because he lacks initiatives or perseverence but rather because of the
Vietnamese intrasigence and manoeuvres. His dedication to and his faith in the Charter and role of our Organization in maintaining international peace and security have reinforced the confidence we have always had in him. I would also like to express our high appreciation for the noble efforts made by all of his colleagues in order to find a political solution to the problem of Kampuchea within the framework of the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
ft/41/Wo42
56
I should like also to express our profound gratitude to all those countries which have been willing to grant asylum in their territories to hundreds of thousands of Cambodians who have been compelled to flee their homeland. Our warmest thanks also go to all the donor countries for their financial and material contributions and to the various United Nations organs for their activities in distributing those contributions and saving the lives of hundreds of thousands of our compatriots displaced throughout the country, near the Thai border or taking refuge in Thailand.
I wish to express my heartfelt thanks to all the international humanitarian assistance agencies and to all those persons who take an interest in the fate of the Cambodian people and who offer the hand of assistance to my people. Lastly, I am happy to repeat our deep appreciation and warm thanks to Mr. Gratz, President of the International Conference on Kampuchea and to all the members of its Ad Hoc Committee, in particular to its President, Ambassador Sarre of Senegal. Through their untiring activities and their missions to various countries in Asia, Africa, America and Europe they have greatly contributed to a better understanding of the problem of Kampuchea, have aroused and maintained the international community's concern about this problem, and have thereby strengthened international support for our just struggle.
Through their immeasurable misfortunes and sufferings, which have lasted all too long, our people and our Coalition Government are greatly comforted by having throughout the world many sincere and dedicated friends who have for almost eight years given them firm, steadfast end ever broader support. Never will we forget this invaluable support, so vital for our survival. We will continue to do whatever we can to deserve and strengthen it. It is quite clear that, without such support our struggle would not have been able to develop on such a scale and it could never have been successful. In the geo-political situation of my country,
next to a powerful neighbour with an insatiable appetite, this international support constitutes for us, both now and in thé future, a continuing and vital necessity without which we would not be able to build up an independent Cambodia, which is united, peaceful, neutral, non-aligned and prosperous.
Mr. President, before concluding, allow me, on behalf of my people and my Coalition Government and on my own behalf, once more to express the sincere respect and high esteem we have for you, and also to reiterate solemnly, in this International Year of Peace, our faith in the United Nations, whose noble ideals, enshrined in the Charter, and whose support, constitute a great moral force for all the small and weak countries like Kampuchea which have to fight for their survival and their freedom in defence of their honour and national dignity.
In expressing these profound sentiments, I should like to make an earnest appeal to all the delegations of peace-loving and justice-loving Member States to lend their noble and effective support to draft resolution A/41/L.2, sponsored by 60 countries. We are confident that once again they will express their determination to defend peace, freedom and justice in the world and thereby to strengthen the sacred principles of the Charter. I wish to extend to all of them, in advance, my profound gratitude and that of our people, our fighters and our Coalition Government.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Singapore, who will also introduce draft resolution A/41/L.2.
Mr. YEO (Singapore): It is with deep sorrow that we learned of the tragic event involving President Machel and some of his senior colleagues. My delegation would like to associate itself with the sentiments expressed by you, Mr. President, and other speakers this morning. On behalf of the Government and people of Singapore, I should like to convey our sincere condolences to the Government and people of Mozambioue on this tragic loss.
It has been said that if the heavens could weep Kampuchea would never know drought. This country used to be a symbol of peace and harmony. It has, unfortunately, become a modern-day symbol of continuous tragedy and suffering. There have been basically three phases in Kampuchea's suffering, the first being the civil war between 1970 and 1975 and the second the brutal rule of the Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1978. What is perhaps less well known is that the latest phase of Kampuchea's suffering, the result of Viet Nam's invasion and occupation of Kampuchea, has lasted almost as long as the first two phases combined. This single fact highlights Viet Nam's cruelty in prolonging the suffering of the Kampucheans.
It is truly tragic that we have to meet here once again to discuss the auestion of Kampuchea. For seven years in a rc^ we have adopted resolutions calling upon Viet Nam to withdraw its forces from Kampuchea and make Kampuchea a free and independent nation again. Viet Nam's response, reiterated only recently in this hall by the Vietnamese Minister, Vo Dong Giang, has been to say that these resolutions are "erroneous". It is unfortunate that Viet Nam has so little respect for the views of the international community or the United Nations.
My delegation is, however, gratified that after eight years the international community's response has been that it will persevere with its efforts to persuade Viet Nam to withdraw from Kampuchea. We have to persevere for two fundamental reasons: first, because we have a moral obligation to end the 16 years of nightmare and suffering for the Kampucheans and, secondly, because the international community has to demonstrate that no nation can be exempted from the principles of international law. We must prove that no State, not even Viet Nam, can be allowed to violate these fundamental principles. If Viet Nam succeeds, other aggressors might be encouraged, and that could make the world a more dangerous place for small States.
It is perhaps inevitable that with the passage of time we become desensitized to a problem. The human psyche is incapable of remaining permanently engrossed in the suffering of any one people; our attention gets distracted. We are fatigued by compassion. Inevitably, Kampuchea's suffering begins to recede into the background.
This lack of public attention to Kampuchea's problems should not blind us to the fact that, in some ways, the Kampucheans are suffering more today than they have in the last 16 years. Det me just quote to you a few passages from a recent book by Elizabeth Becker who, as Viet Nam knows, has been a true and credible witness of events in Kampuchea. In her recent book, "when the War is Over", she described the nature of the Vienamese occupation of Kampuchea;
"Each year that control has produced humiliating orders from the Vietnamese overlords. Although Kampuchea does not produce enough rice to feed its own population, it is required to send rice and fish to Viet Nam. Vietnamese *s becoming the second language in Government offices. The number of new Vietnamese settlers rises each year, following the pattern set hundreds of years ago when the Vietnamese settled in what is now South Viet Nam. First come the Vietnamese equivalent of carpetbaggers, petty merchants who now inhabit entire quarters of Phonm Penh. Then come the farmers and fishermen. The farmers settled in disputed territory near the Vietnamese-Canbodian border, further blurring the divide. The fishermen moved up the waterways and are now clustered as far west as the Great Lake. If the pattern holds, the next group to settle will be demobilized Vietnamese soldiers who are given land in return for pacifying Cambodia."
Having perpetuated the Cambodian suffering for so long, it is shameless - and I am only using the word that Minister Vo Dong Giang used several times in his speech -shameless for Viet Nam to pretend that it is rescuing the Cambodian people from suffering.
Viet Nam has also given lectures here on previous human rights abuses in Kampuchea. Let me auote from a recent report by Amnesty International, a report entitled "File on Torture" dated September 1986, which documents the involvement of Vietnamese experts in the continuing torture of Kampucheans:
"Vietnamese 'experts' are reported to have participated in or been present during torture at these PRK centres, especially those at the provincial level and above." (A/41/701, p. 3)
If we recall that Viet Nam defended the record of the Khmer Rouge at meetings of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in 1977 and 1978, these reports of Vietnamese atrocities should not surprise us.
I am afraid that there were many other misleading elements in Minister Vo Dong Giang's speech to the General Assembly. In an effort to divert attention away from its brutal invasion and occupation of Kampuchea, Viet Nam has spread rumours that "peace is at hand" in Kampuchea. Mr. Vo Dong Giang said:
"Developments in and around Southeast Asia have shown that confrontation is step by step being replaced by dialogue and the differences are gradually being narrowed".
Viet Nam has also announced its own proposals for a settlement of the Kampuchean problem and declared that "the withdrawal of the Vietnamese volunteer troops from Kampuchea ... will be completed by the year 1990".
Since I fear that this Vietnamese announcement may mislead many observers into believing that Viet Nam is ready to withdraw from Kampuchea, let me explain Viet Nam's tactics. We live today in an age where colonialism and imperialism are no longer fashionable. The new colonialists and imperialists no longer trumpet the results of their aggression, but pretend to be conforming to modern principles of international law. Hypocrisy, they say, is the compliment that vice pays to virtue. Viet Nam, I fear, is being totally hypocritical.
To understand Viet Nam's proposals, let us consider what our reaction would be if South Africa made exactly the same proposals concerning Namibia. Both South Africa and Viet Nam are occupying territories in violation of United Nations resolutions. Both have made ingenious attempts to justify their occupation. What would our reaction be if tomorrow South Africa announced that it was prepared to withdraw its troops from Namibia in 1990, but only if the so-called internal administration in Windhoek was not threatened by Namibia's nationalist forces? And would this offer of withdrawal be credible if South Africa added a condition that these troops should be allowed to return to Namibia at the request of the so-called internal administration in Windhoek? This is precisely what Viet Nam is proposing when it offers to withdraw its forces from Kampuchea. It should not therefore come as a surprise that Viet Nam's proposals have been received with great scepticism in South-East Asia and all around the world.
My delegation firmly believes that if Viet Nam is sincerely interested in finding a peaceful solution to the Kampuchean problem, it should speak directly to the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the legitimate representative of the Kampuchean people. Notwithstanding Viet Nam's continued intransigence, the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea put forward to Viet Nam on 17 March 1986 a reasonable eight-point proposal for a political settlement of the Kampuchean problem. The eight points have been outlined in the text which I have circulated, so I shall not proceed to quote them.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries have announced their support for this eight-point proposal because it contains at least two new ideas. First, Democratic Kampuchea is prepared to accept a phased rather than an immediate withdrawal of Vietnamese troops. Secondly, to promote national reconciliation following this withdrawal, representatives of the Heng Samrin regime
will be allowed to participate in a quadripartite government. We are pleased to note that the international community has also responded positively to these proposals, which have demonstrated the flexibility and open-mindedness of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, unfortunately, Viet Nam has rejected outright the eight-point proposal.
If I have spoken at length about the sufferings of the Kampuchean people, I have done so because I believe that our concern for the Kampucheans should be the primary reason for our continued involvement in the Kampuchean issue. However, the outcome of the Kampuchean issue will also have implications for all of us, especially the smaller States of the United Nations.
We met here last week to consider the financial crisis of the United Nations Most of us agreed that what the United Nations faced was not only a financial crisis but also a political crisis arising from the failure of some Member States to abide by the obligations of the Charter, we are not surprised to see the major Powers undermining the United Nations. However, we are surprised that Viet Nam has contributed to this process by refusing to accept the moral authority of the United Nations. By selectively accepting or rejecting resolutions, Viet Nam has torn large holes in the United Nations fabric of moral author!ty and th rough these holes others, like the South African racists, have also escaped from the moral authority of this great Organization.
Singapore has not been alone in expressing its concern over the decline of the moral authority of the United Nations. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has consistently reaffirmed its faith in the Charter of the United Nations and called upon all its Menfcer States to respect the Charter and United Nations resolutions. As one of the members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Viet Nam has often declared its commitment to respect the decisions of the Movement. If it is truly conmitted to the Movement and its goals, Viet Nam could begin by helping to implement the United Nations resolution on Kampuchea.
Regrettably, without waiting to listen to the views expressed by States Members of the United Nations, Viet Nam has already declared that any resolution resulting from today's debate will be "null and void". I refer to the letter from the Permanent Representatives of Laos and Viet Nam (A/41/712), dated 15 October 1986. I wonder whether our colleagues from Laos and Viet Nam have paused to consider the considerable damage that could be done to the moral and legal credibility of the United Nations if every delegation here decided to follow Viet Nam's example and accept or reject United Nations resolutions at will? Mat
(Mr. Yeo, Singapore) moral or legal authority would united Nations resolutions have if we, the Menber States, show no respect for then?
As Singapore is the current Chairman of the Standing Committee, of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, I have the honour of introducing this year's draft resolution on Kampuchea (A/41/L. 2), dated 10 October 1986. In addition to the 54 co-sponsors listed in the draft resolution, six other countries have co-sponsored the draft resolution. They are Belize, Cameroon, Chile, Dominica, Haiti and Mauritius. The main purpose of the draft resolution is to spell out the key elements for a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean problem. As these* elements are in conformity with the principles of the United Nations Charter, we urge Viet Nam to support such a comprehensive political settlement.
We have always maintained that Viet Nam, as one of the countries of South-East Asia, has a legitimate interest in Kampuchea. Viet Nam has the right to expect that Kampuchea, which is its neighbour, should respect its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Viet Nam has the right to expect that Kampuchea should pursue a policy of peace land good-neighbourliness towards it. Viet Nam has the right also to demand that no outside Power should use Kampuchea as a base for subversion and aggression against Viet Nam. On all these points we would agree with our Vietnamese colleagues. By the same token, however, we should point out that Kampuchea also has the right to demand and expect that Viet Nam should also observe the same principles and norms. This is the premise upon which our draft resolution is based.
In his report to the General Assembly on this question, the Secretary-General has reiterated that a political settlement
"will have to be consistent with the basic purposes and principles of the Charter of the united Nations". (A/41/707, para. 20)
He added:
"I am convinced that it can only be reached through a process o£ genuine negotiations without pre-conditions." (Ibid, para. 20)
We urge Viet Nam to heed the appeal of the Secretary-General and enter into genuine negotiations with the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea without pre-conditions.
By voting for the draft resolution before us, the Members of the United Nations will be encouraging Viet Nam to join the search for peace, which we hope will lead to an early and comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean problem.
Sir John THOMSON (united Kingdom): I speak first as the representative of the united Kingdom. In this capacity I should like to express ray delegation's sense of shock and dismay at the terrible news we received this morning of the death of His Excellency President Samora Machel. Not only was he the architect of his country's independence, but he made a great contribution to the cause of peace in southern Africa, both during the Lancaster House Conference in London and by the signature of the Nkomati Accord. His loss is made all the more poignant by the fact that we were honoured to receive him twice in London, in 1983 and in 1985. Our support for Mozambique is manifested in a number of areas, including development assistance, emergency and food aid, and will continue. We extend our sympathy to all those bereaved as a result of this tragic accident.
I now have the honour to speak on behalf of the 12 States of the European Community.
The Cambodian problem has become distressingly familiar to this Assembly. Bor seven successive years, an overwhelming majority of the nations represented here have called upon Viet Nam to withdraw its forces from Cambodia, so that the
(Sig John Thomson, united Kingdom) independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country can be restored and so that the Cambodian people can at last enjoy peace and freedom. last year a record number of countries, 114 of them, including the then 10 menbers of the European Community, and also Spain and Portugal, joined in supporting this resolution on Canbodia. The Vietnamese occupation of Canbodia has, however, continued in violation of the United Nations Charter and the fundamental principles
of international law.
A/43/PV. 42
'	71
^^r J°hn Thomson, United Kingdom) The lot of the Cambodian people has not improved since the Assembly last met to discuss this problem. They remain subjected to illegal occupation by foreign troops and governed by a regime which has no claim to legitimacy. Viet Nam prides itself on its struggle to win independence and the right to determine its own destiny: it should now grant that right to the people of Canbodia. Instead Viet Nam continues to violate their fundamental rights and to endanger their culture and national identity.
The twelve have no intention of contributing to the re-establishment of the Pol Pot régime in Canbodia. We share the collective abhorrence felt by the world community at the terrible abuses inflicted by Pol Pot and his Khmer Rouge. But this provides no justification for Viet Nam's illegal occupation of its smaller neighbour for nearly eight years or its imposition of an illegitimate régime. The Cambodian resistance continues to challenge the Vietnamese forces. The possibility of establishing a free and pluralist society in Canbodia still exists.
The aim must be to achieve a negotiated settlement of the Canbodian question, not one imposed by force of arms. For this reason, the Twelve have supported the efforts of the countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other parties to find such a solution. It is lamentable that Viet Nam has consistently rejected the peace proposals that have been put to it: this year, for example, Hanoi and the Government installed in Phnom Penh turned down out of hand the eight-point proposal put forward by Prince Sihanouk in March. The Twelve have called upon Viet Nam to reconsider this position and we do so again today. We continue to believe that the Declaration of the International Conference on Kampuchea offers the best basis for a settlement. But we have yet to see an indication of any serious will on the part of Hanoi to negotiate or to discuss the implementation of successive United Nations resolutions based on the principles laid down by that Conference.
Much has been made of Viet Nam’s declared intention, announced last year, to withdraw all its forces from Cambodia by 1990. Some partial withdrawals have already taken place, but the overall strength of Viet Nam’s occupation force has remained much the same. Resolutions endorsed by this Assembly have called upon Viet Nam to withdraw its forces immediately from Canbodia. This should remain our aim. Talk by Hanoi of a 1990 withdrawal date should in no way serve to legitimize a Vietnamese military presence in Canbodia until then. The Vietnamese Government has no right to put a timetable on the restoration of Cambodia's independent status. We support the efforts made by the Secretary-General, his representatives and the Ad Hoc Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea to persuade Hanoi to agree to a settlement in accordance with resolutions adopted by the United Nations. Any settlement would, inter alia, need to include guarantees against Vietnamese forces re-entering Canbodia after their withdrawal.
last year the Assembly met in the wake of the most ferocious Vietnamese military offensive in Canbodia since Hanoi's invasion of the country in 1978. Some quarter of a million Cambodian civilians had been forced to flee across the border into Thailand. The situation for those unfortunate people has not changed} they have not been able to return to their homes in Cambodia. Viet Nam has maintained its forces in the Thai border area, from where they have continued, in violation of international law, to make incursions and fire artillery into Thailand, causing casualties among the civilicin population. The laying of mines on both sides of the border by Vietnamese troops has also caused unnecessary suffering. Thailand has drawn the Secretary-General's attention to these abuses. The Twelve urge Viet Nam to cease the attars forthwith.
We should not overlook the severe refugee problem which is a distressing consequence of Viet Nam's policy towards its smaller neighbours. Of particular
concern is the plight of the Khmer border population who remain totally dependent on international relief. The Twelve applaud the humanitarian role played by the Government of Thailand in providing succour for those civilians who have been forced from their country by Vietnamese force of arms. We would also remind this Assembly of the admirable role played by representatives of the international and voluntary organizations, including many nationals of European Community member countries, in looking after this population. The European Community and its member States will continue to play their part, in supper ting ^the programes, co-ordinated by the United Nations Border Relief Operation, for the benefit of these unfortunate people.
But the root cause of the Cambodia refugee problem lies in Hanoi. This problem will persist for as long as Viet Nam remains in illegal occupation of Cambodia, and the sufferings of the refugees provide a forceful humanitarian argument for Viet Nam to comply with United Nations resolutions.
The Twelve will once again give their full support to the resolution submitted by the ASEAN countries, calling for a peaceful and just solution to the conflict in Cambodia, based on a total withdrawal of foreign forces and free and fair elections. We call on other Member States to join us in supporting this resolution and in pressing Viet Nam to take immediate action to end its illegal occupation of Cambodia, and to respect the sanctity of international frontiers and the territorial integrity of that troubled country.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
PROVISIONAL
A/41/PV.54
7 November 1986
ENGLISH
General Assembly
EXEMPLA^ES b 'i .¿JXs v „ RLE COPY '
s raww / saw io bwm« c. if
■^smKSse^mcngBHaBBBBsasMDHHMHaMEflwmm^HH Forty-first session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FIFTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headauarters, New York, on Monday, 3 November 1986, at 3 p.m.
President;	Mr. CHOUDHURY	(Bangladesh)
later:	Mr. MACIEL	(Brazil)
(Vice-President)
later:	Mr. OGOUMA	(Benin)
(Vice-President)
later:	Mr. MOUSHOUTAS	(Cyprus)
(Vice-President)
- Commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights: draft resolution (971
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
86-64376/A 2617V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
•	AGENDA ITEM 97
COMMEMORATION OF THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANTS ON HUMAN RIGHTS: DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/41/L.21)
The PRESIDENT: I wish to announce that, in addition to the Members whose names appear as sponsors of the draft resolution in document A/41/L.21, the following Members have become co-sponsors: Argentina, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, France, Jamaica, the Netherlands, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
It was two decades ago that the Covenants on Human Rights were adopted by the General Assembly. That was made possible by the painstaking endeavours of many from all over the world. The adoption of the Covenants lent further substances to the purposes of the United Nations as set forth in Article 1 of the Charter. It is that moment of achievement that we are assembled here to commemorate.
The founding fathers of the United Nations could foresee that peace was not possible without due recognition of human rights. The human person is inviolable. An affront to his or her dignity is inexcusable. Throughout history, violation of human rights served to heighten tension and cause conflicts. As civilization evolved, there was a greater understanding of this fact. Today I am happy to be able to say that the acceptance of this truth is nearly universal. I fervently hope that this appreciation will be translated into greater numbers of ratifications.
Much of the credit for this goes to the United Nations and to its specialized agencies. Their work in this respect has been truly edifying. They deserve our praise and thanks. Similarly, there are many individuals and non-governmental
organizations devoted to this noble end. We commend their wurk as well.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Charter of the United Nations reflects the keen awareness of its framers that no lasting peace is possible without the observance of human rights. The preamble to the Charter expresses the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small. The purposes of the United Nations, as defined in Article 1, include the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights.
The San Francisco Conference entrusted the preparation of essential norms in this respect to the Commission on Human Rights, whose establishment was specifically provided for in Article 68 of the Charter.
The Commission on Human Rights thus embarked on a historic endeavour, the preparation of an International Bill of Human Rights consisting of three essential parts: a universal declaration; one or more covenants; and measures of implementation. With the adoption in 1948 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which has become one of the great documents of our times, the United Nations gave the world an instrument of fundamental significance. The Commission then set out to draft covenants designed to translate the principles of the Declaration into legally binding obligations of States.
The painstaking work of drafting the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the Optional Protocol to the latter came to fruition when the Covenants
were adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 1966.

"... the instrument which you have adopted today will entrust upon its entry into force various responsibilities to the Secretary-General, not only functions of a ministerial character relating to the custody of the Covenants and the Protocol, but also the provision of services to the Human Rights Committee and other organs performing tasks of implementation. I gladly accept those responsibilities ... on behalf of the Secretariat". (A/PV.1496, para. 73)
For my own part, I have always attached the greatest importance to the promotion of respect for human rights in line with our hard-won legal instruments. I shall continue to do so in the years ahead.
Since the coming into force of the Covenants in 1976, the task of their implementation has become an ever-increasing and important responsibility for the United Nations, including its principal and specialized organs such as the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Committee, as well as the Secretariat. The consideration of economic, social and cultural rights by those bodies has contributed to improved understanding of these rights and of the manner in which their implementation can best be pursued by States Parties as well as by the international connunity.
While, as a general rule, the inplementation of the rights contained in the Economic and Social Covenant is conceived as a task to be achieved progressively, States Parties to the Covenant should pursue in good faith and in a non — discriminatory manner the application of all of the rights contained therein and should work together through international assistance and co-operation for the realization of the rights contained in the Covenant.


In this connection, I should like to pay tribute to the specialized agencies
and to non-governmental organizations for the important contribution they have made
to the work of the United Nations for the realization of economic, social and cultural rights. 
The Human Rights Committee established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights has pioneered a new path in international co-operation on behalf of human rights. Working patiently through a process of consensus, the Committee, by its consideration of reports and the constructive dialogue which it has established with the States Parties, has contributed significantly to the further elaboration of international human rights law in key areas and has encouraged a stricter application of the Covenant. It has also provided redress for grievances suffered by individuals.

Alongside the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenants on Human Rights provide the solid core of international human rights law. Their implementation must be pursued as a matter of the highest priority by all organs of the international community. The Covenants should be made known to every individual in the world and we must be constantly vigilant that nothing is done to detract from their provisions.
Mindful of the great importance of the universal ratification of the International Covenants on Human Rights, I hope that on this twentieth anniversary of their adoption, we shall witness an upsurge in ratifications.
It would also be appropriate that on this occasion all of us renew our resolve to work not only for universal adherence but also for the practical application of the Covenants everywhere. This is a task to which, as Secretary-General of the United Nations, I attach the highest importance.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Morocco, who wishes to introduce draft resolution A/41/L.21.	
Mrs. WARZAZI (Morocco) (interpretation from French): When the Third Committee began work, on 17 October 1966, on the final version of the covenants the international atmosphere was still marked by mistrust, hostility, tensions and a concern jealously to guard national sovereignty.
That was certainly one of the reasons why the draft covenants, on which the Commission on Human Rights, at the request of the.General Assembly, had been working since 1950, had not yet got over the last hurdle.
In 1966, one year after the adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, all delegations realized that iQ. this twentieth century, dominated as it is by the progress of science and technology, the ideal of free human beings could only be achieved if, as stated in the preamble to the
Covenants:
.	(Mrs. Warzazi, Morocco)
"conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy his economic, social and cultural rights, as well as his civil and political rights”. (General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex)
The completion and then the adoption of international instruments clearly setting forth those rights guaranteed by States had to respond to the concerns of the Third Committee, therefore, although the task was obviously delicate and complex, all delegations set themselves to work valiantly.
Thanks to that understanding, that faith in the validity of human rights and a spirit of dialogue and compromise which was to mark a new age in relations among the members of the Third Committee, that Committee was able, on 7 December 1966, to adopt the draft international covenants on human rights, which allowed the General Assembly to do the same on 16 December 1966.
Those instruments, which were the result of untiring efforts and great patience, are this year celebrating their twentieth anniversary. They undoubtedly constitute a triumph for the United Nations, for each delegation that participated in their drafting and for the cause of human rights.
Draft resolution A/41/L.21, which my delegation has the honour of presenting on behalf of the following countries: Argentina, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, France, Jamaica, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and my country, Morocco, is intended to reaffirm the importance of the International Covenants for all the men and women on Earth and to reaffirm the need to ensure their effective enjoyment, which will contribute to good co-operation among States in striving to achieve the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. The steady increase in the countries acceding to those instruments is testimony to increasing recognition of and commitment to the cause of human rights and
fundamental freedoms and therefore to the ideals of justice, freedom and dignity.
(Mrs. Warzazi, Morocco)
The draft resolution invites all States, the appropriate United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to celebrate this twentieth anniversary. Its purpose is to bring about the broadest possible acceptance of those international instruments, full respect for their provisions and widespread publicity and dissemination, so as to guarantee them.
The co-sponsors therefore ask the members of the General Assembly to adopt this draft resolution unanimously.
Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): We are assembled today to commemorate a proud event in the history of the United Nations; the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol. I have the honour, on behalf of the 12 member States of the European Community, to address this vital subject.
An anniversary such as this is traditionally a time both to look back and to look forward. Human rights are not a discovery of recent years, nor even a discovery of the United Nations. As Europeans, the Twelve are proud to recall that under the name of "natural rights" or "the rights of Man" the concept has played a potent part in the political life of our continent throughout the last three centuries. Many of the great reforms of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were inspired by the belief that every individual human being, regardless of status or background, possessed certain inalienable rights.
• (Sir John Thomson, United Kingdom)
The achievement of human rights has for centuries been a basic aspiration of men and women throughout the world? Demands for protection against the tyrannical acts of Governments, for assurances against arbitrary or inhuman punishment, for freedom of assembly and expression, for the rule of law, for better economic and social conditions for all, these have been among the most insistent themes of political activity in many countries. These aspirations were embodied in the Covenants as human rights.*	.
The Twelve seek universal observance of human rights. The Joint Declaration of 5 April 1977 by the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission stressed the prime importance we attach to human rights. Our Foreign Ministers reaffirmed this in a declaration issued in Brussels on 21 July 1986 - circulated as General Assembly document A/41/607 - in which they set out the principles of the Twelve in the human rights field. In this declaration they called for universal ratification * of the major United Nations human rights instruments. Central among these are the two great Covenants whose adoption we are celebrating today. They proclaimed high but attainable standards for the protection and promotion of human rights to which all States should conform.
*Mr< Maciel (Brazil), Vice-President, took the Chair.
■	-	(Sir John Thomson, United
Kingdom)
And they gave effect to the commitment in Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter to make the promotion of human rights the legitimate and continuous duty of the world community. Thus for the first- time machinery was established under the auspices of the United Nations to consider the fulfilment by States of their international obligation to respect and to ensure to all individuals subject to their , jurisdiction certain human rights. The Twelve again urge those countries which have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Covenants and the Optional Protocol as soon as possible to enable them to become truly universal.
The adoption of the Covenants and the Optional Protocol was a major achievement, but we must not rest on our laurels. Setting standards cannot protect human rights if the standards laid down are then blatantly disregarded. We are constantly reminded that human rights are still being grievously violated in very many parts of the world, even in certain countries which are party to the CovenantSo Ratification is not enough, ¡implementation is the essential task before us.
We must be vigilant to defend essential freedoms where they exist and make practical efforts to extend them elsewhere. States parties to the Covenants have a legal obligation to ensure that their actions are in line with the provisions of the Covenants. And at the international level we must ensure ever greater observation of the obligations which have already been accepted. This can be done in a- number of ways. It can be done by making more effective use of the machinery which already exists to monitor the inpiementation of the standards in the Covenants, the Human Rights Committee and the newly established Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Where States parties have made the declaration provided for in article 41 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights there is further provision for monitoring implementation. It can
.	(Sir John Thomson, United
Kingdom) .
also be done through the activities and procedures of United Nations bodies such as the Commission on Human Rights and the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities.	.
All those activities need to be pursued urgently. The adeouacy and effectiveness of the United Nations machinery also need to be kept under constant review. As Sir Geoffrey Howe made clear in our general debate, on 23 September, in his speech on behalf of the European Community and its Member states, the Twelve attach particular importance to maintaining and strengthening the mechanisms established by the United Nations for the protection of human rights. It is essential that the necessary resources should continue to be made available for this purpose.
The task before us is a large one and one that does not fall solely to governmental organizations. Non-governmental organizations and individuals have made valuable and courageous contributions, which the Twelve salute, to the promotion and protection of human rights.
Information, education and publicity, too, are important tools for the promotion of respect for and awareness of human rights. The Twelve attach great importance to the wide circulation of international human rights instruments, in particular the universal Declaration and International Covenants, not only in all official languages of the United Nations but also in other national languages. We reiterate the appeal made in our declaration of 21 July 1986 to all States to enhance public awareness of the cause of human rights through educational programmes and by allowing non-governmental organizations freely to disseminate human rights information.
On this anniversary the international community can indeed take satisfaction
in its achievements: the International Covenants represent the broadest
,	(Sir John Thomson, United
Kingdom)
international codification of accepted standards for human rights. But this should not be simply an occasion for self-congratulation or complacency. It should instead be the occasion for a renewed commitment by all Member states to the promotion of the ideals and objectives of the Covenants. The Twelve will play their full part in this.
Mr. AGUILAR (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a true honour for the delegation of Venezuela and for me personally to be speaking at this meeting commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as the Optional Protocol to the latter document.
The General Assembly, when it adopted and proclaimed in resolution
217 A (III), of 10 December 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, took an extremely important step in t' e process of developing the necessarily general, but none the less imperative, norms in the United Nations Charter in the field of human rights. However, from the outset it was intended that that Declaration would be the first part of an international charter of human rights and would be supplemented subseauently by two others, one dealing with the definition of the rights and freedoms which would be the subject of international protection and the other with the machinery for verification and control of their application.
As everybody knows, it was not found possible to carry out the original plan because of disagreements that arose in the course of the work which followed the adoption of the Universal Declaration. It must be recognized that the task of drawing up juridically binding norms in this area was not an easy one, in view of the great differences that existed at the time, and still exist, between Member States from the point of view of their respective ideologies, social and economic
systems, culture and degree of development. Those difficulties, which were seen k
very clearly in the preparatory work on the two Covenants, explain why it took 18 years to draw them up. Fortunately, thanks > the faith and perseverence of many men and women who worked tirelessly year after year, it was finally possible to adopt those international instruments, although it was necessary to wait for about 10 years before they actually came into force.
This is not the time to go into the background of the le» g and conplex process of the drafting of those Covenants and the Optional Protocol. 1 shall confine myself to saying that after lengthy deliberations on whether civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights should be dealt with in a single instrument, it wan finally decided to deal with the two categories of rights separately, it being understood that both the Covenants would have the same importance and equal status.
,„	(Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela)
It is significant in this connection that both these Covenants were adopted on the same day and came into force in the same year, namely, 1976, on 3 January in the case of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and 23 March, in the case of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol. It is not possible in a Declaration of this kind to carry out a detailed examination of the rights which are defined and protected in these Covenants. Suffice it to say, in this connection, that these two documents lay down those rights which are generally recognized as deserving of international protection in either category. This does not mean, of course, that the list of rights and freedoms which should be internationally protected should necessarily be confined to those laid down in the two Covenants. This list could well be broadened, and this will undoubtedly be done as soon as the various international societies require it and as soon as there is general agreement about the need to modify the Covenants or to adopt new international instruments to deal with these new requirements. But, as practice has indicated, what is perhaps as important -perhaps even more important - as identifying and defining the rights protected internationally, is the question of the ways and means of verifying and monitoring the implementation and performance of the obligations assumed by the various States parties to the various agreements on human rights.
It is particularly interesting, in this connection, to refer to the valuable experience gained by the Committee established pursuant to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which has been in existence for more than 10 years now. First, it should be pointed out that this experience shows how appropriate it was to entrust the delicate task of verifying and controlling the implementation of the international instruments on the promotion and protection of human rights to organs made up of experts serving in their personal capacity. As is well known, pursuant to article 28 of the International Covenant on Civil and
17
(Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela) Political Rights, the Committee which carries out this work is made up of 18 Members, nationals of States parties, who are persons of great moral integrity, of recognized authority in human rights matters, and who are elected and perform their functions in a personal capacity. The fact that according to article 30 of the same Covenant, the members of the Committee, in order to be elected, require not merely the largest number of votes but an absolute majority of votes of the representatives of States Parties present and voting, contributes to election of screened candidates.
This composition, to a large extent, also makes it possible to avoid the politicization of these functions, which unfortunately happened in the work of similar organs made up of governmental representatives.
We are therefore very pleased that this experience has served as a model for the recent creation of a Committee to monitor the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, whose members were elected in a personal capacity by the Economic and Social Council on 22 May of this year.	,
Basically, the functions of verifying and monitoring the implementation of these Covenants is carried out through a well-tried machinery of examining the reports periodically filed by States Parties, in accordance with articles 16 and 17 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and article 40 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Once again, the experience gained in the Human Rights Committee, established under the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights, enables us to evaluate the usefulness of this machinery. Since its creation in 1977, the Committee has considered more than 80 reports filed by States Parties. It should be pointed out that during that period it studied the first report which, in accordance with article 40 of the Covenant, is to be presented by all States
(Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela) parties one year after the entry into force of the Covenant for each of those countries respectively, and it has now started to consider the second periodic report which, in accordance with the provisions adopted by the Committee and the option conferred upon it by article 40 of the Covenant, has been submitted to it by certain States parties for examination. He see to what extent, therefore, this is a responsible task and how important t is for States parties and for the Committee that there should be a constructive dialogue when these reports are studied.
The Committee has also carried out an extremely important piece of work pursuant to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Unfortunately, only 37 States are at present parties to that Protocol, which, as we know, authorizes the Committee to receive and consider communications from individuals who are under the jurisdiction of a State Party and who claim to be victims of a violations by that State of any of the rights enunciated in the Covenant. In this connection, it should be painted out that in 1985 a volume was published which contains a selection of decisions taken by the Committee pursuant to that Protocol between the second and sixteenth sessions and there will shortly be published a second volume with a selection of decisions adopted between the seventeenth and twenty-eighth sessions.
Special mention should also be made of the general comments of the Committee on Civil and Political Rights on various provisions contained in the Covenant, in order to acquaint States Parties with their sense and scope, and also to facilitate the implementation and the preparation of periodic reports.
The Committee’s report contains a detailed description of the work carried out during the last three sessions of the Council. This is an eloquent demonstration of the very serious and constructive done by the body.
Unfortunately, because of the financial crisis which now besets the Organization, the session to be held in October and November of this year was cancelled. It is to be hoped that this situation will not recur next year, because the Cciacittee cannot efficiently perform its duties pursuant to the Covenant and the Optional Protocol if the three sessions which it has been holding since it was crested are now reduced to two. To confine the activities of the Committee to two sessions with a six-month interval between each would have a serious impact on the consideration of the periodic reports of States parties, particularly in the case of individual communications which are submitted for their consideration pursuant to the Optional Protocol. The result undoubtedly would be a backlog, or superficial consideration of these reports, and very often proper attention would not be given to individual complaints. We are confident that these points will be duly taken into account when next year's calendar is drawn up.
Attention should also be drawn to the fact that the number of States Parties to both of these Covenants and the Optional Protocol are Jtill very limited. As of 1 August 1986, according to the report of the Secretary-General contained in document A/41/509, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, had been ratified or acceded to by 87 States, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights by 83 States, and the Optional Protocol by 37 States. Thus, scarcely more than half of the States Members of the Organization have ratified or acceded to these two international instruments and the Optional Protocol. Therefore, we would urge all Member States of the Organization, which have not yet done so, to become parties to both of the Covenants and to the Optional Protocol, so that these instruments can be of a truly universal character. Of course, ratification and accession to these Covenants is extremely important, but what is even more important is strict compliance by States which have already become parties to these international instruments.
,	<Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela)
In conclusion, we should like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for the support which he has never failed to give to the task of promoting and protecting human rights. The assistance provided by the Centre for Human Rights regarding the inpiementation of the Covenants and the Optional Protocol has undoubtedly been an important factor in the fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to the bodies established to ensure their implementation. The programme of advisory services in the field of human rights and technical assistance to States not parties to the Convenants in order to help them subseauently to ratify or accede to these documents deserve particular mention, as does the very important work carried out to ensure that the widest possible publicity is given to these Covenants and to the steps taken towards their effective implementation.
Mr, CESAR (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from Russian): I have the honour to make the following statement as the Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
This solemn meeting of the united Nations General Assembly dedicated to the twertieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights takes place in a year which the United Nations has declared the International Year of Peace. There is a deep symbolic connection between these two events.
More than 40 years ago the ideal of preserving peace constituted the foundation for the establishment of our Organization. The founding Members of the united Nations declared in the Charter that they were determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the eoual rights of men and women, and undertook to promote social progress and better standards of life. The United Nations drew an inportant conclusion from the tragic experience of the
Second World Kar, which had brought about a massive and most flagrant denial of the
rights of entire nations and millions of defenceless victims. The purpose of establishing the United Nations was to guarantee the fundamental rights of every person and every nation, the right to life in the conditions necessary for human dignity.	’'
In addition to the efforts exerted by the United Nations to prevent war, its efforts devoted to formulating international norms in the field of human rights are of outstanding importance. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted and proclaimed by the General Assembly in resolution 217 A (III), of 10 December 1948, has found specific reflection in more than 50 currently valid international treaties and agreements. Far from belittling the significance of other international instruments, we consider that the International Covenants on Human Rights, whose twentieth anniversary we are observing today, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 40/114, of 13 December 1985, entitled "Indivisibility and interdependence of economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights", rightly holds a central place in this area of international co-operation.
The formulation of the text of the Covenants constituted a decisive stage in the 18 years of work of the United Nations in the field of human rights. Their adoption by the General Assembly on 16 December 1966 was a major step forward towards the achievement of the goals of co-operation and the enhancement and promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, as set forth in the United Nations Charter.
The lasting importance of the Covenants lies in the fact that they were the first instruments establishing the fundamental principles and norms of international co-operation in the humanitarian field in a form that was legally binding on States. The adoption of the Covenants on Human Rights also meant International recognition of the principles of the self-determination of nations, the inalienable right of nations to their natural resources and the equality of human beings, without discrimination.
Taken as a whole - because that is how they have to be viewed - the Covenants on Human Rights encompass the whole range of fundamental human rights and freedoms. They prohibit war propaganda by law; they show that the safeguarding of human rights, primarily the right to life, is dependent upon the maintenance of peace and security on our planet; they confirm the indivisibility and interdependence of economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights.
Naturally, all States that participated in the drafting of the Covenants and voted for their adoption at the twenty-first session of the General Assembly were guided on the one hand by the noble goals of the United Nations Charter and on the other by the real possibilities of their respective socio-political systems. It should be recalled that the adoption of the two Covenants at the 1496th meeting of the twenty-first session of the United Nations General Assembly, on 16 December 1966, was unanimous. That action confirmed that co-operation among States with different social systems was possible and beneficial, even in such a sensitive area as this one, which is strongly marked by differences in ideological approaches.
The importance and weight of the Covenants on Human Rights consist, inter alia, in the fact that their compromise provisions form a solid foundation for the further elaboration of international legal standards and norms in individual, specific areas.
- During the time that has passed since their establishment, the two international mechanisms designed to monitor the inpiementation of the Covenants by individual States have accomplished a great deal of beneficial work. There is no doubt that their functioning could be made more effective if more States acceded to the Covenants and the approach were absolutely equal in relation to the two categories of human rights, on the one hand civil and political and on the other
economic, social and cultural. Any one-sided interpretation of standards based on
the exclusivity of any legal or social system will impede rather than promote the universal implementation of the Covenants. Attempts to that end are both unrealistic and detrimental to thé foundation upon which States have agreed with a view to developing co-operation in the advancement of human rights.
We regard current international law in the field of human rights as a means of international co-operation aimed at strengthening peace, but not as a means of justifying the policy of interference in the internal affairs of other States. There have been times in history when crusades have been organized in order to suppress people of other religious beliefs, when interventions have been launched in the name of the protection of one's own citizens and their property abroad and when entire nations have been subjugated on the pretext of conferring on the so-called values of civilization. Regrettably, similar interpretations are used even now by certain States to justify their interventions or so-called punitive
sanctions.
In the context of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Covenants it is especially alarming that certain States continue to pursue a policy of boycotting the International Covenants on Human Rights. It is much easier to make high-flown speeches about respect for human rights and to give all kinds of lessons in that regard than to fulfil to the full extent of their scope the obligations set forth in international instruments, primarily in such significant international covenants as those relating to human rights.
It was already known to lawyers in ancient Rome that once States sign and ratify international treaties they have to abide by them, because pacta sunt servanda - agreements must be observed. It is difficult to understand the obstacles preventing certain States from implementing generally acceptable compromise norms in the field of human rights. Socialist countries attach great importance to international co-operation in the implementation of the provisions of the Covenants, as well as in other humanitarian matters. Socialist, democratic revolutions have not been carried out in our countries in order to achieve some sort of world hegemony but rather to free us from oppression and deprivation of rights and safeguard the free development of each individual and the full exercise of all his political, civil, social, economic and cultural rights.
For socialism, full recognition and constitutional enactment of the entire complex of human rights as an indissoluble whole is just the first step, the starting point. We put emphasis primarily on the genuine ensuring and safeguarding of all rights for every member of society. Care for the well-being of man, genuine implementation of his right to work, education, housing and social welfare, time off for work and medical services and participation in the management of the affairs of the State, society and the production collective - all this constitutes the essence of both the policy and the practice of socialist States and societies.
In a socialist society the freedoms, human rights and dignity of the human individual have real content, the unity of rights and duties is safeguarded, the
same laws and ethical norms apply to everyone and ever better conditions are being created for the all-around development of the human individual. As new stages are reached in the socio-economic development of the socialist countries the rights and fundamental freedoms of citizens acquire new content. For example, democracy and socialist self-government by the people are enhanced by ever broader involvement of citizens in the management of State and social affairs, and the well-being of the people is raised to a qualitatively new level.
Our approach is based on the premise that in the present circumstances the main objective of international co-operation in matters relating to human rights is to create appropriate, truly human material and spiritual conditions for all nations and every individual. We are convinced that the true safeguarding of the right of every nation to peace and of every human being to life opens up wider possibilities also for increased international co-operation in the sphere of human rights.
Mr. BIERRING (Denmark): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
One of the most important achievements of the United Nations has been the extensive codification of human rights. Today we join the entire membership in celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Together with the universal Declaration of Human Rights, they form an international bill of rights, the corner-stone on which all subsequent efforts in this field are based.
Since the Covenants were adopted by the General Assembly, only about half the Member States have acceded to them and only one third of those have acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Let us use this anniversary not only to celebrate an important achievement in the history of mankind but also to urge all those States which still have not ratified them to do
so as soon as possible.
(Mg. Bierring, Denmark)
The Covenants dealcwith the rights of the individual human being and are designed to protect him or her against the encroachment of State power. Respect for the rights of the individual is a fundamental principle underlying the approach of the Nordic countries to international issues. We believe in the overriding importance of these rights and in the need for States to respect them scrupulously.
We note that many international problems which cause grave human suffering derive from the failure of States to recognize the dignity and worth of the human being, it is our conviction that all human rights - civil, political, social, economic and cultural - must be respected and promoted as essential elements of an integral system for the protection of the individual.
We take this opportunity to repeat once again that by accepting the Charter States also accept that human rights violations are a legitimate concern of the United Nations» indeed, a necessary one if the Organization is to fulfil its purposes and preserve its credibility. This concern must be universal and evenhanded. It must extend equally to all violations, wherever they occur and under whatever political, social or religious system.
In other words, efforts by the United Nations to promote and protect human rights do not constitute interference in the internal affairs of States. This general conclusion is apparently shared by all. we hope, therefore, that Member States will refrain from rejecting as interference in their internal affairs allegations that they have violated human rights.
Unfortunately, there is often a wide gap between the words of the Covenants and reality in many parts of the world. Let us devote our efforts to ensuring that by the time of the next anniversary many more Member States will have acceded to these instruments, and above all to their full implementation in all parts of the world.*
*Mr. Ogouma (Benin), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Mr. KIKUCHI (Japan): My delegation has the honour to speak as one of the three representing the Group of Asian States in commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Hunan Rights. It is clear that the substantial progress in ensuring respect for fundamental human rights is due to the painstaking efforts made by those who have devoted themselves to this cause. We also recognize that there is still much to be done before these basic rights are universally honoured and fully implemented, goals which we believe are closely connected to the realization of world peace.
My delegation believes that it would be worth while on this occasion to take a brief look at the history of the international efforts to secure world-wide respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, so that we may reaffirm our original determination to achieve progress in this vitally important area.
After the Second World War, the Member States of this Organization reaffirmed in the United Nations Charter their belief in fundamental human rights, and in 1948 they adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which provided the impetus for the world-wide efforts to establish concrete standards for the protection of the rights' of people everywhere. In this hall in 1966 the Member States adopted the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as a means of realizing the ideal expressed in the Universal Declaration. These two International Covenants spurred efforts which led to the adoption of more than twenty additional international instruments in this field. The more recent examples include the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, adopted in 1979, and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment and Punishment, adopted in 1984. Thus in the 1970s the emphasis shifted to the implementation of existing humanitarian instruments.
This movement represented a significant change, since it led to the establishment of ways and means of ensuring the enforcement of the standards on which the international community had agreed. I am referring here to the inclusion of the so-called enforcement clause regarding the agreements; the creation of the mechanisms to deal with appeals regarding the infringement of human rights; and mechanisms for the investigation of violations of human rights by ad hoc organs. The United Nations was to serve as a centre for the co-ordination of all these functions, in which regard my delegation wishes to stress the crucial importance of pursuing more systematic and co-ordinated methods of implementation. In this connection, we note that only about half of all the Member States of the United Nations have ratified these International Covenants. My delegation, therefore, takes this opportunity to appeal to those which have not yet done so to take positive action so that the universality of those Covenants will be ensured.
It is true that remarkable progress has been made in the field of fundamental human rights. However, it is also true that we still face many problems in this field, at both the national and the international level. These difficulties are often complicated by the differing political, ecc - de» social and cultural systems and traditions of the nations of the world. Furthermore, these problems sometimes cross national boundaries, which necessitates active co-operation at the international level. In this regard, my delegation wishes to give its assurance that Japan will work together with other Member States to contribute to the cause of human rights as much as possible.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes once again to request all Members of the United Nations to review what has been achieved and resolve to make further progress. As for how we should proceed from now on, it is our belief that, although at times the going may be slow and rough, we must work steadily and pragmatically at the problems that confront us, since this is the only way to
realize universal respect for and observance of human rights.
The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights is, therefore, a special occasion for us, for it is at this time that we recall the original spirit which inspired them, a spirit which tends to slacken unless we give it our constant attention.	.
Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): I have the honour, as Chairman of one if the delegations of the Arab Group, to participate in this meeting to commemorate the adoption of the International Covenant on Human Rights. Mankind's long and bitter suffering prompted the creative human mind to develop instruments guaranteeing human rights and fundamental freedbms, in order to maintain and protect the dignity of the human person on the basis of freedom and equality, without discrimination as to sex, language, race or religion. The leaders and thinkers os ¿his era drafted international principles reflecting the highest aspiration of a ’skind, the aspiration to create a world where the individual would enjoy freedom of speech and religion and be free from any intimidation and fear. So that these important and noble international instruments should not remain a mere aspiration or an unattainable goal, concerted international efforts were made to make them open to implementation in accordance with international arrangements, to monitor the implementation of their provisions and to develop general awareness of the need to preserve human rights.
In this context, the United Nations is, as always, playing a major fundamental role in safeguarding these instruments and monitoring their implementation on the basis of the fundamental principle of the Charter that the maintenance of individual human freedoms is the noblest aim of our collective endeavours. The peace-loving peoples of the world pledged their co-operation within the United Nations to maintain respect for human rights. Thereafter the General Assembly, on 10 December 1948, adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the highest common ideal for all peoples and nations, with the object of ensuring respect for those rights and freedoms.
Article 1 of the universal Declaration of Human Rights embodied the basic philosophical principles on which the Declaration is based, saying:
"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one emother in a spirit of brotherhood." (resolution 217 A (III), Art. 1) The conviction of the need to comply with the provisions of the Charter, which calls for social development for mankind, for the improvement of standards of living in an atmosphere of freedom and human rights and for fundamental freedoms, without discrimination, opened the way to the search for binding legal instruments in the field of human rights to lay down the norms and commitments that all States would have to abide by. Then began the search for texts to reflect those norms, maintain the rights of mankind and, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, be the foundation of international legitimacy in the human rights field.
Following long discussions, involving long-lasting differences of opinion, in its resolution 2260 (XXI) of 1966 the General Assembly adopted the two International Covenants on Human Rights, in addition to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Those Covenants entered into force in 1976 - 10 years after their adoption.
In accordance with resolution 40/114, of 13 December 1985, we are meeting today to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the two International Covenants on Human Rights. This important occasion, with its noble connotations, is a recognition of the importance the Organization attaches to human rights and fundamental freedoms. The adoption of the two Covenants and their ratification have led to an increasing concern for the promotion of human rights
and the protection of man's fundamental freedoms.
Despite our conviction o£ the importance of the two Covenants and their universal character, that universality has not yet been achieved, because some States have not yet acceded to the Covenants. Although we have gone a long way towards laying down international instruments that conform to the Charter, we have not always been able to put an end to the grave violations of human rights in many parts of the world. As individuals and States, we are today called upon to ensure man's enjoyment of his fundamental freedoms. We must all co-operate in implementing one of the most important objectives of international action in this field, which is the broadening of the concept of national protection of individuals, through the free acceptance of human rights instruments and the grafting of their spirit onto the national legislation of all countries.
Mr. INGLES (Philippines)t When the General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 one representative said that it deserved to be known as the "Rights of Man Assembly". Today, as we observe the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, we should try to live up to that enviable distinction.
For years the protection of human rights had been viewed largely as a matter of the relationship between individuals and their respective States and therefore a subject considered to be within a State's sole competence. The Charter challenged this view. In its preamble the peoples of the United Nations expressed their determination to reaffirm their faith in fundamental human rights, the dignity and worth of the human person and the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, and to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, in Article 56 Member States pledged themselves to take joint and separate action, in co-operation with the Organization, for the achievement, among other things, of universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
• (Mr. Ingles, Philippines)
By subscribing to the Charter, therefore, Member States recognized that the observance of human rights no longer pertained to the exclusive domestic jurisdiction of States, but was a matter of international concern.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights marked the first international definition of the human rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Charter. But it only laid down a "common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations". (resolution 217 A (III), eighth preambular para.)
It was the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights that authoritatively defined the economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights embodied therein as peremptory norms of customary international law.
The Philippines had been in the forefront of the struggle to promote human rights. Representatives of the Philippines participated actively in *->e drafting of the Universal Declaration, as well as of the International Covenants on Human Rights.
My delegation is pleased to note that as of 1 August 1986 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights had been ratified or acceded to by 87 States, and that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had been ratified or acceded to by 83 States, a little more than half the membership of the United Nations. We urge those States which have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the two Covenants.
. The Philippines ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in June 1974. It also ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and made the declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant on 28 February 1986, three days after a popular revolution installed a new Government and restored democracy in the Philippines.
It cannot be gainsaid that the United Nations has succeeded in focusing the world's attention on human rights issues, but it has freauently been criticized as
being far less successful in establishing adequate procedures for the enforcement of human rights, it is in this area that international co-operation must be encouraged and strengthened - for example, to remedy the obvious gaps in the Covenants. My delegation can understand the reluctance of some States to submit themselves to international supervision in the field of human rights. Nevertheless, comprehensive and effective machinery must be established if the United Nations is to be able to fulfil its promise of the full enjoyment of, and respect for, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all mankind.
The nearest approach to a permanent legal institution for the monitoring of! violations of human rights is the Commission on Human Rights, which provides policy guidance for United Nations activities in this area. It invites Governments to reply to complaints involving a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights. However, by a self-denying ordinance, the Commission does not take action on complaints involving isolated instances of human-rights violations. How many tons of complaints have been consigned to gather dust in the archives of the united Nations Secretariat? Even so, the Philippines welcomes the efforts of the Commission on Human Rights, not only in standard-setting but also in public discussion or confidential consideration and subsequent investigation of serious and persistent violations of human rights. It may be recalled that the discussions in the Commission on Human Rights of gross violations by the past régime in the Philippines contributed to the moral pressure of public opinion that eventually led to its downfall.
There is of course the Human Rights Committee set up under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to monitor compliance with that Covenant. But it has jurisdiction only over States Parties to the Covenant, and only to the extent that they have made the declaration under article 41 of the Covenant, or ratified the Optional Protocol recognizing the competence of the Committee to hear complaints from individuals. However, the Committee or its Conciliation Commission does not decide cas.es like a court of human rights but may only offer its good offices to the parties. In case the parties fail to agree on an amicable settlement, the Committee or the Commission shall make only a brief statement of the facts of the case.
As for the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, it provides for the submission of periodic reports to the Economic and Social Council concerning the progress made and measures taken to advance the rights enshrined
(Mr. Ingles, Philippines) in the Covenant. But the Council is only vested with the authority to make recommendations to the General Assembly and other organs of the United Nations on the advisability of international measures likely to contribute to the effective progressive implementation of the Covenant. Hence, the decision to establish a Committee on Social and Cultural Rights to monitor implementation of the Covenant is a positive development.
The adoption of the International Covenants should be viewed as only the initial step in the establishment of the rule of law in the matter of the observance of human rights. It is obvious that they have to be amended or supplemented by more detailed instruments in the specific fields. Already we have - among others - the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, on the Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
My delegation attaches great importance, therefore, to the expansion of the competence of the Commission on Human Rights to deal with all valid complaints from individuals alleging violations of human rights, as well as to the continuing improvement of existing mechanisms for the implementation of the two Covenants on Human Rights.
In so many parts of the world we see people struggling against oppression and injustice. The United Nations must reach out and help them in other ways than by merely adopting resolutions of censure or condemnation. I recall the following words used by President Corazon C. Aquino when she addressed this body on 22 September:
"The United Nations has stayed out of the internal affairs of nations. ...
Obviously this is wise in so far as it prevents abuse of the sovereign independence of nations. ... [Yet] it should carefully avoid becoming an unwitting partner of their oppressors". (A/41/PV.5, p. 3-5 and 7)
.	(Mr. Ingles, Philippines)
More than that, the United Nations must take positive measures under the Charter against systematic and widespread violations of human rights by Member States. The day is long past when tyrants could oppress their people with impunity by invoking the outmoded concept that the matter is exclusively an internal affair.
The Filipino people in their struggle to restore democracy and preserve their dignity and worth as human beings looked to the international standards of human rights that they heloped formulate. In the end, even as we were on our own, without any help from the United Nations, we finally liberated ourselves from a reign of greed and despotism.
The new Philippine Government is strongly committed to the promotion of respect for and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. To that end it has taken the following actions on the national level: the immediate release of all political prisoners, the restoration of the writ of habeas corpus and the creation of a presidential committee to investigate violations and oversee the full restoration of human rights. At the international level we have, as I mentioned earlier, ratified the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which we signed on 19 December 1966 but which the previous Government had refused to ratify.
We have also acceded to the Convention against Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, so that the atrocities committed by the deposed régime shall not be committed again. The Philippines will continue to pursue policies directed to the full implementation of the rights contained in the Covenants.	.
As we resume our place in the mainstream of the world-wide movement for the universal enjoyment of and respect for human rights, we see that much still remains to be done. For the International Covenants on Human Rights, as we have indicated, are not an end in themselves; at best they constitute only a framework cm which to build public confidence in the efficacy of international action to safeguard and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
' In commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, the United Nations faces an even greater challenge: to make a living reality of its cardinal purposes so grandly conceived in the Charter.
The world continues to be a witness to widespread oppression and injustice, to the pervading poverty of more than three fourths of the world's population, and to constant threats of war and possible nuclear annihilation. None the less, the United Nations should take pride in the fact that it has helped move mankind forward in the recognition of human rights as the touchstone of the peace, security and well-being of the peoples of all nations.
Mr. BELONOGOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today, the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, I have come to this rostrum with particular emotion: first, because I am aware that the International Covenants on Human Rights, which were based on an initiative of the Soviet Union calling for their preparation, have stood the test of time, have demonstrated their value as instruments of fundamental
importance in the efforts to secure universal respect for human rights and freedoms.
MLG/MO
A/41/PV.54
46
.	(Mr. Belonogov, USSR)
Secondly, I have purely personal grounds for feeling a particular emotion at this time, since the very first steps in my diplomatic career, more than 30 years ago, were connected precisely with the fact that I was involved in drafting both those Covenants, first in the Commission on Human Rights and then here at the sessions of the General Assembly. The first international forums in which one happens to participate quite naturally remain forever etched in one's memory. • Therefore I well recall the circumstances which gave birth to the International Covenants on Human Rights, particularly since that birth was by no means an easy one and not without its complications, sometimes being accompanied by bitter and protracted political struggle. First, we had to overcome the resistance of those forces which were fundamentally opposed to international co-operation in the field of human rights, taking the form of States becoming parties to treaties and agreements containing specific legal obligations for Governments to observe in connection with human rights and freedoms. Unfortunately, the negative attitude towards the adoption of such obligations is still to be found in the policies of certain States.
Secondly, in those years a number of influential States were against the Covenants on Human Rights containing any language referring to the socio-economic sphere. As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its involvement in the drafting of the Covenants was from the very outset governed by the task of ensuring that they encompassed the broadest possible range of human rights and freedoms. We also considered it of fundamental importance that the Covenants should start with an article referring to the rights of peoples to self-determination and to their right freely to manage their own resources. The struggle to include that key provision in the Covenants, which represented a prerequisite for the enjoyment of individual rights and human freedoms, was an unusually difficult one.
Turning to the contents of the Covenants, we can see that the stubborn and hard work which went into their preparation in the final analysis yielded excellent results. History, however, does not stand still, in recent decades a new situation has arisen, surrounded by the realities of the nuclear space age which has given a new slant to the whole problem of human rights, which has brought to the forefront the question of mankind's survival, preventing a nuclear catastrophe and how thus to reliably secure the most important right of all, the right of the individual to life. In these days there is a very urgent need to put an end to the arms race on Earth and not to allow it to spread to outer space, and for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons and other forms of weapons of mass destruction. As is known, the Soviet Union put forward a concrete staged programme to free Earth of those weapons by the year 2000. That was also the purpose of the efforts made by the Soviet side at the recent meeting of the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States in Reykjavik. There the Soviet Union made bold proposals and demonstrated a willingness to make major concessions in order to achieve a .historic purpose commensurate with the vital interests of all mankind, that of eradicating nuclear weapons.
Recently, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gorbachev, made the following statement:
"A few steps away, as we are, from practical agreement on such a difficult and vital problem we have all become immeasurably more aware of the danger which faces the world. We are more clearly aware of the need for there to be immediate solutions and the roost important thing is, as we now know, to remove the nuclear threat both in its real and potential forms." Quite recently the Soviet programme for the elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2000 was declared by many pillars of world politics to be an impossible
(Mr. Belonogov, USSR) dream. At the same time, despite the dramatic nature both of the talks and their results, the meeting in Reykjavik perhaps for the first time in many decades has brought us forward considerably in our efforts to seek a way of bringing about nuclear disarmament. This mapped out the course for resolving the most important problems on which the very fate of mankind depends, and that is, and likewise therefore, the fate of the rights and freedoms of each individual.
But the post-Reykjavik period has also shown something else. Those circles who are taken up with militarism and profits from the arms race are quite clearly frightened at the clear prospect of there being swift progress towards nuclear disarmament. They are making feverish efforts to ensure that the process which started in Reykjavik peters out. Naturally, it would be a mistake to overestimate the strength of those who oppose détente and disarmament, but it would also be inadvisable to underestimate them as well, it is quite clear that this will be a difficult struggle which at the same time is a struggle for the future of mankind and for human rights and freedoms, a struggle to guarantee in the broadest connotation of the word the aims and the tasks formulated in the International Covenants on Human Rights.
The International Covenants assert the indivisibility, interrelation and interdependence of the rights of peoples and the rights of the individual, of political, economic and social rights. It is impossible to implement one of those Covenants without implementing the other. We cannot have political rights without social rights and vice versa. Any other approach would be at variance with the International Covenants and would undermine human rights.
In the Soviet Union,.which has ratified both of those Covenants, all the rights and freedoms enunciated in the Covenants are legally enshrined in the
Constitution and other acts. An earnest that in the Soviet Union there will be
even more thorough implemention of the whole range of human rights is the policy which was approved at the 27th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet union further to strengthen and develop socialist democracy. It was precisely in democracy that the founder of our State, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, saw the creative force of development and progress» and today, speeding up the development of society is unthinkable and impossible without the further development of socialist democracy in all its aspects and manifestations and, consequently, it is unthinkable without the expansion and without deepening the very content of human rights and freedoms.	'
We regard it as our task to consolidate further socialist self-determination and the self-government of the people and fully to involve the workers in managing State and public affairs. That is the climate which is needed if we are to exploit fully the creative possibilities both of society and of the individual.
Our approach also determines the consistent policy of the Soviet union to strengthen further international co-operation in the humanitarian field. As members know, at the present session the Soviet Union, together with other socialist countries, has put forward an important initiative on the establishment of a comprehensive system of international peace and security which would presuppose broad co-operation in the humanitarian sphere as well.
Many States with differing social, economic and political systems are today parties to the International Covenants. That is surely telling corroboration of the vitality and strength of those instruments. The International Covenants have become the yardstick for the way in which certain States respect human rights. In the light of this, it is conpletely abnormal that certain States which are vebjment in their protestations of their dedication to human rights should openly boycott the International Covenants. We call upon those States to revise that double standard and join in international co-operation in the field of human rights.
The twentieth anniversary of the Covenants is a major event in international life, and today's discussion is also intended to promote the development of co-operation among States in the field of human rights and in strengthening peace and mutual understanding among peoples. That is why the Soviet Union, which has constantly spoken in favour of such co-operation, supports draft resolution A/41/L.21 which has been introduced by a group of States.
Paine Nita BARROW (Barbados): My delegation is honoured at the decision of the Latin American and Caribbean Group that Barbados should be one of the three countries from the region to participate in this meeting commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the International Covenants on Human Rights.
On 16 December 1966 the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted and opened for signature, ratification or accession the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol. It was also during the twenty-first session that Barbados gained its Independence and was able for the first time to come to this Assembly as a sovereign State. It is not difficult therefore to understand the special affinity which Barbados feels with the Covenants, which speak, inter alia, of the right to self-determination.
Barbados shares the commitment of the Latin American and Caribbean States to promoting and safeguarding human rights not only in our own countries and our region but everywhere on this globe. We believe that none of us can truly be satisfied until human rights violations cease to exist anywhere.
Barbados considers the Covenants to be the best and clearest blueprint of how each State may guarantee to its citizens the human rights and fundamental freedoms to which they are entitled as human beings and of how individuals should respect each other's human rights. In 1973 we ratified the Covenants and the Optional Protocol as an indication to all of the commitment of Barbados to the principles enshrined in those most inportant instruments.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights,* proclaimed by the General Assembly in 1948, was hailed for the moral force it could exert in the primordial field of human rights. The international community sensed, however, that other instruments which carried legal force were still a necessity.- Thus, when, 20 years ago, the Covenants were adopted by the General Assembly, completing what is known as the
international bill of human rights, it was an incomparable achievement. My delegation considers that the adoption of resolution 2200 A (XXI) was one of the best examples of how our international body is able to co-operate in the interest of humanity. We believe that those who toiled with patience and in a spirit of compromise deserve to be remembered with an expression of gratitude on this special day.
The value of our human rights Covenants cannot be disputed. However, we feel that on this day of commemoration we should be assessing and evaluating their impact. As at 1 August 1986, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights had been ratified or acceded to by 87 States, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had been ratified or acceded to by 83 States; and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights had been ratified o? acceded to by 37 States. Of this number, 19 Latin American and Caribbean States had ratified or acceded to each of the two Covenants.
In view of our size and numbers, that is a clear demonstration of the esteem in which the instruments are held and a pledge by those States to uphold the principles enshrined therein. My delegation would urge States which have not yet done so to become parties to the Covenants as a clear demonstration of their intentions. .
In his statement in the general debate at the forty-first session of the General Assembly the Foreign Minister of Barbados stated:
"The context in which the people of Barbados address the question of human rights is empirical not theoretical." (A/41/PV.22, p. 27)
We suggest that the protection and promotion of human rights should be constantly monitored if we are to know how great is the challenge which remains. In this regard the Human Rights Committee has a very important role to play in our efforts in so far as international activity is concerned.
At the national level each State, even those which are not yet parties to the Covenants, should be vigilant in guarding the rights of citizens and activities which mould public opinion and foster a spirit of mutual respect regardless .of race, sex, creed or ethnic origin. Efforts might also be made to ensure that national legislation is consistent with the principles of the Covenants.
(Dame Nita Barrow, Barbados) Moreover, regional organizations have a role to play in nurturing the solidarity and fraternity among peoples in a given geographical area. Non-governmental organizations, too, deserve encouragement and support in any efforts they undertake to promote social development and human rights, as they represent a wide cross section of their communities.
In joining the United Nations, we all stated our determination: "... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights". We have made great progress in elaborating those rights and in promoting their acceptance.
The States parties to the international Covenants recognize in the preamble to the instruments that:
"... in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only be achieved if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy his [or her] economic, social and cultural rights, as well as his [or her] civil and political rights."
Ours is a collective duty to ensure the creation and maintenance of such a climate. On the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Covenants, and on its own twentieth anniversary the Government of Barbados considers this a most opportune time for us to rededicate ourselves to those principles which we address this afternoon and which provide the moral and legal foundations of this Organization.
Mrs. ASTORGA GADEA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a great honour for my delegation to participate today as the Chairman of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States in the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the international Covenants on human rights.
In commemorating the adoption of these Covenants, it is inportant to emphasize
that the United Nations is the most complete realization by mankind of the
(Mrs. Astorga Gadea, Nicaragua) promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. It could not be otherwise, since our Organization was created precisely as an answer to the most destructive and inhumane war in history.
The very first paragraphs of the Charter state that one of the aims of the Organization is to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the eaual rights of men and women and of nations large and small.
In Article 1, for the first time in the history of international relations a universal instrument includes the right of peoples to self-determination, which was the first great blow to colonialism and neo-colonialism. Gigantic steps in the evolution and inpiementation of this belief were represented by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, whose adoption laid down the basis for the proposals put forward in the 1950s that bore fruit with the entry into force of the international Covenants on human rights in 1966.
All these initiatives were found in their highest expression in adoption of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, in 1977, with the recognition by the General Assembly of the indivisibility and the interdependence of all rights, civil, political, economic, social and cultural.	.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, have come to be regarded as the "Magna Carta of Human Rights", the basic legislation in this sphere. As States Members of the Organization, we must not slacken our efforts to create a complete system in the area of human rights. The Covenants are of crucial importance for peaceful co-operation among States in the area of human rights.
(Mrs. Astorga Gadea,.Nicaragua)
Yet, in spite of the fact that over the past 40 years the activities of our Organization in the area of human rights has constituted a significant part of its work, we must point out that nearly half the Member States of our Organization have not yet acceded to these fundamental instruments, the international Covenants on human rights.
The obligations of the States Parties are found in a carefully conceived system of measures for implementation, in which the Human Rights Committee has an important role to play. It was established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and its reputation and considerable influence are due to the fact that it makes possible a realistic exchange of experiences and is a valuable instrument for the co-operation of states in promoting human rights. Conseauently it is often referred to as a positive achievement.
With regard to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, we hope that the organizational changes agreed upon, will serve to enhance the effectiveness of its work, as well as the presentation of reports by Member States. The indivisibility and interdependence of economic, social and cultural rights and civil and political rights reauire that reports of States parties on the implementation of the international Covenants on human rights should be studied at the same level tnd with the same care and depth. More effective examination of the reports and good use of the valuable experience of the Human Rights Committee, would not only help to ensure that States made greater efforts to implement the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and to give it universal application, but it would also encourage the co-operation of States in promoting the rights laid down therein.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, most of which have acceded to these Covenants, today wish to urge Member States to commemorate the adoption of the international Covenants on human rights by signing, ratifying or acceding to
them.
Mr. NOWDRYTA (Poland): The delegation of the Polish People's Republic welcomed the decision of the General Assembly last year to convene during its forty-first session a commemorative plenary meeting devoted to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the international Covenants on human rights. By any standards, the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant .on Civil and Political Rights, has been a milestone in the endeavours pursued in the United Nations:
u... to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women ..." as proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations.
Having been worked out in the process of multilateral negotiations within the United Nations, the international Covenants on human rights struck a positive compromise between the needs and reauirements of the international community for co-operation and the practical possibilities for their implementation. The adoption of the Covenants presupposed the existence of. political will on the part of the Governments of the countries concerned to assume specific obligations. The Covenants constitute a synthesis of many schools of philosophy. They represent the
highest expression of humanism, and of legal and social thought.
The adoption of the Covenants gave a strong impetus to a trend towards relaxation of international tensions which subsequently did much to further the elaboration and adoption of many agreements on disarmament and on social questions.
The socialist, as well aa neutral and non-aligned countries, brought to the Covenants the provisions of such immense value as the right of all peoples to self-determination, to the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, and opposition to all kinds of policies of aggression, discrimination and domination. These provisions have been given a prominent place in the Covenants. The latter have genuinely and significantly contributed to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms and to International co-operation in this respect. The significance of the International Covenants on Human Rights is underlined by the fact that they constitute the first all-embracing and legally-binding international treaties in the field of human rights, and establish standards to which all States should conform.
The Polish People's Republic attaches great importance to the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to the universal recognition and implementation of the Covenants. We attach eoual importance to both Covenants. There is a close relationship and interdependence between economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights. This intimate relationship has been confirmed by resolution 40/114 of 13 December 1985.
Consequently, there is a need for joint implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which constitute a material guarantee of real implementation and
eoual access to all rights and freedoms.
Poland, being a socialist State, apart from developing institutional guarantees for civil and political rights, attaches particular importance to widespread guarantees of an economic and social nature which, in our view, safeguard respect for human rights.
Poland made a significant contribution to the elaboration of the Covenants and other international instruments for the protection and promotion of human rights.
The texts of the Covenants have been published on a Keiber of occasions and are easily available in Poland. A bibliography on the Covenants in the Polish language is ouite impressive. On 4 November an all-Polish scientific conference commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the Covenants will be held in Poznan.
There is another precondition for the enjoyment of human rights, namely, that of peace. He subscribe to the view that respect for and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms in their civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, on the one hand, and the strengthening of international peace and security, on the other, mutually reinforce each other. It is significant that the year 19.86, marking the- twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, has been proclaimed the International Year of Peace.
This solemn occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants can best be commemorated by the rededication of all States to the fundamental human rights enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and by their common pledge to pursue policies directed at the full inpiementation of the rights contained in the International Covenants.
The draft resolution (A/41/L.21) on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, which the Polish delegation has the pleasure to co-sponsor, invites all States to commemorate this anniversary by continuing and strengthening measures aimed at the inpiementation, promotion and
protection of the provisions of those instruments.
The draft resolution also invites the appropriate United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, to take appropriate measures to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Covenants.
We hope that the implementation of the resolution will promote the cause of human rights world-wide.*
Mr. ATTEWEU. (Canada): My delegation is pleased to speak today on behalf of the delegations.of Australia, Austria, Canada and New Zealand on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights.
Anniversaries are the occasion for celebration. They are the occasion to remember the great accomplishments of the past and the high sense of purpose and dedication which propelled this Organization towards completion of an international bill of human rights. Anniversaries are also the time for observation and reflection. It is appropriate that ray remarks today touch both the optimistic faith that led to the adoption of the covenants as well as the more critical spirit which now pervades discussion of all areas of international co-operation.
Work on the International Bill of Human Rights began in 1946, in the initial year of the United Nations. Progress was rapid on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted two years later after substantial preparatory work. But casting the principles enshrined in the universal Declaration into binding treaty obligations with effective enforcement machinery proved a much more formidable task. Twenty years were to pass before Initial preparatory work bore final fruit with the adoption of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
*Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Attewell, Canada) Rights, its Optional Protocol and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The adoption o£ all of these instruments constituted a revolution in international law. It brought to the forefront of international activities the protection of individuals and the safeguarding of rights all too often ignored by Governments. Gone is the notion that a State's treatment of its own nationals was entirely the domestic responsibility of the State concerned. Gone as well is the doctrine that intercession on humanitarian and human rights grounds with other States constitutes interference in the internal affairs of other States. Through usage and precedent, the Universal Declaration has acquired a privileged status contemplated by only a few at the time of its adoption in 1948.
We celebrate the adoption of these instruments. We congratulate both the Organization which gave birth to the Covenants and the many individuals whose contributions will long be remembered by the oppressed and down-trodden of this world.
Twenty years after the adoption of the Covenants, our assessment must be balanced and sober. These instruments have not ushered into being a new global order in which respect for the integrity and dignity of the human person is a primary consideration. But neither.have these instruments proven more rhetorical proclamations. Many countries - over 80 - are States Parties to these instruments
and the list is growing longer.
The work o£ the Human Rights Committee on civil and political rights has been impressive. The Sessional working Group of the Economic and Social Council has made a substantial contribution to the protection and promotion of economic, social and cultural rights and this work should be further enhanced by the new expert Committee. The Covenants and the Universal Declaration which inspired them have found reflection in the legal and administrative systems of many countries. The global sweep of the Covenants has been supplemented by regional arrangements for the promotion of human rights, most recently the African Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights.
The work of the Human Rights Committee has been especially innovative. The review of States periodical reports has provided a wealth of information, encouraged dialogue and underlined the accountability of States in the field of human rights. The publication of its casework is especially important in building up a body of expertise and experience in the field of human rights which can be shared with jurists and interested observers throughout the world.
Further innovations in the work of the Human Rights Committee should be given consideration. For example, in order to strengthen the Committee's monitoring function, it should be informed about the declarations of states of siege or emergency and their effects on the enjoyment of human rights.
It is of crucial importance that States are aware of their reporting obligations and have the necessary expertise to prepare adeouate documentation for the Committee. We, therefore, support the work of the Committee in drafting general comments on the obligations enshrined in the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in working towards the preparation of guidelines for the submission and periodicity of reports under all human rights instruments. Such guidelines would facilitate the preparation of reports, ensure that reporting timetables are realistic and identify key requirements in reporting obligations which need to be met punctually and completely.
There is abundant scope for effective co-operation within the United Nations system and among United Nations agencies in seeking to improve the reporting processes. Participation in training courses at the national level and at regional seminars on the application of the Covenants is to been encouraged and emulated by other expert bodies in the field of human rights. The United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) seminars on the preparation of national reports, held in Senegal and in Barbados, have demonstrated the value of an integrated approach to human rights training. Moreover, we consider that relevant specialized agencies can play an active role in assisting the bodies supervising implementation of the Covenants.
The progress made in building up a body of customary law, capturing the spirit of the Universal Declaration in binding treaty obligations and creating protective machinery has been impressive. Therefore, we lament the financial and budgetary decisions taken in recent months which threaten to undermine 40 years of inspired and diligent work. The cancellation of one of the 1986 meetings was a serious setback. The proposal that the summary records of the substantive work of the two supervisory Committees be cut causes us grave disquiet because it would undermine the foundation of the Committees’ work. The United Nations has an inescapable obligation to provide adequate services for these two Committees. We find it unacceptable that fundamental work of the United Nations should be so disrupted.
The delegations of Australia, Austria, Canada and New Zealand join those within the international community which endorse the progress made in human rights matters in this Organization over 40 years. We support especially the role of the International Bill of Human Rights in rallying international public opinion towards a more compassionate world in which basic rights are respected. We urge that more
States ratify the International Covenants and give consideration to becoming
■	(Mr. Attewell, Canada)
parties to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. We urge as well the total co-operation of the international community in the work of expert bodies in the field of human rights. Twenty years ago we celebrated the long-delayed passage of the two Covenants. Now let us celebrate not only their entry into force but also their effective implementation. The Covenants set standards in the field of human rights which must eventually become the standards of all States and of all peoples.
Mr. ENGO (Cameroon): I am honoured by the privilege of speaking as current Chairman of the African Group presenting the sentiments of a continent that has provided sustenance to the economic growth of the world yet the bulk of whose peoples remain among the most deprived known to history.
We assemble once again, in reality to commemorate, not to celebrate; for there is nothing real to celebrate. The least we can do is remind ourselves of the lofty aspirations to peace and security we set for this and future generations; ideals born of man's awareness of the nature of his finiteness and incapacities; an awareness derived from a long history of misery inflicted by his craving for grandeur. We must address the persistence of the fundamental evil that haunts man in his organization of peace and security both in the national society and in the international community.
We meet at a time at which the turmoil in many countries across the globe is mirrored clearly in the state of the international community. Whatever the convenience of perspective, whether in terms of the central preoccupations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or of those of the nagging injustices and dangers the elimination of which is sought by the prescriptions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the world does not seem to have made significant progress in resolving its contemporary malaise; the same malaise that modern man hypocritically associates only with the obsessions of imperial legions in the Middle Ages of European history.
The preparations for unproductive conflict and destructive war in contemporary times seem to respond to the same utterances as those of the Roman legions in training for and prosecuting senseless wars, bringing undeserved pestilence to populations. Either by design or by resistance to accelerating forces of change, the world has become a hostile place in which the very survival of man is at stake. Across the glebe the actions of peoples and nations appear to have their roots in that natural inpulse of all animals to resent, to retaliate, or else merely to satisfy the urge to subdue the weak.
One would think that the frustrations of warfare and the threat of nuclear annihilation would usher in a new era, a modern renaissance, which, given the tremendous human and natural resources available, would direct our more enlightened and scientific minds to the promotion of better standards and conditions of living for all mankind.
In today's world unimaginative politics engineered by misleading economic . theories and miscalculations have blurred the noble visions of the human intellect expressed by centuries of theologians, philosophers, poets, writers, artists and the like. Held hostage by the very attainments we have sought in science and technology, we appear collectively incapable of understanding the nature of our predicament as a generation.
The human rights issue has become a ritual football, dribbled from one ideological camp to the other. For many Western Pc wire the discourse provides an opportunity to rebuke communism and to accuse the socialists of expansionism and brutality in trying to maintain an assumed sphere of influence. The rejoinder of the socialists contains similar pointers against capitalism and the West, which they submit has greater expertise in exploitation.
Both live in a world of hypocritical convenience when it comes to addressing the issues of the third world. Each sees the causes of -conflict in terms of the degree of involvement of the other. Thus, the South African tragedy; the economic woes of third-world peoples; the global instability; these are all treated in terms of an East-West conflict. In the process, even the two super-Powers, heading the two ideological blocs best equipped to prevent war and the ones to which a helpless world looks for constructive change in the global climate, these two Powers often give in to the alluring fantasies of bitterness and wasteful ideological conflict between them. The rest of the world must tremble at the political vibrations, wondering whether the geography that delineates man's existence on this planet does have any commensurate biology that distinguishes human beings from other creatures that share the habitat.
The countries of the third world have reason to be scared; for when the diatribe between the great and powerful assumes its physical expression, it is in third-world countries that they establish a theatre for violent conflict. When that happens, the peoples of the victim nations must needlessly shed costly blood, be condemned, be categorized, be impoverished further, as unwilling marked? for trade in armaments and as prisoners of despicable external debts. Perhaps unconsciously to hide their origins, the staged conflicts are now called regional conflicts.
' This commemorative occasion must be categorized among those recently organized by the international community to take stock of this generation's reaction to the plight of the human condition.
For too long has the concentrated attention of the world been turned to Africa as a theatre of brutality and indifference to so-called democracy and human rights. The reviews issued to the world by political agents and press analysts
A/41/PV.54
72
(Mg« Engo, Cameroon) would give the misleading impression that the definition Cx the concept of human rights ie confined within the realms of a limited sphere of those principal civil and political rights recognized by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Africa has had its share of the historic experience of breaches of civil and political rights, relating to life, liberty and security of the person and freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and exile. In this its peoples have always been victims, and that is inportant to note. They have been and continue to be the subject of deprivations at the han^o of external forces, either directly or through the effects of internal strife and national political instability, generally designed or instigated from without.
One only needs to examine the events of contemporary history to conclude that free Africa and the third world do not provide the genesis of the lack of humanism involved. Emergent African States may well have mitigating circumstances, for the systems and the mechanisms they inherited from centuries of calculated exploitation are hardly appropriate to reinstate the noble cultural values which insist on the African loving his neighbour and being his brother's keeper. Respect for the sanctity of huamn life is part of the jus cogens of African legal and religious norms.
What justifiable reasons can be advanced in defence of those nations which once claimed exclusivity of advancement and civilization? To recall their history would merely be repetitive of common knowledge of historical facts. Suffice it to say that Africa will continue the sacred march against attendant misgivings. With regard to the present subject matter, an African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights was adopted at the eighteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held in June 1981. It came into force on 21 October 1986.
In only a matter of five years, we have demonstrated the Africans' commitment.
In
the words o£ the Secretary-General of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), that date marked an important day in the history of that organization. He went on to say:
"indeed, for the first time, after Europe and America, the African continent has also established a legal instrument of great political significance, not only for upholding fundamental human and peoples' rights, but also for . protecting and promoting these rights. In this regard, as provided for under this Charter, an African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights shall be set up and the eleven members elected by the next Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government".
That Charter is the region's complement to the International Covenants. Time must be permitted to season the particular aspirations declared in it. It specifically took into consideration
"the virtues of the historical traditions and the values of African civilization which should inspire and characterize their reflection on the concept of human and peoples' rights".
The element of "peoples" is new to the international discourse. It reflects the reality of African concepts of communal existence: that man is not created to live and act alone; that success in the life of the individual depends on conditions of peace and security contributed to by all members of society. Applied to the international community, that attitude could stimulate greater co-operation among States in the peaceful resolution of international conflicts and problems of a universal character.
Poverty, whether of an individual, a nation or a region, is a condition of war and conflict, not peace and security. We would submit that many of the violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 'n the young countries
stem from a paradoxical poverty: incomprehensible, having regard to the endowment of natural resources. Frustrations lead to dissatisfaction, ostensibly with the leadership of the nation, and change, sometimes erratic, is sought without an understanding of the true meaning of things. Ignorant outsiders react with destructive condemnation, accusing Africa of immaturity, as if that continent claims exclusive ownership of instability.
It is thus to the less abstract elements of the human condition that we must turn. What, we may ask, has happened since the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights was adopted and since it came into force? That Covenant introduced many new features which addressed the broad issue of better standards of living for ev^ry people. The right to work would provide access to fair wages and the attributes of human dignity. Social security, a natural feature of the traditional African culture, enhances the capacity to dream and to entertain reasonable hopes for the future. The rights to health and education would guarantee a knowledge of one's environment and the scope of advancement that beckons to each member of society. The right to form and join trade unions gives a sense of participation or guarantees to a national and a valid say in the process of community and nation-building.
The right to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advance and its benefits, touches the foundations of man as a social animal.
All of these are perhaps the most critical of the items focused upon in the International Bill of Human Rights. Success in these areas would undoubtedly foster better national and international attitudes favouring universal peace and security. They would induce conditions of internal peace for each individual, inspiring him to greater heights of spiritual rejuvenation. Nations are, it must constantly be borne in mind, constituted and run by people.
The human component is the instrument for fanning so-called public emotions; its attitudes towards national life dictate the fortunes of war and peace. Man at peace with himself influences change for the better. It was Aquinas the philosopher who postulated the belief that for men to be at peace with one another, each must be at peace with himself; but, he went on,
"Man's heart is not at peace, so long as he has not what he wants, or if, having what he wants, there still remains something for him to want." As we review the human experience with regard to human rights the facts of the attitudes of some of the contemporary great nations are not only discouraging but present embarrassing cniestion marks as to the scope of the success the international community may reasonably expect. To greatness must be attached leadership, and the world needs that Quality of leadership that is inspired for the common good.
Apart from the activities alluded to earlier, it would appear that, regrettably, international conventions are backed mainly by the young nations. The indolence of some of the bigger nations is blurred by the dust of undue criticism mounted mainly by them against one another and against defenceless young nations.
Permit me to refer to those relating to labour, for purposes of illustration.
According to statistics, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) had by 1975 adopted 140 international labour conventions since it was established in 1919, many of them relating to important human rights aspects. We need not labour the fact that a very important super-Power had ratified only seven since its entry into the ILO in 1934; the other super-Power had ratified only 40.
The staggering revelation is that, while our young nations in Africa have responded legislatively and administratively to most of the human rights aspects of these conventions, the important leadership of this period in time has not.
In my nation, Cameroon, for instance, the right to work and to receive fair wage conditions is not only an aspect of national policy towards women but the instrument of enforcing traditional values, which treat woman as the indispensable mother of society. A pregnant working mother in my country is entitled to a total of four months' maternity leave of absence with full pay. The husband gets three days with full pay. This avoids disruption of budgetary decisions made by individuals or couples. In our view, it is fair and just.
It is amazing that such provisions cannot be found in many of the leading nations in this the last cruarter of the twentieth century. Women are still discriminated against in work. This sort of issue is even more fundamental than the grave threats to the right to freedom of expression.
Why is this important as a human rights issue? The current debates on the status of women and family planning reveal that the practice of such discrinnation violates fundamental human rights as defined in. article 7, and as specifically addressed in article 10, of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The International Year of Peace provides yet another opportunity to appeal to the greats of the international community - the United States and the Soviet Union in particular - to use their good offices to promote a better, safer world. We
urge them to remove confrontation from their relations and join the universal
campaign for the rudiments of peace and security, founded on the protection of human rights in all its aspects, everywhere.
In southern Africa there can be no news worse than the world has seen in recent times. A deprived people bleeds for justice's sake, and we waste opportunities here arguing on the phraseology of resolutions that turn out to be little more than tranquillizers - for the process, not for the deprived people who die.
One of- Tr aspect that must be underlined concerns the young nations and the role they could play in the peace process. Harassed by undue criticism, bullied by an oppressive bad press, the Governments of young nations are being called upon to compromise national values.
In the difficult process of infusing a sense of nationhood into a colonial grographical expression, peoples have to grapple with delicate adaptations in order to achieve a constitutional consensus within the nation. The trend of opinion among some of the so-called non-profit humane or humanitarian organizations is in many instances moulded by the narrative of individuals who escape the nation after attempting to disrupt the organization of the State. We may exclude genuine political refugees. Indiscriminately, those organizations listen to one or other individual, make hasty judgements, ignore subsequent responses by the legitimate Government and set themselves up as chanpions of the cause of so-called oppressed petpies. We must be careful not to be drawn into activities that may be disruptive of the justice and order we claim to seek in* other nations. Between the universal interest in human rights everywhere and the principle prohibiting interference in the internal affairs of a.nation there is a thin line which must constantly be
watched.
The international instruments we hail today came from the human conscience of the finest type. One region where the credibility of the most powerful of this generation is being tested is Africa. For our grandchildren and history, let us avoid the conclusion that, although we created the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Covenants, we either snored through attests at their demise or took conscious steps to ignore the values they proclaimed and consequently bequeathed to future generations a wrecked and useless world.
Let us, in upholding these International Covenants, give full support to others which promote the attainment of conditions that are conducive to the implementation of human rights. Africans need more than promises, less of unfulfilled and forlorn hopes.
We call for the international community's full support for Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery as a major universal effort to create those conditions. We seek support for the OAU African Charter of Human and Peoples' Rights. We- are particularly concerned about the nature and realities of the cruel world in which we live. We are just as concerned that a resource-rich Africa shall not bequeath to its grandchildren and future generations a wretched and useless
world.
Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French); The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights gives me the opportunity of paying a tribute, on behalf of Senegal, to the united Nations for the standard-setting work it has done in regard to the protection and promotion of human rights.
Indeed, since the General Assembly in its resolution 217 A (III) of 10 December 1948 adopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights -making that subject a common ideal of mankind and a concern of the international community - the United Nations has achieved significant progress in defining and codifying the standards relating to the exercise and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Thus, the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights, as well as the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, were patiently drafted. They entered into force in 1976, and since then have formed, along with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, what it has now been agreed to call the "International Charter of Human Rights".
Similarly, the right of peoples to self-determination, the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination, crimes against humanity and the crime of genocide, statelessness, refugees, the rights of non-citizens, the protection of persons subjected to detention or imprisonment, women's rights, the right to culture and education, marriage and the family, and so forth, have become subjects of various international legal instruments, in the form of conventions or declarations or a package of rules of conduct, which have entered into force.
New concepts have taken shape - in particular, the right of participation by the people as a factor in development and in the realization of human rights; the
BCT/rogr
.	(Mr2 jSarr^jtene^^
right of the child; and, above all, the right to development. All those concepts are now being studied in a number of working groups.
Moreover, the intact of the development of science and technology on human rights has been recognized. Indeed, while scientific discoveries and the explosive development of technology have opened broad prospects for economic, social and cultural development, that progress can endanger the rights and freedoms of the individual, and therefore vigilant, sustained attention by the international communnity is reauired. In other words, this is the prodigious development since the Second World War of what can undoubtedly be described as the "human rights phenomenon". In fact that phenomenon, on the one hand, derives from a totality of ideas, expressions, behaviour, rules and institutions and, on the other, has inherited the common past of mankind. For it has indeed been confirmed that all the currents of thought have contributed to the development of human rights.
But this human rights phenomenon does not stop with the past: it takes into account the present, which is constantly changing, and it looks to a future yet to be built. ■
Given that phenomenon - also a contemporary phenomenon - that has unouestionably left its stamp on our century, and because of the formidable legal arsenal which it has produced and stimulated - and which, moreover, is still diversifying and developing, since man's imagination in regard to ensuring the protection of his dignity is as wide as his desire for and capacity to explore outer space - one might think that the human being is now truly protected from all violations of his person. But, alas, as everyone knows, that is not the case.
To be sure, there have been encouraging and positive achievements both at the country and the international levels. Thus, various measures have been taken in different economic, social, educational and cultural spheres as well as in the
è	(Mr. Sacré, Senegal)
sphere of civil and political rights to ensure that all individuals can be equal de jure and de facto and that they can really exercise their fundamental rights.
At the international level, since the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV), the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the right to self-determination and the right of peoples to decide their own future have been enshrined as human rights and as conditions for the exercise of fundamental freedoms.
In that regard, several countries have acceded to international sovereignty and are patiently working - by means of various development models and under the dual constraint of political tensions and a widespread and critical economic crisis - to build a model for their society, to develop and to play their role in the concert of free and independent nations.
The concept of international protection of human rights is not yet firmly established; the intention is to give a new dimension to international co-operation. International public opinion, alerted and involved, is becoming more and more aware of the need to help in the promotion of and respect for human rights. Some non-governmental organizations and men and women of good will throughout the world are alm» participating in this noble battle to ensure the triumph of human rights.
But, while we should welcome and certainly encourage these measures - although concrete results from them remain modest and limited - we must also recognize that the international community, despite its sustained efforts, has not yet been able to wage an all-out common battle for respect for and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and.that much remains to be done.
Indeed, in racist South Africa the apartheid régime, considered to be a crime against humanity, continues in full force. In occupied Namibia and Palestine, the
.	(Mr. Sarré, Senegal)
right to self-determination and independence is still denied to the Namibian and Palestinian peoples. Throughout the world, despite the political programmes of of action and declarations adopted in this regard, we witness more and more forms of racism and racial discrimination.
Moreover, despite repeated appeals for respect for the human person, today the world - which is both powerless and outraged - sees more and more massive and systematic violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, bloody racial riots, arbitrary condemnations and detentions, disappearances and physical elimination, torture, inhuman and degrading treatment, and massacres, more or less organized, of ethnic and religious minorities. Individuals, migrant workers, cultural minorities have been left out of the picture and are increasingly becoming victims of flagrant violations of human rights.
What is the situation in Senegal? In the context whose broad outlines I have just drawn, I am pleased to recall, with some pride, that Senegal - traditionally a country of law - has constantly committed itself, on the basis of the principles that underlie and guide its policy in the matter, to defending and promoting, first of all nationally, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Indeed, from the moment it achieved independence Senegal solemnly proclaimed in its Constitution its deep commitment to fundamental rights, as they are defined in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 10 December 1948; and spontaneously acceded to the United Nations Charter, whose -terms and provisions it committed itself to respect.
A/41/PV.54
86
,	(Mr. Sarr^, Senegal)
In Senegal itself, at the sane tine as it guarantees the effective exercise of civil, political econonic, social and cultural rights for all Senegalese citizens without exception, the Government of Senegal ensures, within a framework of genuine democracy, equality of opportunity for all without discrimination. Moreover, any discrimination, whether based on origin, race, sex, religion, ethnicity, political ideology or anything else, is condemned by law.
The Senegalese Constitution highlights the sacred nature of the human person, whose freedom is inviolable, and the State has the important obligation of protecting and respecting it.
Freedom of expression and dissemination of opinion, whether oral, written or portrayed, freedom of movement and association, freedom of thought and conscience, the free profession and practice of religion: all of these are guaranteed for all, as are the right to life and to physical integrity, the right to property, the right to education, the right to work, the right to strive for a job and the right to a legal defence, which is considered as an absolute right throughout the entire judicial system and at all levels of judicial procedure.
All of these rights, as well as the right to strike, are recognized and guaranteed, and are exercised provided they do not violate the rights of others or public order or the law itself. This is moreover in conformity with the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In terms of the relevant provisions of the Senegalese Constitution, marriage and the family constitute the natural basis and moral basis for the human community. They, like youth, are placed under the protection of the State.
There exist in Senegal some 15 political parties of all trends, which compete democratically and legally for the vote. None need fear because of his political
opinions and we have no political prisoners. All of this is due to the double
(Mr. Sarr4, Senegal) fortune which Senegal enjoys of being a democratic State and a country of law, k
where the executive, legislative and judicial powers are genuinely separate and where the press is absolutely free.
For the promotion of human rights, we have, inter alia, established at the national level an independent Committee on Human Rights, essentially made up of lawyers who are charged with the popularizing, so to speak, of human rights at all levels and with educating people by alerting them to all the concrete realities covered by the concept of human rights.
Similarly, we have also created an Institute of Human Rights within the Department of Law at the University of Dakar. Its essential role is to integrate human righto ift their African end universal dimensions as.taught at the University, at the secondary school and, later on, at the primary school, with the teaching of . certain elementary notions of the concept of human rights.
Indeed, the mission of this Institute is not merely a national one. It is directed already at this stage to the subregion and the ambition is to extend it to all countries of oi r region that are particularly interested in the promotion of human rights.
The Senegalese Government has placed the human individual at the centre of its policy and its daily concern because, imbued with the fundamental values that make man a creature different from others, the Senegalese people recognizes the existence of inviolable and inalienable human rights as a basis for all human society, for peace and justice in the world.
On the African level, whether in the case of the Protocol on the Status of Refugees in Africa, or the African Charter on Human Rights and the Rights of Peoples, whose recent coming into force we welcome - an event so full of promise and a key contribution on the part of Africa to universal endeavours to protect and promote human rights - my country has taken an active part in the drafting and
(Mr. Sarré, Senegal) putting into effect of those important regional instruments whose impact on human rights is undeniable and which amount to a very valuable contribution to international co-operation in this field.
As a party to virtually all international instruments relating to human rights, an active participant in the struggle against apartheid, racism and racial discrimination, to mention only a few areas, Senegal is constantly engaged on the national level and, indeed, on the international level, in implementing the recommendations and resolutions adopted in the fields of human rights and the struggle against racism by the General Assembly of the United Nations and its relevant bodies.
Thus convinced that raspect for human rights is a necessary condition for the exercise of democracy and the free development of the human individual, my country, as early as 6 July 1970, signed the international Covenants relating to economic, social and cultural rights and to civil and political rights, which were also ratified on 13 February 1978, together with the Optional Protocol relating to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Furthermore, on 4 January 1981, the Government of Senegal deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations the declaration provided for under article 41 of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In making this solemn declaration, my country recognizes the competence of the Human Rights Committee to receive and examine any communication in which a State party claims that Senegal is not discharging its obligations contracted under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which it has signed and ratified.
Hence it is easy to understand the very special interest that my country attaches to the work of the Human Rights Committee and the Commission on Human Rights, of which we are an active member.
(Mr. Sarr4t Senegal)
The policy which I have just succinctly outlined has earned Senegal a place in the vanguard of the sustained battle to ensure the respect and pronotion of human dignity and fundamental freedoms. According to us, human rights should not be violated or flouted in any way or under any pretext whatsoever for, as has often been categorically affirmed by President Abdou Diouf of the Republic of Senegal:
"We cannot agree that development problems can be so inportant as to justify trampling people underfoot."
The United Nations Charter, of which we were celebrating last year the fortieth anniversary, proclaims the faith of peoples in:
"... fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small" and one of the aims and principles of the United Nations being:
"To achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion".
It is thus the duty of States, of all States, to ensure that fundamental human rights are respected and fostered.
Thus, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, a celebration in which we should all participate, let us urge all Member States of our Organization to become parties to those two international instruments and thus make them universal, to make the declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and to accede to the Optional Protocol to that Covenant.
In this connection, we wish to stress that for the people of Senegal human rights and fundamental freedoms are inalienable, irrevocable, indivisible and
MLG/&O	A/4VPV.54	,
SO
(Mr. Sarre, Senegal) interdependent. We attach the sane inportance to pronoting and protecting all human rights, whether they be civil and political rights, or economic, social and cultural rights; individual rights equally with collective rights; we give no precedence whatsoever to one or other category of right, for, as we see it, human rights are an indivisible whole.
The United Nations, in which our peoples and populations continue to have faith, seems to us to be the most appropriate forun in which to consider human rights, which should be neither the monopoly nor the exclusive possession of any country or region. This approach, furthermore, responds to the ideals and demands of strengthening international co-operation.
(Mr* Sacré, Senegal)
The question of human rights and fundamental freedoms should not be sacrificed to the crisis which is currently besetting this Organization. It is from the standpoint of objectivity, discernment and levelheadedness, and in an atmosphere of strengthened international co-operation and friendship among peoples that we would like to see a question of such tremendous importance for mankind as human rights and fundamental freedoms constantly tackled and discussed. We do not believe that human rights should give rise to acrimonious confrontations. Admittedly, it would be regrettable if human rights served as an excuse for countries to arraign sovereign States and deliberately to make direct unjustifiable attacks. At the same time, however, it is deplorable that, under the pretext of national sovereignty, certain States consider themselves under no obligation to co-operate with the united Nations in the area of human rights when it is common knowledge that in those countries there are massive, flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
In Senegal we do not believe that to engage in the promotion and defence of human rights to restore freedom and dignity to the human being in order to foster the well-being to which he has a natural right, or to join in the struggle against apartheid, racism and racial discrimination in countries where those practices exist, is an unfriendly act or a way of interfering in the internal affairs of States. On the contrary, for all nations, large and small, and for the international community as a whole this is a sacred duty and mission which all of us together, inspired by the unshakeable political will and a sincere desire to create an atmosphere favourable to the attainment of the noble purposes and principles of the United Nations, must seek to accomplish in order to bring about greater justice and eauity and international peace and security, and to ensure the security and future of mankind itself.
^	(Mr. Sagré, Senegal)
We believe that the United Nations would be failing in its duty if it did not unecruivocally denounce massive, systematic and flagrant violations of human rights when the existence of such violations is irrefutably established. That is why my country, on the basis of its political beliefs and its commitment to the San Francisco Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the various International Covenants relating to human rights, will continue to participate in any action likely to promote and protect fundamental freedoms whenever the objective and the aim of that approach is to give greater dignity to man.
It is in that context and that spirit that Senegal intends to make its modest contribution to the construction of a more just, more human world, in which the individual will take a qualitative leap into greater well-being and be reconciled with himself and in which, living in peaceful and harmonious coexistence, all may work towards the triumph of true dialogue among cultures and the advent of a pan-human civilization.
Mr. PBJIC (Yugoslavia): The commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights is an important event for the entire international community. In the Charter of the United Nations the Member states pledged solemnly
"to reaffirm faith in fundamental, human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the eoual rights of men and women and of nations large - and small”.
They undertook also to take action jointly and separately, in co-operation with the Organization, to promote, inter alia, universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
The noble purposes of the Charter are further elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia) Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Those documents, conceived as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, have been and rightly continue to be a fundamental source of inspiration for national and international efforts for the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. At the same time, the Covenants on Human Rights have changed the established relations in the international community and set forth the principles and obligations of Member States, primarily with regard to their own citizens rather than to other States. They provided a basis for international definitions of human rights and fundamental freedoms which further elaborated specific rights and freedoms.	.
Among a wide range of activities resulting in a number of international declaration and conventions, of particular importance are the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, to mention just a few.
It is encouraging that the Covenants have been widely accepted and that their provisions have become an integral part of the domestic legislation of individual States. To ensure their universality, further efforts are needed to ensure that they are accepted as widely as possible and faithfully implemented. In order to heighten awareness of these important instruments the United Nations should reissue the compilation on international instruments in the field of human rights as soon as possible.
In Yugoslavia both Covenants have become a part of internal law. Furthermore,
in Yugoslavia the rights of workers and citizens have been further developed, thus
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia) creating a system of self-management by workers and the participation of citizens in decision-making processes at all levels.
The freedoms, rights and duties of roan and citizen, as spelled out by our Constitution, are an inseparable part and expression of democratic, socialist, self-management relations based on the socially-owned means of production, in which labour is creating conditions for all-round and free expression and protection of and respect for human dignity.
Popular participation, including workers' participation in management and self-management, has been increasingly recognized by the international community as an important factor in development and its human rights aspects. The active involvement of citizens in setting national goals and objectives which affect their lives ensures the most constructive mobilization of their energies for economic and social development. Such participation promotes social justice and enhances the access of all sectors of society to the fruits of progress.
The international situation continues to be burdened by negative tendencies and, contrary to our expectations, hardly any progress has been made in reversing them. The sovereignty and independence of many countries are threatened and the use of force and pressure plagues international relations. The rights of peoples to self-determination and the sovereign disposal of their natural resources continue to be denied. The economic and social situation in many countries, particularly the developing ones, is being exacerbated. Racial discrimination and apartheid have not yet been eradicated and numerous other individual and collective rights are being violated. There are attempts to erode the achievements in the
emancipation of peoples and countries thus far.
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia)
It is incumbent upon the international community to seek solutions to the pressing problems of the present-day world. Political action should be followed by practical measures aimed at promoting international economic relations and international standard-setting activities. As far as the preparation of new international instruments in the field of human rights is concerned, it is very important to continue the work on the completion and adoption of the Convention on the rights of the child and the Convention on migrant workers, the Declaration on the rights of national, ethnic and other minorities and the Declaration on the right to development.
There is no doubt that the ouest ion of development is one of the most important auestions of the contemporary world and the most crucial one for the developing countries. The close interdependence between development and social progress has been constantly reiterated at many different forums and has been reflected in a large number of documents, including article 1 of both Covenants on human rights.
The value of the right to development is manifold. It seems to be particularly important that the right to development provides a new and fresh dynamism and a more comprehensive interpretation of the whole set of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights and represents a strong appeal for the full and complete realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The adoption of the Declaration on the right of development by consensus at the current session of the General Assembly would be a significant contribution to the meaningful celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Covenants. At the same time, it would open new perspectives for future co-operation and understanding between individuals and peoples as well as contributing to further advancement of rights of individuals, peoples and mankind
as a whole.
Mr. AL-KAWARI (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic): I am pleased to make this statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States, of which I have the honour to be Chairman this month. This statement is our contribution to the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the international Covenants on human rights. These Covenants, and their adoption by the United Nations, represent an important milestone in the creation of a tetter world, where fairness and justice prevail and where all of mankind enjoys dignity, liberty and welfare.
The Arab Islamic civilization, which had its roots in our part of the world and then spread to other areas, many elements of which contributed to the creation of contemporary world civilizations, is based, among other elements, on the individual's moral responsibility and the corresponding fundamental rights of the individual, which no authority can deny or try to strip away. From this premise we attach great significance to human rights and consider the degree of respect for such rights and their observance and application in practice as a significant indicator of the growth of the world's human community, its civilization, and the idealism to which mankind aspires.
It is indeed regrettable, on this twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the human rights Covenants, that in some parts of the world we see those rights trampled under foot and the rights of peoples violated, while the world community apparently stands by unable to preserve those rights, to deter the culprits and to implement the rights of the peoples concerned to self-determination.
The first instance that comes to mind in terms of these overall human rights violations is what we see in Palestine, whose people has been denied its collective right to self-determination, while individual Palestinians have been deprived of
(Mg. Al-Kawari, Qatar)
their right to enjoy freedom, even in the heartland of their national home which has, alas, been usurped from them. We take this opportunity to salute the struggle of the people of Palestine to achieve its collective and individual national rights. We reiterate our support for that legitimate struggle until the Palestinians realize their just claims and the rule of international law prevails in our part of the world when human rights would then be respected.
Also, the Arab Group cannot let this occasion pass without referring to current events in South Africa, where the racist Pretoria régime totally denies human rights to a majority of the indigenous population, denying them citizenship and depriving them of the opportunity to participate in the rule of the country, as well as other painful aspects of discrimination, in violation of the fundamental human rights enshrined in the two Covenants, the twentieth anniversary of whose adoption we commemorate today.
Despite all that, we cannot give up hope that the total darkness of night will eventually be followed by the bright sunlight of day. In fact, the concern of mankind for the lofty principles of the two international Covenants will ultimately lead sooner or later to the elimination of those vicious manifestations which are, indeed contrary to human rights. In this respect, we count on the awareness of the international community and the true sincerity of the overwhelming majority of the world's people to uphold the banner of human rights everywhere in the world, to translate the provisions of the two international Covenants into a concrete reality for the benefit of all peoples, under an umbrella of security, peace and genuine and full respect for human rights.	.
Hr. GAYAMA (Congo) (interpretation from French): Among the tasks of the international community through the United Nations system is the development of an extended system of law to promote the well-being of man and the fundamental freedoms set out in the San Francisco Charter.
The adoption on 16 December 1966 by the General Assembly of resolution 2200 A (XXI) including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights was one of the historic moments in the fulfilment of this mission, since the United Nations thus succeeded in working out an International Bill of Human Rights, of which the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, of 1943, was the first stage and the two Covenants the culmination.
As we celebrate today the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of these Covenants we cannot but reaffirm our determination concerning the commitments consequent upon our accession to the two instruments and concerning the position in the world in general with regard to recognition of human rights as the foundation of freedom, justice and peace.
In this connection, we must stress that the question of human rights has always been at the heart of Africa's concerns as a powerful tool for the liberation of the continent and an essential instrument for progress and development. It could not have been otherwise since the independence of most colonized African territories came about only some 10 years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948. Most African peoples were then unable to claim those rights except through the colonial Powers. The colonial wars which accompanied the evolution of many African countries and those in other parts of the . world proved, if proof were necessary, the relative advantages for our peoples oJ the advent of the recognition of human rights. •
Further, it was in 1948 that.the infamous neo-fascist National Party of
Mr. Verwoerd took over South Africa, creating the essential structures of the inhuman apartheid policy, which today symbolizes the most fundamental denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
In fact, at the outset, the signatories of the Universal Declaration of 1948 invested it only with a moral value; not in any way compulsory. It was the Covenants relating to civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights that translated the principles of the Universal Declaration into binding treaty provisions.
In our view, the two International Covenants were a useful addition to the Universal Declaration which simply relied on Member States to ensure the effective enjoyment of the rights and freedoms proclaimed by it by the peoples of non-autonomous Territories under their jurisdiction. For the two Covenants, in their article 1, clearly state an important right: the right of peoples to self-determination and to dispose of their natural wealth and resources.
When the United Nations adopted the two International Covenants, in 1966, it had already embarked on a broad programme of working out standard rules based on the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of 1948, whose influence on the evolution of contemporary international law was considerable.
Among these rules and norms are the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted in December 1960 in resolution 1514 (XV). This historic Declaration states, among other things, that the peoples of the world are resolved
"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small and to promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom"
After 1966, reference to the Invitational Coven^cs relating to civil and political rights and economic, social end cultural rights followed naturally in connection with the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, which was adopted by the General Assembly.in 1967.	.
It was especially in 1974, in resolution 3201 (S-VJ? of the sixth .special session of the General Assembly, entitled "Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order" and resolution 3281 (XXIX) on the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, that reference to the two International Covenants on Human Rights was most significant. In them we see stated -with more conviction and precision the close, intrinsic link between the concept ;of human rights and that of the rights of peoples, thus confirming that the ideal of a free human being, freed from fear and poverty, can be achieved only in conditions that enable everyone to enjoy his economic, social and cultural rights as well as his civil and political rights, as stated in the third preambular paragraph of the preambles to the two Covenants.	...
In Africa, generally speaking, all those interested in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms were historically convinced of the close relation between human rights and the rights of peoples.
Thus, in working out and adopting its own Charter of Human Rights, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) made of it also a charter of the rights of peoples, which the current President of the OAU recently called "a fundamental contribution by Africa to the promotion of international law”. . .
Thus, the problem of recognition of and respect for these rights and freedoms arises in terms that reflect two simultaneous approaches.	-.
One approach consists in considering all possibilities of extending the rights
inherited from classical liberalism. All constitutions and most national laws are
(Mr. Gayama, Congo) inspired by ''it, since progress and development presuppose a genuine realization of individual fights and freedom: the right to work, freedom of expression, freedom of conscience';	’
Often, unfortunately, we have to admit the evident dichotomy between formal, and abstract’’freedoms and economic, social and political structures characterized by latent underdevelopment or chronic crises, which are not eliminated by an international environment hardly favourable to development. The human rights policy, therefore, will essentially be seen in a constant effort to harmonize the relationship Existing between structural constraints and the legitimate aspirations of the individual, social well-being and treaty or legislative provisions.
The other approach is illustrated in the obligation for African peoples to free themselves of the colonial and’ racist yoke which still holds sway over Namibia and South Afriéa in its grip.
The situation that has existed in southern Africa practically since the foundation of the united Nations is not only a violation of the norms and principles of the' Charter but a clear sign of absolute contempt for international conventions, especially the International Covenants on Human Rights and the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, on thé part of the South' African régime. In South Africa there is neither eaudlitÿ before the law nor protection of the law for the majority of the people, and thewill of the people is not the foundation of the authority of the public powers. The apartheid policy which is applied in South Africa is expressed in the infamous laws which rule the life of the individual from the cradle to the grave and by a fascist violence which caused that system ^ be described as a crime against humanity.'
Twenty years after the adoption of the International Covenants on civil and political rights and on economic, social and cultural rights, one is entitled to wonder about the meaning of the challenge this represents. The international community must take a stand when confronted with such a situation. We venture to hope that in this state of affairs those who boast of being the great champions of human rights in the world will not forever continue to act as the de facto allies of the outlawed apartheid régime. The massive and persistent denial of human rights represented by the colonial and racist system in southern Africa unfortunately compels the people concerned to fight by every means possible to abolish the discriminatory and oppressive system inposed on them. In their just struggle to ensure the triumph of the standards and principles of freedom and human dignity the national liberation movements enjoy our sympathy and support.
Thus today, as yesterday, the international charter of human rights, with the essential components I have spoken of, including the International Covenants on human rights, remains both a source of inspiration and an indispensable guide for building a world of brotherhood based on the principles of peace, harmonious co-operation, justice and eouity.
The advent of a legal system for all with the participation of all, is an aim we must spare no effort to achieve, because as long as there is oppression, poverty and discrimination anywhere in the world there is no doubt that the establishment of the reign of the fundamental human rights and freedom will remain only an ideal.
I hope that on this twentieth anniversary of the International Covenant*! on Human Rights we can work for the full realization of this ideal.
The PRESIDENT; Spain has announced its intention of becoming a sponsor
of draft resolution A/41/L.21.
(The President)
We have heard the last speaker at this special commemorative meeting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution contained in document A/41/L.21.	■
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt this draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 41/32).
The PRESIDENT: I declare concluded this meeting devoted to the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/41/PV.102
22 December 1986
ENGLISH
Forty-first session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 19 Decenber 1986, at 4 p.m.
Presidenti	Mr. CHOUDHURY	(Bangladesh)
-	Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development [40]
-	Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations: [38] (continued)
(a)	Report of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the united Nations
(b)	Notes by the Secretary-General
(c)	Report of the Fifth Committee
(d)	Draft resolution
- Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council [41]
/...
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
86-64668/A 4776V {E)
Question of Cyprus [43]	.
Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations [44]
Consequences of the prolongation of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq [45]
Pending appointments
Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa [33] (continued)
Pattern of conferences
[115]
(continued)
Organization of work
Closing statement by the President
Suspension of the session
The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 40
LAUNCHING OF GLOBAL NEGOTIATIONS ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION FOR DEVEIOJMENT
The PRESIDENT? As a convenience to the members of the Second Committee, and in response to a request I have received, I suggest that we first take up agenda item 40, entitled "Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development".
In connection with this item, representatives will recall that on
20 September 1986 the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the forty-first session.
Mr. PEJIC (Yugoslavia)? On behalf of the Group of 77 I request that consideration of agenda item 40, "Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development", be deferred to the forty-second session of the General Assembly and that it be inscribed on the agenda of that session. This request reflects the intention of the Group of 77 to seek an agreement with our partners from the developed countries on the implementation of General Assenbly resolution 34/138.
The Group of 77 very much regrets that the international community has been usable to reach an agreement on the commencement of global negotiations. The reasons for that failure are to be found in the unwillingness of some developed countries to respond positively to the call of the Group of 77 for the launching of global negotiations. We, the developing countries, continue to attach great importance to this issue because we consider it a valid approach to the solution of pressing world economic problems in the interests of all countries. The Heads of State or Government of non-aligned countries, at their recent meeting at Harare,
Zimbabwe, reaffirmed the commitment of developing countries to global negotiations
•	(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia)
as the most important and comprehensive endeavour of the international community for the restructuring of international economic relations, the accelerated development of the developing countries and the strengthening of international economic co-operation. They requested the Group of 77 in New York to continue its efforts towards that goal. At the same time, they urged the developed countries to demonstrate the necessary political will to enable global negotiations to be launched.
For its part, in accordance with the decision taken at the meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs held at the beginning of this session of the General Assembly, the Group of 77 is resolved to achieve agreement on the launching of global negotiations. We earnestly hope that the developed countries will react in the same spirit. It proved difficult at this session of the General Assembly to engage in serious discussion on this issue. Therefore, after consulting a number of our partners from developed countries, we are proposing that the General Assenbly decide to transmit this item to the forty-second session of the General Assembly and to keep it on the agenda.
Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic); Speaking on behalf of the delegations of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Hungarian People's Republic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and my own country, I should like to stress that those countries have from the very beginning supported General Assembly resolution 34/138 of 14 December 1979 on global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development and have advocated its impl emen ta tion.
.	*Mr» Ott, German Democratic Republic)
This principled position has been continuously confirmed at the highest party and Government levels in the documents of the Warsaw Treaty and the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). At the forty-second session of the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance held at Bucharest last month the Prime Ministers of our countries against emphasized the importance of conducting global negotiations within tiie United Nations with the participation of all States in order to bring about a just solution to the most pressing international economic problems.
Socialist countries have welcomed the constructive provisions of the final documents of the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held at Harare last September and of the Declaration of the tenth annual meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77 concerning fundamental international economic issues. Along that line, our countries agree with the proposal of the Group of 77 to postpone the discussion of the item until the forty-second session of the General Assembly and to make the issue "Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development" a separate item on the agenda of that session.
The mandate for global negotiations on major international economic issues, as spelled out in General Assembly resolution 34/138, which was adopted by consensus seven years ago, is quite clear; what is required for its eventual implementation is political will on the part of all concerned. In that connection the socialist countries, on whose behalf I have the honour to speak, would like to express once again their readiness and determination to follow a constructive and result-oriented approach.
The PRESIDENT: May I take it that it is the Assembly’s wish to defer its consideration of this item and to include it in the provisional agenda of the forty-second session?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 40.
AGENDA ITEM 38 (continued)
REVIEW OF THE EFFICIENCY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE UNITED NATIONS
(a)	REPORT OF THE GROUP OF HIGH-LEVEL INTERGO VERIMENTAL EXPERTS TO REVIEW THE EFFICIENCY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL FUNCTIONING OF THE UNITED NATIDœ (A/41/49)
(b)	NOTES BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/41/663; A/41/763)
(C) REPORT OF THE FIFTH OOJMITTEE (A/41/795)
(d)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/41/L,48/Rev .1, A/41/L.49/Rev.l)
The ERESIDENT? The Assembly will now resume its consideration of agenda item 38, "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations". In this connection the Assembly has before it the report of the Fifth Coninittee, A/41/795.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to take note of that report? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT? The Assembly also has before it two draft resolutions, ’ A/41/L.48/Rev. 1 and A/41/L.4 9/Rev.l. I call upon the representative of Bolivia to
introduce draft resolution A/41/L. 48/Rev.1.
Mrs. CARRASCO (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation submitted draft resolution A/41/L. 48/Rev .1, which was circulated officially at this session. It relates to an increase in the membership of the Committee on Programme and Co-ordination (CPC), in order to achieve the broadest possible geographical representation.
Under the preamble to the draft resolution, the Assembly would recall resolutions 3392 (XXX) and 40/237, and take account of the views expressed at this session on the representativeness of the CPC. Under the operative part, it would decide to increase the number of members of the Committee to 36, elected for three-year terms on the basis of equitable geographical distribution.
The future of the United Nations is at stake. The work to be done in the coming decade will be highly important for the proper functioning of the United Nations. In that context, the medium-term plan for 1990-1995 must respond to these concerns, and Member States must participate in that plan on a broad basis and with strengthened and democratic machinery. The draft of the plan will be examined precisely in the CPC during 1988, before it is sent to the General Assembly. That is why it is important that the representativeness of the Committee on Programme and Co-ordination should be appropriately modified as soon as possible.
That goes together with the important programming and budgeting responsibilities that this session of the General Assembly is assigning to the CPC under draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev.1 - functions that are to complement the tasks already assigned to the CPC in the past by the planning rules.
(Mrs. Carrasco, Bolivia)
A number of delegations have told us that, although they agree with the idea of broadening the CPC, in order to avoid its oligarchical connotations, incompatible with the democratic and pluralistic spirit that should prevail in the United Nations, they believe that both the number of members and the representativeness of the regional groups in the CPC should be the subject of further consultations and negotiations. In order to contribute to the dialogue in a positive way, and taking those views into account, my delegation has decided to defer the consideration of draft resolution A/41/L.48/Rev.l to the forty-second session. We request that this draft resolution and the item be inscribed on the agenda of that session.
The PRESIDENT: As all members know, draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev .1 is the result of extensive negotiations. I am pleased to note that it now enjoys the co-sponsorship of 19 tember States, and I wish to extend my wholehearted appreciation to everyone for the co-operation extended in this endeavour. It is my understanding that the Assembly is now prepared to proceed to take a decision on the draft resolution.
In this connection, I have obtained a legal opinion from the Legal Counsel of the United Nations on three draft paragraphs. The legal opinion reads as follows: "You have requested our opinion on the legal consequences of three draft paragraphs which are under consideration for inclusion in a resolution to be adopted by the General Assembly on the United Nations budgetary process. These three draft paragraphs read as follows:
"’5. Reaffirms that the decision-making process is governed by the
provisions of the Charter and the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
BCT/aa
(The President)
"'6. Agrees that, without prejudice to paragraph 5 above, the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination should continue its existing practice of reaching decisions by consensus; explanatory views, if any, shall be presented to the General Assembly,
"'7. Considers it desirable that the Fifth Committee, before Submitting its recommendations on the outline of the programme budget to the Plenary in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and the rules of procedure, should continue to make all possible efforts with a view to establishing the broadest possible agreement;’.
"It is our opinion that these draft paragraphs read separately or together do not in any way prejudice the provisions of Article 18 of the Charter of the United Nations or of the relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly giving effect to that Article." That coincides with the views expressed by all delegations.
I concur with the foregoing, and I take it that the General Assembly also agrees with it.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That statement will be annexed to the resolution.
Before the Assembly proceeds to take a decision on draft resolution
A/41/L. 49/Rev.l, I wish to convey to it the following information received from the Secretariat:
"Draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev.l would, if adopted, have complex implications for the programme and budget of the Organization. It is not possible at this stage - and in particular pending the outcome of the reviews of the intergovernmental machinery and of the structure of the Secretariat -to indicate with any degree of precision what these implications would be. It
(The President)
would therefore be the intention of the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, both in the context of the reports called for in the draft resolution and in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1988-1989, on the detailed implications of this resolution.”
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their position
before a decision is taken on the draft resolution.
Mr. SAMUDIO (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): The opinion of the Latin American and Caribbean Group of States on section C of chapter VI of the report of the Group of 18, on the planning and budget mechanisms, is to be found in document A/41/960 of 8 December 1986, whose purpose was to contribute to the review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
In that context, it is not acceptable that under the pretext of reviewing the efficiency of that functioning, or under any other pretext, there should be an attempt to detract from the democratic nature of the decision-making process provided for in Article 18 of the Charter. Nor is it acceptable for the Organization's efficiency to continue to be affected by the intentional withholding by some Member States of their contributions to the regular budget, contributions they are obliged to make under Articles 17 and 19 of the Charter.
The Latin American and Caribbean Group of States considers it appropriate to make the present interpretive declaration in order to confirm its position and to point out that paragraphs 6 and 7 of section II of draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev.1 are subject to the basic principle contained in paragraph 5 of that section, which reaffirms that
"the decision-making process is governed by the provisions of the Charter and the rules of procedure of the General Assembly".
The informal practice of arriving at resolutions and decisions by consensus, which should not be confused with unanimity, is useful and therefore tends to be employed in all the bodies of the General Assembly. However, as it is not a juridical norm, it is not obligatory and it does not interfere with the right of any Member State to seek recourse to a vote to achieve majority decisions when
(Mr. Samudio, Panama) necessary. The practice of consensus is conceived of only within a process of decision-making governed by the fundamental rule of voting.
Mr. JESUS (Cape Verde): On behalf of the African Group of States, I congratulate you, Sir, on the important results that you have achieved on agenda item 38. Your efforts, especially over the past three weeks, the patience with which you have endured, by sharing with us the long and sometimes frustrating negotiating sessions, and the wisdom of your guidance were of fundamental importance in reaching a compromise. The Organization owes you a historic debt.
The African States participated in the negotiations fully conscious of their international responsibilities, and were guided solely by the objective of preserving and strengthening the United Nations. Our keen interest and deep involvement in the negotiations reflected our strong attachment to the Organization and the purposes for which it was created.
Africa and the Organization have strong historic ties. The most glorious moments of the continent’s modern history - the liberation from colonial rule - are counted as outstanding achievements of the United Nations.
As independent States, we were born with the blessing of the noble principles enshrined in the Charter and, since then, as its members, we have become active participants in the permanent dialogue for the fulfilment of its purposes of maintaining international peace and security and of co-operation for the
development and well-being of all peoples.
These historic ties between Africa and the Organization and our strong attachment to its purposes and principles explain and legitimize Africa's strong commitment to the negotiations direct d at its efficiency and the strengthening of its functions.
That is why since last year, when the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts was created to review the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations, we, the African States, have taken this initiative very seriously, and accordingly have worked very hard to make our contribution to the outcome of that endeavour.
Our responsible firmness at the negotiating table was shown when necessary. The defence of fundamental principles of international relations, including the principle of the sovereign eauality of States in the United Nations, had to be dealt with firmly. Our willingness to compromise, shown time and again during the negotiations, was reflected in the flexibility that we displayed and in the many constructive proposals that we made. Some of those proposals were further built upon and later included as important elements of the draft resolution.
Our co-operation with all delegations involved in the negotiations was extensively documented in the careful consideration and accommodation given by the African Group to the positions and interests of all countries and groups of countries. In short, the African Group participated in these important negotiations fully aware of the magnitude and sensitivity of the matter before us, and determined to make every effort to preserve and strengthen the functioning of
the United Nations.
Firmly committed as we are to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, we were strongly against the consideration of any Question which directly or indirectly threatened those principles or jeopardized the attainment of those purposes. We could in no way endorse positions that would subvert the democratic rights of all Member States, particularly in the General Assembly.
It is therefore with satisfaction that we acknowledge that those legitimate concerns and firm positions of the African States, which, after all, were shared by the overwhelming majority of Member states, if not by all, have been fully taken into account and are duly and clearly reflected in the text of the draft resolution and its annexes.
We come out of these difficult negotiations convinced that all Member States are aware of the utmost importance of the United Nations as an indispensable framework where nations of the world can debate and search for peaceful solutions to their conflicts and where all nations representing the human race as a whole can find agreed solutions to global problems.
The agreement reached on the reforms to be introduced into the Organization, with a view to improving its efficiency in the administrative and financial fields, gives us renewed hope that all countries will, in compliance with their Charter obligations, commit themselves to the dignifying task of preserving and strengthening the United Nations, in the interest of world peace and the well-being of all peoples.
It is a privilege for the African countries, for my country and for me personally to have participated in, and contributed to, the successful conclusion of our work on the review of the efficiency of the United Nations. We very much appreciate the co-operation given to us by all delegations in the course of the negotiations. Their willingness to compromise on such an important matter, matched by that of the African States, made this historic success possible, under your patient, able and efficient guidance, Sir. We therefore support draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev.l.
As this session draws to an end with this remarkable achievement, I wish to conclude by expressing, on behalf of the African countries, our best wishes for a happy new year to you, Sir, to the Secretary-General, to all representatives and to all members of the Secretariat staff.
The PRESIDENT: May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/41/L.49/Pev 1 without a vote?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 41/213).
The PRESIDENT: I call now upon the Secre tary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The resolution just adopted by this Assembly on the report of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts is of cardinal importance for the future of this Organization as an effective force for progress and for peace. This notable achievement has been possible only because of the spirit of accommodation shown by all Member States. The measures endorsed for the improvement of the financial and administrative functioning of the Organization are without precedent in their scope and detail. I believe they provide a sound basis for changes that will bring new confidence in the effectiveness and efficiency of the Organization and facilitate the agreement among Member States on the programmes and budget that is necessary for financial and political viability. The President of the General Assembly deserves great credit for the essential role he has played in guiding the extensive discussions through various forums to a successful result.
There is now much to be done. Implementation of the measures decided upon by the Assembly will be a complex and demanding undertaking, to the success of which I am totally committed. I have already taken steps within my authority to improve resource utilization and I have made preparations within the Secretariat which should permit us to move ahead expeditiously and in orderly fashion to implement
the broad measures foreseen in the report of the Group of 18.


In stating this I must add that a number of important strands will need to be woven into a coherent pattern during the coming year. Some of the measures decided upon by the Assembly require action by intergovernmental bodies. Others which can be implemented by the Secretary-General will need to be carried out with due regard for their relationship to such intergovernmental action. The year 1987 must also see extensive work accomplished on the programme budget for the next biennium, to include a contingency fund and the initiatiion of preparations for the 1990-1995 medium-term plan. The effect of the prospective reforms will have to be taken into account in the process.
The year 1987 will thus be a year of transition, a year in which we undertake purposefully the reforms that can be quickly begun and lay the groundwork for further rationalization of structures and operations through the reviews and studies that are to be made. Clearly, there will need to be flexibility in the modalities of implementation. In the progress report which I shall submit to the General Assembly this coming May I shall give a full account of what has been accomplished by then and define the approaches which I believe can best be taken in achieving the purpose of the measures agreed upon by the Assembly.
As a result of the far-sighted and painstaking work of the Group of 18 and of the constructive action taken by the Assembly today after thoughtful and constructive deliberation, we have in place the blueprint for a more efficient united Nations. The co-operation and understanding of Member States will be necessary as we build from this the stronger edifice that all desire. I must emphasize, as we end a year of severe financial crisis and enter another, that the major requirement in this respect, now and in the future, is full payment of assessed contributions in accordance with the Charter. The reform measures now to
be undertaken must be accompanied by an end to the present financial uncertainties

if the United Nations is to meet successfully the challenges and opportunities of the future. 
In this year, proclaimed by the Assembly as the International Year of Peace, Member states have overcome substantial differences to reach agreement on the means of strengthening this Organization, established to ensure a peaceful world for future generations. I would hope that this same spirit and determination can be applied to lessening the political differences which underlie many of the problems of the Organization, including those in the financial area, and that there will be a common resolve to comply with all of the provisions of the Charter. This hope can guide us as we move ahead in the new year and beyond to bring to reality the measures of reform on which all Member States have reached agreement.
The PRESIDENT: A number of delegations, including certain of its sponsors, have expressed a desire to make statements in connection with the resolution just adopted. In view of the importance of the item under consideration, may I take it that the Assembly agrees to hear the delegations concerned, since they have not yet had the opportunity to speak?
It was so decided.
Mr. SHIHAB I (Saudi Arabia): First and foremost, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on this achievement. Your able leadership, the tireless efforts you made with your colleagues, and the highly commendable co-operation of the Secretary-General and his staff have enabled us to reach the present conclusion.
I have accepted with a heavy heart the resolution just adopted without a vote. Despite its ambiguity, which initially we found difficult to accommodate, I consider your explanation, Mr. President, sufficient to eliminate any ambiguity that might have been created by the terms of the text itself, and believe that nothing in the text will really hanger the procedures adopted by the General Assembly in its normal deliberations.
(Mr. Shihab!’, Saudi Arabia)
That said, let me reflect for a mbment upon the circumstances, upon the resolution itself, and upon the atmosphere in which it was considered. We al tit, power and authority have always been tile history of humanity. We have passed through eras of war and peace and have reached the era of the United Nations, whidn was to rationalize wealth and harmonize power in a Charter with checks and balances to accommodate the powerful, the wealthy, the small and the big; to accommodate all circumstances - except the fact that the world has become a small one.
(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia) During the last 40 years more than 100 countries have earned their independence. During the last 40 years we have achieved a great measure of harmony in rationalizing our differences and in reaching agreement on many issues. Having stepped into the forty-first year of the history of the United Nations, we still have two problems on the conscience of the world: the problem of Palestine and that of South Africa and Namibia.
X must stress the fact that - as Members are aware - leadership is not only wealth and power, in essence, leadership is moral leadership. The ingredient of any leadership is the moral power that is inherent in it. Wealth and power without the moral ingredient would not be the right approach to solving problems. The moral of these two problems which remain on our conscience now will always be the responsibility of this great body. I therefore call on all Powers, big and small, in exercising their authority, to live up to the moral responsibility that the founders of the united Nations have entrusted to us. It is that moral responsibility that calls on us today to ensure that the United Nations survives, to live up to our responsibility to the Organization and to pay our dues. We should be ready to reconsider any situation that might lead to failure in this respect.
Mr. President, again I want to congratulate you, the Secretary-General, and all representatives here who have participated in achieving this conclusion.
Mr. GHAREKHAN (India): With the adoption of the draft resolution contained in document A/41/L.4 9/Rev.l, which has now become resolution 41/213, the General Assembly has taken a historic decision. It is historic not in the sense that it breaks any new ground or lays down new policies or principles: On the contrary, it reconfirms existing principles and provisions. It is historic in the
sense that the Organization, which was facing one of the most acute crises in its 40-year life - some even say that it was the most acute crisis ™ has shown once again that, given political goodwill on all sides, it is possible to overcome seemingly insurmountable obstacles. There was a widespread perception that the very existence of the United Nations was in danger. Every Member, as it were, was on trial. Hence all of us might claim that we have passed the test with at least reasonably satisfactory grades.
At this moment, when perhaps the universal feeling in the Assembly is one of relief, it is not necessary to go back to the beginning and recall the circumstances which gave rise to the crisis. Naturally, we cannot forget those circumstances, nor would it be wise to do so altogether. But our principal preoccupation now should be to look forward, to look ahead to the future - the not-too-distant future, but the foreseeable future.
My delegation, for one, hopes that some cf the underlying causes behind the controversy will not recur and that our Organization will once again become healthy, financially sound and administratively even more efficient, fully capable of tackling the social and economic problems facing the international community, in particular the developing countries.
Rarely are we privileged to participate in events of such significance. It is with pride and satisfaction that we are witnessing a tangible expression of the combined will of Member States to renew, revitalize and reinvigorate the Organization. It is pertinent to recall that over 40 years ago we had committed ourselves to the United Nations as an instrument to build a better world, not only for our generation but, more importantly, for future generations. Regrettably, in the recent past, the Organization has been subjected to a severe crisis challenging its very viability. We all know the causes of this crisis. My delegation trusts
that this resolution will help ensure that such a crisis will not be allowed to occur again in the future. During the present international situation, it is important to ensure that the United Nations can, both now and in the longer term, be that strong, constructive force in world affairs that is vitally needed in our increasingly interdependent world.
The resolution we have adopted by consensus clearly expresses a desire on the part of all of us to rededicate ourselves to the provisions and principles of the Charter. It is also a reaffirmation of the essentiality finally to uphold the principle of democratic functioning on which the United Nations is based, without commitment to this basic, unalterable principle, durable solutions to the complex economic, social and financial problems facing the international community cannot be found.
The fact that the sponsors were drawn from all regions of the world bolsters our confidence in the future of the United Nations and its role in the maintenance of peace and security and enhancing international co-operation in different sectors. We hope that the adoption of the resolution will encourage Member States to utilize further the forum afforded by the United Nations in order that it may, in fact, serve as the "centre for harmonizing the actions of nations" for the attainment of these common ends.
We are glad that this resolution reaffirms the principle of according full respect to the authority of the Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of the Organization. This will surely assist him in performing the duties assigned to him under the Charter. The implementation of this resolution places an enormous responsibility on the Secretary-General and on the Secretariat, which he so ably leads. We are fortunate that the Organization has at its head a person of
such high eminence and outstanding qualities. We remain fully confident that the
Se ere tary-Gen er al, with his extensive knowledge and expertise, his intelligence and diplomatic skills, will carry out his tasks to the satisfaction of all Member States. It shall be the duty of all of us to extend to him our unstinted co-operation.
Mr. President, I should like to place on record my delegation's deep and most sincere tribute to your leadership in dealing with this sensitive item. It is no exaggeration to say that without the qualities of tact, intelligence, firmness and - very important - humour that you have brought to bear throughout the protracted and, at times, painful negotiations, we could not have achieved the results that we have succeeded in achieving. The many long hours that you personally spent in guiding the negotiations, with the help of your enthusiastic aides, is a testimony to your commitment and that of your country tc the united Nations. For me and my delegation it was an honour to have been associated with the decision-making processes of the past two weeks. In short, Mr. President, the confidence that we placed in you on 16 September has been justified beyond our expectations. For all this, we and the Organization remain indebted to you.
■	Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): My delegation congratulates you,
Mr. President, on the adoption of resolution 41/213, entitled "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations". Its adoption is indeed a major achievement of the present session of the General Assembly and a reflection of the hope of all the Member States that, as a result, the United Nations will be stronger and, at the same time, more effective in fulfilling the letter and spirit of its Charter.
My delegation supported the initiative taken by Japan at the fortieth session of the General Assembly and welcomed the establishment of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations. Our support of the Japanese proposal stemmed from our conviction that the proposed Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts would not interfere with the prerogatives of the Secretary-General as the Organization’s chief administrative officer and might actually assist him in implementing reforms in sensitive areas for which the support of the Member States was imperative.
We were happy to see that the Group of 18 was able to reach agreement on wide-ranging issues affecting nearly all aspects of United Nations work. While we had difficulty with some specific recommendations contained in the report, we found that on balance the report was a useful tool for remodelling the method and content of the work of the United Nations and intergovernmental machinery and for streamlining its administrative and budgetary functioning.
Our belief in the United Nations and our commitment to its purposes and principles encouraged us to dedicate ourselves, in co-operation with all the delegations, to finding solutions to the overriding financial problem confronting the current session of the Général Assembly. We have remained involved in this effort from the very beginning of the debate on the issue in the General Assembly
(Mg. Shah Nawaz, Pakistan) which culminated in the agreement reached last night by the negotiating team under the President's chairmanship.	•
We also participated actively in the technical considerations given to the report of the Group of 18 by the Fifth Committee and in the work of the Consultative Group, which deliberated over the matter from 12 to 18 November under the chairmanship of the Permanent Representative of Malaysia, Ambassador Yusof M. Hitam. As the President rightly pointed out in the Committee's meeting this morning, it was in that Consultative Group that the various positions were clearly formulated and presented, enabling the negotiating team to conclude its work successfully. We therefore take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Yusof for his contribution to the evolution of a final resolution on this subject.
Mr. President, it was a memorable experience for us to have participated in the deliberations of the negotiating team under your chairmanship. We were able to agree on a text because all of us had moved in a spirit of accommodation and understanding. The text of the resolution just adopted will- have an impact on all elements of the functioning of the United Nations, above all on the central issue of the planning and budgetary mechanisms, without detriment to the principles and provisions of ‘the Charter. We are confident that our decisions today will effectively improve the Organization's administrative and financial functioning.
I should like to place on record my delegation's deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the able and skilful manner in which you presided over our work and brought to a successful conclusion our deliberations on an issue of great technical complexity and political sensitivity. It is no exaggeration to say that this successful outcome would not have been possible without your imaginative leadership and the commitment and tireless efforts of your dedicated colleagues.
(Mr. Shah Nawaz., Pakistan) The special ties between our two countries and our close personal relations entitle us to Eeel a deep sense of pride in your accomplishment.
Let me also congratulate the Group of African States at the United Nations for its outstanding contribution to the success of our joint endeavours at both the political and technical levels. Above all, the role played by the representative of Cape Verde, Ambassaror José Luis Jesus, merits our special recognition and generous tribute. He has demonstrated extraordinary negotiating skills and qualities of statesmanship that deserve fulsome praise.
Equally, I wish to congratulate Ambassador Reid of the United States and his colleagues for their flexibility and readiness to negotiate which made this agreement possible.
All of us have worked hard during this session of the General Assembly to evolve recommendations that would ensure the future of this Organization. Let us hope now that we shall continue to work together to ensure that they are implemented in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the Charter for the betterment and strengthening of this Oi mization.
Mr. GUMUCIO GRANIER (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): Bolivia wishes to reiterate its support for the role of the United Nations, for the work of the Secretary-General, and for the Organization's administrative and financial efficiency. We endorse the statement by the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States made a few minutes ago by the Ambassador of Panama.
None the less, my Government is concerned by the trend in international forums to seek consensus - or unanimity - even though it may sometimes result in a document of dubious value. A more accurate term might be "undemocratic", because the democracy which we try to preserve in our countries is based on the will of the majority, as expressed by the vote. Adoption by consensus, on the other hand,

(Mr. Gumucio Granier, Bolivia) imposes criteria that mask delegations' positions. This is obviously inconsistent with the pluralism which should prevail in the international community.
At its fortieth session the General Assembly adopted resolution 40/237 without a vote so as to demonstrate unanimous support for changes in the Organization's administrative and financial functioning. My delegation, though not in agreement with aome of the provisions of the resolution, did not formally oppose them because they were procedural in nature and we wished to be flexible. But now my delegation finds that the way in which the report was dealt with at this session - both in the plenary Assembly and in the Fifth Committee, under agenda item 38 - was partial and somewhat confusing: In the Fifth Committee factual, technical findings were discussed that did not make it possible for States Members duly to formulate their objections to the report as a whole or to its individual recommendations. Hence it might have been thought that on the first five chapters of the report on which there was unanimity among the experts who prepared it there might also have been unanimity among the Member States. That is not the case. Indeed, in respect of the 67 recommendations contained in the first five chapters the Bolivian delegation stated that it did not agree with 18 of them and that it found seven of them unacceptable, specifically recommendations 6, 7, 24, 25 (3), 27, 37 (3) and 61.
In this Connection we reite ’te that, although the resolution just adopted -document A/41/L.49/Rev.l - decides that the Secretary-General and the competent bodies should implement those recommendations, so far as the recommendations of the Group of 18 are concerned my delegation records its reservation that it does not agree with the aforementioned criteria.
31
(Mr. Gumucio Granier, Bolivia)
I reiterate that the lack of efficiency resulting from the Organization's financial crisis is the responsibility of neither the Secretary-General nor the staff of the international civil service. My delegation does not agree that the international staff is overpaid or that it has too many privileges. On the contrary, the international civil service should be given every support and all the incentives needed so that it can accomplish its work.
My delegation stresses that if draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev.l had been put to a recorded vote, we would have abstained on the draft resolution in general and voted against paragraph 6 for reasons of principle.
Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): On behalf of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People's Repulic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, I have the honour to explain their principled position on Questions concerning the report of the Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations.
The countries I have the honour to represent have supported the resolution on the report of the Group of Experts although the document before us does not fully take into account all our ideas and interests. The resolution, which contains useful recommendations, is the result of lengthy and difficult consultations. They have been successful thanks to the untiring activities of representatives from all groups of States in various negotiating bodies and the active and constructive contribution made by the socialist States. I should like to take this opportunity to express to you, Mr. President, the special thanks of the group of States on whose behalf I have the honour to speak for your wise and apt guidance of the negotiations.	,
(Mr. Ott, German Democratic Republic)
The support our group of States has given the recommendations agreed upon is an expression of the principled commitment of our States to the United Nations and to the purposes and principles enshrined in its Charter. It is an expression of the interest of the socialist States in a strong and efficient United Nations, which has to contribute to averting the danger of a nuclear inferno, to ending the arms race on earth and preventing its spread to outer space.
The priority of these vital Questions of mankind, which in the nuclear and space age have become Questions of survival, was clearly underlined at the meeting of the highest representatives of the Soviet Union and the United States in Reykjavik, and they will remain on the agenda until they are settled.
What is imperative now is to invigorate, in the United Nations too, the policy of result-oriented political dialogue and of establishing a world-wide coalition of common sense and realism. There is urgent need for the United Nations also to overcome social and economic injustice, poverty and hunger, to implement human rights and to eliminate oppression and exploitation. Today we need the United Nations more than ever before as a centre for dialogue, understanding and co-operation.
At this juncture I once again assure the General Assembly that the socialist States on whose behalf I have the honour to speak are profoundly interested in the potential of the United Nations to.be used more effectively, which in our view can be achieved by, inter alia, making its proceedings and its main bodies more democratic. We stand for an all-round strengthening of the political, legal and moral positions as well as of the authority and effectiveness of the world Organization, and will do our utmost to help overcome the Organization's short-term and long-term problems.
Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): I have the honour to make a brief statement on behalf of the 12 member States of the European Community.
Mr. President, the Twelve have watched with admiration your skilful and untiring efforts over the last weeks to achieve a satisfactory solution to this issue. Those of us who have had the privilege of working under your personal direction have especially come to appreciate your determination, your common sense and your good humour. The Twelve would like to pay a personal tribute to you and to your staff for unflagging efforts on behalf of us all and for the sake of the Organization itself.
The resolution deals with issues of major importance: the administrative and financial efficiency of the United Nations and the planning, programming and budgeting process of the Organization. It is no exaggeration to say that those issues were examined intensively. We can recall no other single report that has commanded so much of the time, effort and interest of delegations.
The views of the Twelve on the report of the Group of 18 were set out in the plenary in October. We believe that the resolution we have just approved represents a careful, balanced approach to a complicated and intractable set of problems. For our part, we never expected negotiations to be easy, and so it has proved. Naturally, the resolution does not satisfy all Member States fully in all respects. But we accept the outcome as an essential stage in the improvement of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
The negotiations over recent weeks have demonstrated the ability of Member States to make common cause for the sake of the Organization in order to enhance its efficiency and reinforce its effectiveness. The manner in which those negotiations have been carried out - in the spirit of pragmatism and mutual accommodation, accompanied by a firm determination on all sides to uphold the Charter, its principles and purposes - is a good augury for the future of the
(Sir John Thomson, United Kingdom) United Nations. It is now for us, the Member States, to continue along the path that has been so well defined. The Twelve will follow with the utmost interest the implementation of this resolution, beginning in 1987. They wish to reassure the Secretary-General of their continuing co-operation in his task of overseeing this process and to reaffirm their political and financial commitment to the • Organization.
The Twelve wish to pay tribute to the Government of Japan, the originators of the process which has led to this juncture and to the Group of 18 and its Chairman, the Permanent Representative of Norway.
Finally, we wish also to commend the dedication, the professionalism and the goodwill shown by all those who have taken part in these negotiations. All of us together have demonstrated how countries with very different interests and goals can come together for the common good.
Mr. GBEH3 (Ghana) % Now that we have a resolution that reflects the will of the General Assembly, our difficult task has come to an end. Apart from approving those agreed measures recommended by the 18-member Group of High-Level Intergovernmental Experts, the document gives recognition to a tradition of making decisions by consensus in the budgeting process of the United Nations and strengthens the role of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in adopting the budget. The road towards the resolution has been long and arduous, but, if it creates the necessary environment and understanding that would ensure the Organization's viability, then those agonizing hours that went into the formulation of the resolution would not have been in vain.
Again, this document not only represents an impressive and important achievement in multilateral diplomacy; it also bears testimony to the good sense and commitment of Member States to the purposes and principles of the united Nations. Threatened with the spectre of a collapse of their united Nations, Member States have stood firm and, by sheer tenacity of purpose, have also worked hard to achieve what can become an important milestone in the history of the Organization.
Those of us from Africa who took part in this historic effort had no illusions about the magnitude of the problem when we began the negotiations. It was our coranitment to the Organization that sustained us. As the Group of 18 pointed out in its report, over a number of years the content and level of the budget of the Organization had been plagued by disagreements arising out of dissatisfaction with aspects of the Organization's management and administrative functioning. Those problems were compounded by shortcomings in the planning and budget procedures of the Organization. Instead of an integrated process through which wide agreement could evolve on activities to be financed from the budget, the procedures lacked the dynamism that would ensure this measure of agreement. Member States felt that they were not sufficiently involved in the budget process and could only pronounce on it at a very late stage.
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana)
In this regard, the adoption of the resolution should restore Menber States' confidence in the process. For, apart from recognizing the Member States' attachment to a full respect for the provisions of the Charter, its principles and its aims, the resolution introduces a system that will enable Member States to be involved, in a structured manner, in the planning, programming and budget procedures from the very beginning and throughout the process. It also makes possible the establishment of guidance to the Secretary-General by Menber States on the over-all level of resources to acconinodate the activities of the Organization during the biennium and on priorities. By calling for strict application of existing rules and regulations by intergovernmental bodies concerned and by the Secretariat, the resolution facilitates the chances of achieving an improvement in the efficiency of the adminstrative and financial functioning of the Organization, which would contribute to the strengthening of its effectiveness in dealing with political, economic and social issues. The novel idea of an outline with which the budget process starts and with which Menber States would be actively associated through the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination should ensure the necessary participation which the previous procedures lacked and which gave rise to so much mistrust and dissatisfaction.
An initial agreement by Member States - on such elements as a preliminary estimate of resources to accommodate the proposed programme of activities during the biennium*, priorities reflecting general trends of a broad sectoral nature; real growth, positive or negative, compared with the previous budget; and the size of a contingency fund expressed as a percentage of the over-all level of resources - had the merit of assisting the process in a positive way, and Menber States should give it a try.
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana)
It is also our hope that the process of decision-making as agreed during the negotiations and as reflected in the present resolution will promote that degree of understanding and spirit of compromise that should underlie our individual efforts at creating a better world.
In my earlier statement on this item I ventured the hope that Mender States would not let this opportunity slip by to come together to take those decisions that will result in a United Nations capable of enjoying the wider confidence and cohesion required by the global imperatives it was created to meet. Today's adoption of this historic resolution leads me to believe that the appeal has not gone unheeded. It has demonstrated the strength of our attachment to the survival o£ the world body.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me pay tribute to your wisdom, your patience and your indefatigable spirit in guiding to a successful conclusion these most delicate and complex negotiations. In thus seeing us rescue the Organization from the brink of financial collapse, you have saved not only the united Nations but also the interests of humankind. We are honoured to have been associated with you in this regard.
Our appreciation also goes in equal measure to all those who have been associated with this giant effort, especially those menbers of the individual delegations that, in various ways, made it possible for this historic resolution to see the light of day. We thank all of them and are happy to be associated with this historic occasion.
Mr. KIKUCHI (Japan): On behalf of my delegation I should like heartily to welcome the adoption of draft resolution A/41/L.4 9/Rev.l, "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations". As a delegation which, just over a year ago on the eve of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, initiated the proposal to set up the Group of High-Level
(Mr. Kikuchi, Japan)
Intergovernmental Experts in an effort to revitalize the Organization and renew confidence in the United Nations, we feel particular satisfaction at the consumation of that effort. From the beginning to the end of our arduous negotiations, our initiative was motivated by a genuine desire to review and improve the administrative and financial functioning of the united Nations, without, of course, prejudice to the Charter of the Organization - no more and no less than that. My delegation feels most gratified that this basic objective has been fully accepted.
The resolution just adopted contains more comprehensive and constructive measures for reform than any similar efforts in the past. The resolution is a product of the intensive efforts of all delegations to secure the future of our
Organization by establishing a common ground acceptable to the entire membership.
Bcr/jf	A/r/pv.102
4 a
(Mr„ Kikuchi, Japan)
Mr. Présidait, it is because of your tireless efforts, initiative, enthusiasm and imagination that what has been perhaps one of the most difficult and painstaking series of negotiations in the recent history of the united étions has met with success.
I recall that during the general debate on the report of the Group of 18 in this Assembly Hall, I appealed to you, in view of the report’s vital importance and its implications for the future of the united Nations, to guide our deliberations in this House personally, so that we might arrive at a satisfactory conclusion. This you graciously agreed to do because of your deep commitment to the cause of the United Nations.
My delegation would like to pay a special tribute to you, Sir, and to all of the delegations to the United Nations for the high level of statesmanship that has characterized these negotiations. In particular, my delegation appreciates the positive attitude shown by the African delegations. I would be remiss if I did not also mention the. great contributions made by two of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly, who at one stage or another of our negotiations played an important role, under your mandate, Mr. President - namely, Ambassador Yusof Hi tarn of Malaysia and Ambassador George Maciel of Brazil.
The United Nations has taken an epoch-making step forward towards administrative and financial reform. But all of us know that what is more important than adopting a resolution is its implementation. Realizing as we do that this is no easy task to fulfil, we have to implement the resolution fully in order to increase the efficiency of this world body and, indeed, to secure the very survival of this universal Organization. The eyes of the world will henceforth focus on how the United Nations as an organization is going to put the contents of our resolution into practice. In this connection, my delegation
A/4VPV.102
42
(Mr. Kikuchi, Japan) welcomes the statement just made by the Secretary-General, in which he expressed his full coranitment to the speedy a^a effective implementation of the resolution.
My delegation sincerely hopes that Kento er States and the Secretary-General will work together to effectuate the speedy and effective implementation of this resolution, so as to preserve and strengthen this irreplaceable world Organization. I should like to place it on record that the Government of Japan will spare no effort in co-operating with this endeavour.
Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): On 15 October I stood before you, Mr. President, and the Member States assembled here to deliver the United States statement on the review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations. At that time I said that the United Nations was at a critical juncture and that United States concern about the United Nations and resulting criticisms of it reflected the deep-seated attachment of the United States to the ideals of the Organization.
I urged delegations not to sacrifice the possibilities of the future but rather to seek practical improvement and structural renovation so that we all might turn this time of crisis into an era of renewal. I explained that efforts of the United States at promoting reform were devoted to restoring and strengthening the important contributions that the United Nations had to make to international peace, freedom and progress.
Having said those things, I am particularly pleased to be here today for the adoption of this resolution. It is a tribute to the United Nations and its ideals and to the Member States that engaged in its formulation throughout the Assembly's extensive debate and during the long weeks, days and hours of negotiation under your expert guidance, Mr. President. The reform measures embodied in this
resolution represent hope for the future of the United Nations and, more
(Mr. Walters, United states)
importantly, for the people whom we here in this House represent.
We all owe a great deal to the Government of Japan, which first advanced the idea of the Group of 18, to the members of that Group and to its Chairman, Ambassador Tom Eric Vraalsen, Permanent Representative of Norway, for their devotion to the Organization, for their individual and collective ingenuity and for their willingness to stand behind their convictions. None of what we have accomplished during this session of the General Assenbly would have been possible without their efforts.
The United States believes that the adoption of this resolution is the beginning, not the end, of a process of reforming and improving the united Nations in the interests of all its Members. Central to this process, in our view, is the use of consensus in establishing the framework for the united Nations budget. Guidance given to the Secretary-General in this area will now reflect broad agreement among the membership. As has been suggested, it is unhealthy for an institution when. Member States which contribute 75 per cent of the funds of the United Nations still feel compelled to vote against or abstain on the United Nations budget in order to express their disagreement with the level or type of expenditur es.
As a result of what we have achieved today, Member States, through good-faith negotiation, will now act by consensus on the important budget issues that previously proved so divisive. This is fundamental, indeed absolutely essential, for the long-term viability of the united Nations. Were this new process to break down, we would find ourselves back where we started, in a situation unacceptable to all of us.
What we have done has turned rhetoric into reality. We have turned a crisis
of credibility into a demonstration of what the united Nations may achieve when
(Mr. Walters, United States) Member states work towards agreement on important and highly sensitive issues. Member States should not forget what we have all accomplished. What was thought impossible by many has been made possible by all. If this is done today, it can be done tomorrow.
Before I conclude, Sir, I wish to express the deep gratitude and appreciation of the united States delegation and the American people that it represents in the United Nations for the superb way in which you have executed your responsibilities as President of the General Assembly. Without a doubt, your judgement, wisdom and perseverance have served Member States admirably throughout this session, and particularly during the successful consideration of this very sensitive and very important issue.
Mr. STROMIDIM (Sweden): As a oo-sponsor of resolution 40/237 of 18 December 1985, which led to the establishment of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the united Nations, Sweden is pleased with the outcome of the deliberations under item 3 8 at the forty-first session of the General Assembly. My delegation welcomes the fact that it was possible to reach consensus in the negotiations, under your personal direction, Mr. President, during the past weeks. It recognizes, with appreciation, the tremendous efforts and good will that have gone into this proœss.
In this connection, my delegation pays a tribute to Japan, as the initiator of this process, as well as to the High-level Group itself and to its Chairman, Ambassador Vraalsen of Norway. The Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs stated on 25 September 1986 that the recommendations of the Group constituted a good basis
for work on reforms.
My delegation believes that the examination of the report made by the Fifth Committee during the current session has proved to be useful and helpful for the Assembly in taking a decision.
The Swedish delegation regards the resolution just adopted as a response to a generally recognized need for reforms in the financial and administrative areas. At the same time, it is obvious that the review of the Group of 18, as well as the Assembly's deliberations, has been undertaken during a period in which the United Nations faces a severe financial crisis.
With respect to the wider picture, the Swedish Government believes that a revision of the present method of assessing contributions is an essential reform which should be included in a comprehensive solution of the problems facing the United Nations. It remains the conviction of my Government that a more even apportionment of assessments would reflect, better than at present, the fact that the United Nations is the instrument of all nations. The Organization would be less dependent on contributions from any single Member State. This, in turn, would be likely to improve the balance and coherence in the functioning of the world body, thereby enhancing its efficiency and effectiveness.	.
Reform means change for the better. All institutions benefit from reform now and then. The resolution just adopted marks a beginning. The implementation of the reform measures rests with Member States and with the Secretary-General and his programme managers in the Secretariat. The Swedish Government believes that the exercise of the authority and responsibilities of the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the Organization, will be the decisive factor in the years ahead. Management skills and a high degree of professionalism will be
reauired to secure an efficient, effective and viable world Organization.
(Mr. Stromholm, Sweden)
In that context, I wish to underline the importance of a strong financial . control function, in the form of an efficient Office of Financial Services, headed by the Controller-
With respect to the role of Member States, let me assure the Assembly that Sweden will participate as actively as possible in the follow-up and implementation of the reform measures adopted by the Assembly.
Let me also reiterate the well-known position of my delegation that unless all Member States fulfil their financial obligations under the Charter, by paying in full and on time their assessed contributions, the United Nations will continue to face serious problems.
Once again, Sir, I pay my tribute to you for having brought this item to a successful conclusion. Sweden was pleased to join in the consensus decision.
Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): I wish to convey my delegation’s appreciation to you, Sir, for the determined manner in which you have directed the negotiations on this important item. The Assembly is much indebted to you and to all the negotiators.
My delegation's commitment to genuine reform of the United Nations and to raising the level of efficiency and effectiveness of our Organization has been stated on many occasions. It was in a spirit of actively supporting this reform process i-hat my country agreed to serve on the Committee of 18 and the Committee of 27. There is much in the report of the Committee of 18 and in the resolution that my country welcomes and is happy to support and promote. I do not intend to single out those recommendations that we can live with. They have largely to do with the proposed administrative improvements.
My delegation believes that to most of us here the main purpose of the exercise we have gone through has been to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations system. However, we are aware that there were other efforts that were not necessarily aimed at promoting the democratic character of this body. This was, is and will continue to be a cause of anxiety to most of us. It is for that reason that Zimbabwe wishes to place on record its understanding of the crucial paragraphs 6 and 7 on the budgeting process, which have a potential for subverting the democratic principles governing the Organization.
It is our understanding that the existing practice of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in reaching decisions is to do so without a vote. It is therefore our interpretation that the phrase "existing practice of reaching decisions by consensus" when applied to the Committee's present practice can mean only the practice of coming to decisions without a vote. Otherwise, it has no meaning at all. It is also my delegation's understanding that the Committee cannot be said to have a single practice of arriving at its decisions. Consecruently, we take it that the word "practice" in the English text is used in the plural form, ' just as is the case in the unofficial language of the text, and therefore the Committee is not being restricted by paragraph 6 to following any one practice.
Zimbabwe recognizes that in the English language "consensus" has at least three meanings. First, it may be taken as being synonymous with general agreement - or unanimity, for short. Secondly, it may designate a judgement arrived at with the concurrence of most of those concerned. That is, it reflects the majority view. Finally, it may be ecruatecl with group solidarity, sentiment and
belief.
Given this array of possible interpretations of "consensus", my delegation is of the view that the only interpretation that is in consonance with paragraph 5 is its second meaning: a judgement arrived at with the concurrence of most of those concerned - that is, it reflects the majority view.
Zimbabwe therefore rejects as invalid any interpretation that seeks by the purported codification of a delaying mechanism in the decision-making process of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination to derogate from the operational provisions of the Charter and the General Assembly's rules of procedure.
With those few observations, we hope that those who have brought us here by withholding their assessed contributions will now accept their obligation to the Organization. For if that does not happen, this will have been an exercise in futility, significant only in that the sharks have had an opportunity to taste
blood.
EMS/16
Mr. ALATAS (Indonesia)
The resolution we have just adopted can
undoubtedly be regarded as one of the major achievements of this forty-first session of the General Assembly. I therefore join those who have spoken before me, and pay a warm tribute to you, Mr. President, for the laudable and dedicated efforts you have exerted to help us arrive at the present consensus. Our sincere appreciation goes also to those delegations that have worked closely with you in the negotiating group throughout these past agonizing weeks.
I would be less than honest if I were to say that my delegation is entirely satisfied with the text before us. However, being realistic, Sir, we concur with you that under the present circumstances draft resolution A/41/L.49/Rev.l, which we all know was the result of long and painstaking negotiations, represented the best possible compromise at this time. It is clear that what we have achieved today is but a first step in our effort to address the complex issues of the administrative and financial functioning of the united Nations. As recommendations 16 and 25 of the report of the Group of 18 clearly suggest, and as is now indicated in section I of the resolution just adopted, quite a number of the recommendations of the Group of 18 - for instance those in chapter II of its report, on the intergovernmental machinery and its functioning, and in chapter III, on the structure of the Secretariat - imply the need for further studies or reviews before final decisions can be taken, we expect that the studies or reviews that are going to be made will take into account not only the views of the Group of 18, but also the views expressed by delegations during the debate on agenda item 38.
In that regard, my delegation maintains its view pertaining to the structure of the Secretariat, namely that any fundamental change affecting the status of Secretariat units established by intergovernmental decision should have the approval of the relevant intergovernmental bodies and cannot be left solely to the discretion of the Secretary-General.
(Me. Ala tas, Indonesia)
In conclusion, let me express the hope that the major steps we have just agreed to take will indeed lead to the strengthening of the role of the United Nations and to achievement of the objectives of its Charter. To that end, I deem it appropriate to reiterate what I have already stated in our earlier debate on this item: that in the context of resolving the current financial crisis the effort to enhance the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the united Nations must be accompanied by a renewed commitment of explicit support for the Organization by all Member States, in accordance with their Charter obligations.
Mr. RAIMA (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): Now that the General Assembly is about to suspend its forty-first session, having adopted by consensus draft resolution A/41/L. 49, "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations", my delegation wishes to congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the other Assembly officers, the members of the Group of 18 and all those who participated in the various groups set up to collaborate in the formulation of the report, on your fruitful efforts to produce a resolution acceptable to all concerned.
Everyone must support the efforts of the Secretary-General’, there must be greater adherence to Charter provisions and to General Assembly rules of procedure if we are to ensure peace and security to all those who believe in enhancing the role of our Organization. By the same token, nutual trust and good will are vital if we are to achieve the noble purposes of the United Nations Charter. The best way to attain that goal and to breathe more strength and effectiveness into the United Nations, is for all Members to fulfil their Charter obligations. Only thus can the Organization achieve its purposes in today’s world - a world beset by
preparations for bilateral, regional and international conflict.
•	•	(Mr. Rahma, Oman)
Only through persistent, sincere efforts to provide all people with a life of dignity, peace and security can the United Nations eliminate the spectre of war.
Mr. KITTAN I (Iraq)*. On 15 October last, my delegation had occasion to present its views on die fundamental issues underlying this item. I shall not repeat them now, especially since previous statements this afternoon have made this redundant. Instead, I wish to share with members some thoughts for the next 12 months. I wish briefly to address four or five points.
If the euphoria so clearly manifested this afternoon in this Hall is not to disappear into thin air - as did the euphoria present here for two weeks during the oommemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the Organization - at least some of the hopes I am about to express must be realized. First, nothing, in my hunble opinion, would enhance the chances of translating the important resolution we have just adopted into reality so nuch as immediate action by those Menbers that are in arrears in their contributions to the regular budget - illegally in arrears - to end their delinquency without any further delay and promptly meet their obligations to the budget of the United Nations. I hope they will do so. That would open the door upon a new era of co-operation in the implementation of the resolution just adopted. The Secretary-General has again made an urgent appeal in that regard, and we endorse it.
In practice, when we say "Member States" we mean the executive branches of the Governments of those States, for the united Nations always calls itself an intergovernmental organization. My second hope is that Member States - and their executive branches in particular - will do everything in their power to counter the constant "United Nations-bashing". I hope that, if today's achievement means anything it means that every Member Government will do everything in its power to restore confidence in the united Nations and in the credibility of the Organization
EMS/16	A/41/PV.102
54-55
(Mr. Kittani, Iraq)
and to make extra efforts actively to counter, within its national boundaries, those forces that are out to destroy the United Nations and that continuously tell us that there is no constituency for the United Nations in their country.
56
(Mr, Kittani, Iraq)
I always thought that in each country the strongest constituency for the United Nations was precisely the executive branch of that Government which is responsible for undertaking the obligations on behalf of that State under the Charter.	'
The third point I should like to emphasize once again is the enormous role of the Secretary-General in this very area of administrative and financial reforms. It is our hope and prayer - and our appeal - that the Secretary-General will not be deterred: on the contrary,, that he will be encouraged to exercise fully his Charter mandate, as well as other mandates given to him by the General Assembly, and that he will be encouraged to play an active part, with the full co-operation of Member States, instead of their constantly trying to deprive him of that which is rightfully his under the Charter. We look to the Secretary-General and his colleagues in the Secretariat to guide us actively and to tell us what is needed to carry out not only these reforms but others, as I mentioned on 15 October, which were not even referred to by the Group of 18.
On this point, in less than two weeks the Secretary-General will begin a new-term with a unanimous and enthusiastic mandate from the Assembly - spearheaded, incidentally, by the five Permanent Members of the Security Council. That, indeed, puts us all - the Permanent Members, especially - under an obligation to give the Secretary-General what he has asked for in order to carry out his mandate in his second five-year term of office.
The fourth point I want to make is by way of a reminder. I hate to sermonize, but administrative and financial reform and efficiency important and laudable though it be, should never in the context of the United Nations be seen as an end
in itself. It can only make sense as a means to an end, because in the final
57
(Mr. Kittani, Iraq)
analysis the success or failure of the Organization will never be measured by how much money it has spent, whether it is slightly less - as it is now - or slightly more than the cost of a nuclear submarine. Its success or failure will be measured by the ability or failure of the Organization to solve, and to remove from our agenda chronic political, economic and social items - items that have the persistent habit of not going away. For that to be achieved, and for the United Nations to be a success and really efficient, we ave to turn a new page. As so many of my colleagues have said this afternoon, we must bear in mind that the United Nations is important to every Member State, and some of us have to adopt new attitudes in order to make the United Nations work towards the solution of these problems.
In conclusion, nothing would please my delegation more than to come back next year and see the adoption of this draft resolution without a vote have a material effect on the budget itself. Nothing would please us more than to see the major contributors, and others, who now pay 75 per cent of the budget, vote enthusiastically for the next budget.
Finally, I am not going to congratulate you, Sir, but I want to tell you that we in Asia take particular pride in the fact that it was under your presidency, a representative of the Asian group, and due to your indefatigable efforts, infinite patience, understanding and courtesy, that this resolution was adopted.
Mr. TELEMANN (Norway): My delegation would like to add its voice to the expressions of satisfaction with the resolution which has just been adopted by consensus this afternoon. It represents the end result of a long, and occasionally
arduous and complex process which has occupied much of the attention and energy of
58
(Mr. Tellmann, Norway)
our Organization over the last 12 months. We hope and trust that the adoption tonight of the draft resolution contained in document A/41/L.49/Rev.l will mark the beginning of a reform process that will lead to greater efficiency in the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
We would also like, as so many other delegations have done, to pay tribute to you, Mr. President, for the most able and competent way in which you have guided our negotiations.
The implementation of this resolution will necessarily require great skill, perseverance and sensitivity on the part of everyone concerned. I can assure you, Mr. President, and through you the Secretary-General that my delegation will always be ready to assist in any way we can to achieve this goal.
Finally, I will not fail to convey to the Chairman of the Group of 18, Ambassador Vraalsen, the kind words which have been expressed by various delegations concerning the conduct and work of the Group of 18.
The PRESIDENT: We have heard the last speaker on this item.
AGENDA ITEM 41
QUESTION OF EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION ON AND INCREASE IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
The PRESIDENT: I understand that there is no reouest to consider this item at the present session.
If this is the case, may I take it that the Assembly decides to include the item in the provisional agenda of the forty-second session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 43
QUESTION OF CYPRUS
The PRESIDENT: Members will recall that, on 20 September 1986, the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the present session but deferred a decision on the allocation of the item to an appropriate time in the future.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to leave the Question of Cyprus open at the present session.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that understanding and decides to retain the item on the agenda of its forty-first session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 44
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT: I have received a recuest to the effect that this item be retained on the agenda of the current session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to retain this item on the agenda of the forty-first session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 45 CONSEQUENCES OF THE PROLONGATION OF THE ARMED CONFLICT BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ The PRESIDENT: In connection with agenda item 45, I have received a request that it be kept on the agenda of the current session.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides to retain this item on the agenda of the forty-first session.
It was so decided.
PENDING APPOINTMENTS
AGENDA ITEM 33 (continued)
POLICIES OF APARTHEID OF THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH AFRICA
The PRESIDENT: In connection with agenda item 33, I should like to draw the attention of menbers to resolution 41/35 F of 10 November 1986. By paragraph 5 of that resolution the Assembly established the Intergovernmental Group to Monitor the Supply and Shipping of Oil and Petroleum Products to South Africa. By paragraph 6 the Assembly authorized me to appoint, in consultation with the Chairmen of the regional Groups and the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 11 Member states as members of that Group on the basis of equitable geographical distribution and to ensure representation of oil-exporting States and shipping States.
As it will be necessary to hold further consultations on this matter, may I consider that it is the wish of the General Assembly to entrust the President with pursuing this matter in accordance with the provisions of resolution 41/35 F? It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 115 (continued)
PATTERN OF CONFERENCES
The PRESIDENT; with regard to agenda item 115, I should like to draw the General Assembly's attention to resolution 41/117 B adopted on 5 Decenber 1986.
I should like to inform members that, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of that resolution I have consulted with the Chairmen of the regional Groups and have appointed, on the basis of an equitable geographical balance, the following 22 Member .States to serve on the Committee on Conferences for a one-year term beginning on 1 January 1987: five from Africa - Algeria, Egypt, Kenya, Senegal and Tunisia? four from Asia - Cyprus, Indonesia, Japan and Sri Lanka; three from Eastern Europe - the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the German Democratic Republic, and the union of Soviet Socialist Republics; four from Latin America - Argentina, the Bahamas, Chile and [fexico; and six from Western European and other States - Austria, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America.
ORGANIZATION OF WORK
The PRESIDENT? In the light of the action already taken at its 53rd, 96th and 101st meetings, as well as at the present meeting, the General Assembly has decided to retain on the agenda of the forty-first session the following; agenda item 38, "Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the united Nations"; agenda item 43, "Question of Cyprus"; agenda item 44, "Implementation of the resolutions of the united Nations"; agenda item 45, "Consequences of the prolongation of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq"; agenda item 62 (d), "Comprehensive programme of disarmament"; agenda item 140,
(The President) "Current financial crisis of the united Nations"^ and agenda item 146, "Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 27 June 1986 concerning military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua: need for immediate compliance". With those exceptions, therefore, we have concluded our consideration of all the items on the agenda of the forty-first session.
CLOSING STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT: At the inaugural meeting on 16 September 1986, as representatives will recall, I stressed the need for a "better united Nations for a better world". It was a reflection of the ardent aspiration of millions of people around the world whose hopes were enshrined in the Charter of this institution. It has been nearly three and a half months since then and during this period all of us have worked hard. As the current phase of the forty-first session draws to a close, perhaps it would be appropriate for us to ponder for a moment on our efforts and take stock oi our collective endeavours.
It would be in order, I beli-ve, to ask ourselves: Are we any closer to our goal than when we set out? To my mind, the short answer is yes. Our labours in the pursuit of our objectives in the past few months have not been in vain. When we began, the United Nations was confronted with a crisis of confidence. While the crisis has not dissipated in its entirety, a modicum of confidence in the system has been restored. This was attained through the relentless efforts of all representatives. For this the United Nations system owes you all a deep sense of gratitude.
I should like to sunmarize briefly our work during the current session and
bring out into sharper relief the most significant features. The forty-first
session of the United Nations General Assembly was faced with 146 items on the agenda. That was doubtless a formidable list, but as a result of co-operation and mutual understanding on the part of all delegations it was possible for most committee work to be concluded by the end of November. Furthermore, this was done without any curtailment of substantive-discussions on any of the items. -It was made possible by the dedication and commitment of the committees and their Chairmen. Only some issues before the Fifth Committee continued to be considered into December, but all representatives are aware of the reasons therefor.
I must at this point convey my deep appreciation to all representatives for heeding my appeal with regard to the necessity of conforming to schedules and work programmes. In some meetings the requirement of a quorum was dispensed with. We succeeded in underscoring the importance of punctuality. In terms of the number of resolutions, we were able to achieve mergers where possible, consensus where desirable, and reductions where practicable. Our main thrusts were on the rationalization of work and the displacement of quantity by quality. I feel that on both counts our success was commendable. These were no mean achievements.
This session marked the culmination of the observance of the International Year of Peace. We held a commemorative meeting to celebrate the adoption of the International- Covenants on Human Rights. An important action on the part of the General Assembly was the reappointment of our distinguished Secretary-General to a second term of office. The Assembly pronounced itself emphatically and in unequivocal terms against the abhorrent practice of apartheid, gave a clarion call
(The President)
for a dur stole and comprehensive solution to the problems of Palestine and the Middle East, urged the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan and Kampuchea, deliberated upon the situation in Central America, and gave its verdict in favour of the immediate independence of Namibia.
Peace, as you well know, is not just the absence of war. It is the global ambience of harmony in the interrelationship of States and nations. It is heartening to detect the general intellectual acceptance of the indivisibility of peace. I have noted with considerable happiness the widening belief that the acquisition of weaponry, nuclear or otherwise, does not enhance security. This is a major step forward in the conversion of disarmament from an idea to a faith. In our deliberations on disarmament, on which we have adopted 65 resolutions, we have been able to stress the most pressing issues such as the need for, inter alia, a comprehensive test ban treaty, adequate security measures for non-nuclear States, reduction of budgets for weapons procurement, and commitments to non-proliferation both vertical and horizontal.
On the economic and social front, our achievements have been noteworthy. A significant feature of the resolutions on economic and finanicial Questions is that as a result of rationalization of work their number was reduced by nearly half, and all but 10 were adopted by consensus. The resolution on the external debt problems of developing countries is particularly worthy of mention, because no agreement on the matter was possble in previous years. No less important is the adoption of the consensus resolution on food and agricultural problems, which provides directions for joint efforts by the international community for further progress in the area. The 26 resolutions and three decisions relating to the International Campaign against Traffic in Drugs reflect our concern on these important issues.
A deepening financial crisis loomed large over us as the forty-first session of the United Nations General Assembly commenced its work. While the crisis is still very much with us, there is also a keen sense of urgency to overcome. I am happy to note the positive response of the Member States to the many appeals by the Secretary-General and by this Assembly. I am also gratified that the Secretary-General is continuing with his short-term economy measures.
In our consideration of the report of the High-Level Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the Efficiency of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the United Nations, there has been a positive indication of the desire on the part of the Member States to arrive at a broad agreement. The resolution adopting the recommendations of the Group and introducing a significant innovation in the budget procedure of the Organization bears ample testimony to this fact. The adoption of that historic resolution, implementation of which will now begin, where possible, without delay, can truly be considered an achievement of this session of which all of us can be justly proud.
Allow me to digress for a moment, only to enter a caveat. One cannot afford to be unduly complacent over this. We still have a long way to go. The changes introduced in the budgetary process in an effort to seek the much eluded broadest agreement will have to undergo the acid test of practicability. I earnestly hope that Member States will approach this challenge with vision and a sense of commitment.
In my inaugural address I underscored the need to strengthen the role of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Secretary-General as vital instruments to secure peace and promote development. Further experience during this session has convinced me of the need first to examine this question closely and come up with concrete proposals on how the objectives could best be achieved. Secondly, there exists a reouirement for strengthening and broadening the role of the United Nations itself and a systematic approach towards making its deliberations more purposeful and result-oriented. Finally I feel we must reverse the trend increasingly gaining ground in the system to judge issues not on their merit but by individual and group interest. This tendency has the potential for eroding the effectiveness and the moral weight of the world body, and must be
halted without further ado.
Perhaps we should at this point briefly review the place of the United Nations system in the body politic of contemporary international society. The founding fathers of the Organization had a vision of a new strife-free world. They crafted the Charter ever so carefully to serve as a fundamental law of inter-State relations. They sought to set up a framework of rule’ and code of a behaviour for nation-States. But, as the classical Greeks used to say, one never steps into the same river twice; everything is in a state of flux. The system was born on one set of assumptions, which was replaced almost immediately by a new set of political realities. This required and continues to require continuous readjustments, and the success of the world body largely depends on our ability to effect these. .
The public commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter is nearly universal. The membership has proliferated rapidly, and today, ironically, some of its intramural problems are accentuated by its own success in achieving a primary aim - decolonization - for the larger the membership, the greater the likelihood of differences.
What has the United Nations been able to achieve in our times? How has it served the global community? The aueries merit an analytical response.
First, the United Nations has provided for all of us a grand parliament of nations. Both the strong and the weak countries profit from its function as a barometer of global public opinion. It is a forum for all States, big and small, to air their views. For instance, the forty-first session of the United Nations General Assembly was addressed by 13 Heads of State, seven Prime Ministers, eight Deputy Prime Ministers and as many as 103 Foreign Ministers. It allows for the expression of pent-up emotions, which reduces the potentialities of actual conflict. It provides a platform to commend good actions and condemn bad ones. It
holds out the benefit of multilateral diplomacy for the smallest of States that
would otherwise ba denied these interactions. Many a crisis has been resolved in its corridors, even before detection by the media. -	;
Secondly, it provides security insurance for the weaker States, The fear of international opprobrium, and at times action, often precludes the strong from aggressing against the weak. To newer States, recognition by it, or its membership, is a seal of legitimacy, a symbol of sovereignty. I recall how a major foreign-policy goal of my own country in the first couple of years following independence was simply to be able to join this Organization.
.	} .	(The President)
Thirdly, It is a source Of support to the development endeavours of the global needy. The specialized agencies have done yeoman's work in this respect. This includes technical assistance to projects, expansion in food, production, succour to refugees, eradication of contagious diseases, protection of the rights of women and children, human rights in general, provision of disaster relief and much more. In fact, some of the United Nations signal achievements have been in social, economic and humanitarian spheres. This is also the forum where the development debate is gradually gaining momentum. It has been said that much of the insecurity of the world is connected with the division between the rich and the poor countries. If that be so, the United Nations is the place where positive contributions to broader security are possible, however painful and laborious the process.
Fourthly, the United Nations is an intellectual confluence of varied minds, a meeting-place of a conglomeration of politicians, diplomats, professionals, scholars, researchers, men and women of learning and letters from all over the world. They apply their minds to the issues and problems that confront us - military, diplomatic, legal, social, humanitarian, scientific and technical. They debate and discuss and record their views and findings. The Secretariat, which is itself a microcosm of the wide world, produces an incredibly vast plethora of documentation, which must be a joy to researchers in many fields.
There are undeniably areas where the United Nations has disillusioned us. It has not succeeded in providing the collective security as envisioned in the Charter. It has not been able to prevent many wars from breaking out in different parts of the world. It has not succeeded in negotiating disarmament, either nuclear or conventional. It has not managed to redress the imbalance between the world's rich and the poor. The list can be long, if you wish, but perhaps one
should bear in mind that the fact that the United Nations has had least success in
(The President) these areas indicates that efforts in those spheres should be redoubled and not lessened, and that more, not fewer, resources should be allocated to them.
It is my bounden duty to convey my sincere thanks to all of you for your co-operation and your contribution to our work. May I, on your behalf, express our deepest gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar for his unswerving support and counsel. I am in debt to Mr. William Buffum, the under-Secretary-General for General Assenbly Affairs, whose advice and guidance a ire of invaluable help to ray work. I wish to coninend the untiring efforts of the Vice-Presidents, the Chairmen and the Rapporteurs of the different Committees and their bureaux, who have significantly contributed to what we have achieved. Thanks are also due to a host of Secretariat functionaries, seen and unseen - conference officers, editors, interpreters, translators, secretaries, typists, security personnel, messengers, caterers and cleaners - who have provided us assistance in every possible way.
We are about to adjourn our work for this phase of the current session. We are about to return to our homes and usher in a New Year. I hope for all of you it is both happy and prosperous. I convey to you all the greetings of the season.
I hope we go back with a deepening commitment and a firmer belief that the United Nations is a fine idea. It is, therefore, an institution worth preserving. It requires your support and sympathy to survive and succeed. I am positive that these would be forthcoming. I thank you all. SUSPENSION OF THE SESSION
I hereby declare the forty-first session of the General Assenbly suspended.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.
tO»!®
United Nations GENERAL ASSEMBLY FORTY-FIRST SESSION Officiel Records*
FIRST COMMITTEE 23rd meeting held on 28 October 1986 at 10.30 a.m. New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 23rd MEETING Chairman: Mr. ZACHMANN (German Democratic Republic)
CONTENTS
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
•Tfca tecord ta 1^1 w nKThfe* (\ntAihW AMd ta trai wtki ita MftaM al « mtataf et taf M |MHm uAtr*^ ^Am .m »eH .■/ ita ¿^ ./^Atawtata M tat < taf w( taf U^wl lnw* Uwg tauat o»im IX I T^J } IAiW Puntai Piala tal imuta’taJ ta • «‘W '* ** **Ì
(«Alitai «Ut Bt lattata »taf ita rW uf ita manta, m • accertar Uumta Ita t#kCumusi
Distr. GENERAL A/C.1/41/PV.23 31 October 1986 ENGLISH
86-63135 2385V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN» Today the First Committee is holding a special meeting in observance of Disarmament Week. In so doing, we continue a tradition that was istablJshed by the General Assembly at its first special session devoted to disarmament.
It is a great honour and pleasure for me t>- welcome to the Committee on this occasion His Excellency Mr. Humanyun Rasheed Choudhury, President of the General Assembly at its forty-first session. Let me. Sir, on behalf of the entire Committee and on my own behalf, congratulate you not only on your election as President of the General Assembly at this year's session, but also on the consummate diplomatic skill and great effectiveness with which you are fulfilling the high responsibilities entrusted to you.
I also have the distinct honour and pleasure of welcoming to the First Committee His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations. On behalf of the entire Committee and on my own behalf, I extend to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations on your reappointment as Secretary-General. I am confident that your vast knowledge and experience and your tireless dedication to advancing the cause of peace and the noble objectives of the United Nations will help enhance the role of the Organization in resolving the pressing problems facing mankind.
Al a time when the arms race is continuing unabated and when mankind is threatened with the extension of the arms race into outer space, the original aims of conunemoratIng Disarmament Week - namely, to make the world public aware of the increasing dangers of war and to generate widespread public understanding of and active support for the objectives of arms limitation and disarmament - are more timely and relevant than ever before.
(The Chairman)
At its fortieth session the General Assembly proclaimed 1986 the International Year of Peace. In the process of implementing that decision, we have witnessed manifold and far-reaching initiatives by States to ensure conditions of peace and security in the world and to save future generations from the scourge of war.

(The Chairman’;
The observance of Disai marnent Week provides an opportunity for all Member States of the Organization as well as for all people to recall their joint commitment to preserve peace on our globe, to ban the danger of nuclear annihilation of mankind and to promote détente as well as trust and peaceful co-operation among all peoples and countries.
The meeting of the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States of America in Reykjavik earlier ^his month was undoubtedly a major political event. It was an important step in a complex and difficult dialogue. This has been recognized by Member States during our deliberations in the First Committee. Although they expressed regret that the meeting did not fulfil expectations, nevertheless, they also expressed sincere hope that the prospects for a historic breakthrough that emerged will continue and that the progress achieved at that stage will be further elaborated in the framework of bilateral negotiations.
It is my beliei that the results of the Reykjavik meeting provide a significant impetus for the multilateral disarmament process and should, therefore, also encourage us here to induct our deliberations in a businesslike and constructive manner. I am happy to note that in the course of our debates Member States have already expressed their willingness to do so.
The proposals and ideas that have been put forward clearly show the readiness and determination to seek possibilities for the settlement of those questions that are important for a viable and secure future for humanity. Among such proposals, I may mention those related to the prevention of an arms race in outer space and its termination on earth, a call for the immediate cessation of all nuclear-weapon tests, measures for conventional disarmament, the elaboration of a global ban on chemical weapons as well as the achievement of regional disarmament measures.
(The Chairman)
On the occasion of Disarmament Week, we should rededicate ourselves to our common responsibility and commitment to bolster the unique role of the United Nations in ensuring peace, achieving arms limitation and disarmament a.id strengthening the security of all States as well as to promote public awareness, understanding and support for the realization of those vital goals.
It is now my pleasure to call upon the President of the General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Humayun Rasheed Choudhury.
Mr, CHOUDHURY (President of the General Assembly): I welcome this opportunity to address the First Committee at its special meeting dedicated to Disarmament Week. This observance affords us the opportunity to reflect on the state of this armed world In which we live, and the continuing accumulation of lethal weapons and destructive potential.
Ever since the very first General Assembly session, the subject of disarmament has received continuous att ntion at the United Nations, yet the attainment of a world free of arms seems now more remote - and indeed, Utopian - than it did four decades ago.
Even sc, the developments over the last year, and especially the last month, give reason for hope. Thinking back to October 1985, at the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, I recall the many sombre statements that were made on the lack of progress in the field of arms limitation and disarmament. There seemed to be no movement, no advances on the issues under negotiation.
Since that time, much has happened, both in multilateral and bilateral forums, which has given momentum to the arns limitation process. In November 1985, the leaders of the two most powerful States engaged for the first time in six «ears in direct discussion. Subsequently, 1986 has witnessed a measure of progress in the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, particularly on the question of chemical
weapons. Tbe Review Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention had a positive outcome and the Conference on Disarmament in Europe successfully concluded its work in Stockholm. Earlier this month, at the meeting between General Secretary Gorbachev and President Reagan in Iceland, proposals were made that were more far-reaching than any put forward in recent years.
The international community has expressed its disappointment at the fact that no agreement was reached in Reykjavik, that the fleeting opportunity to reach a truly historic accord was not jointly seized. Nevertheless, the existence of political will to conclude an agreement was clearly demonstrated, and it is vital that the momentum created must not be lobt. I call upon the Soviet Union and the United States to ensure that the proposals which are still on the table are further negotiated, and I trust that they will lead to mutually acceptable positions and, finally, to signed agreements.
We ill have a stake in disarmament. We all wish our children and grandchildren to grow up in a peaceful world without fear of armed conflict, war cr a nuclear holocaust. Agreements to limit and reduce arms are one step, but we should also look to a world in which resources now squandered on the arms race are used to enhance the world, instead of endangering it, to improve the quality of life on Earth, instead of destroying it.
Such vision does indeed exist, though it does not always prevail. The International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which was to take place last summer, is part of that vision of a world in which disarmament, development and security are but different facets of one issue. It is my hope that the holding of the conference can indeed be agreed upon at thir session of the General Assembly.
(The President ot the General Mutably)
The momentum gained on dll the issues on the disarmament agenda needs to be sustained) and the Member States represented in the first Committee have an important role to play in this respect. Disarmament Week was created to "foster the objectives of disarmament" - what better way than by showing a spirit of pragmatism and compromise, by a willingness to confront the substantive issues and address specific issues that stand in the way of progress.
It seems Utopia», to think of a world without weapons. But it is not Utopian to want to live in a world with fewer weapons, to live in a world which does not spend some $900 billion per year on armaments, but that spends it on sore human and worthy causes.
Achieving meaningful arms limitation agreements is no easy task. It can only be the result of complex negotiations, of political give-and-take and, finally, of taking that extra step necessary to overcome the last obstacle that may stand in the way of an accord. Hie responsibility for this also lies with you, the representatives to the First Committee. I hope that you will discharge this task and this responsibility to the best of your conscience. That is the spirit in which, I believe, Disarmament Week should be observed.
The CHAIRMAN: It is my pleasure now to call upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: When I addressed this Committee last year on the occasion of Disarmament Week, I linked this observance to the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. That occasion saw many expressions of support for the Organization and renewed commitment to the objectives for which the United Nations was founded, including disarmament and arms reduction. Now it is once again time to undertake a review, to look at the progress - or lack of it -that has been made in the disarmament agenda. This review assumes an added dimension during the International Year of Peace, as 1986 was proclaimed by the General Assembly, for disarmament and peace are inextricably linked.
Eight years have passed since the establishment of Disarmament week by the General Assembly at its first special session devoted to disarmament. The objective of eliminating nuclear weapons and restraining the conventional arms race Is still far from being attained. Achievements in this field have, during these years, been too few, despite the increasing awareness of the grave danger and economic disadvantage inherent in the present course of arms accumulation. In addition to quantity, the quality of armaments is becoming ever more refined and sophisticated, due to technological developments that were unimaginable just two or three decades ago.
We must remind ourselves time and again that the world in which we live is threatened with the possibility of annihilation. Must the survival of the world hang indefinitely by a fragile thread? Must we live in a world where the shadow of a nuclear catastrophe is ever present, where badly needed human and material resources are diverted from more useful and urgent needs?


In 1978 the General Assembly proclaimed that mankind was confronted with a choice: halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament or face annihilation. We cannot but choose the first course of action, but this implies the need for positive action. Negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on the complete prohibition and destruction of chemical weapons have been productive. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Weapons concluded its work successfully.
These signs of progress helped to set the scene for the recent meeting in Iceland between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States. The nuclear-weapon States, especially the two most powerful, have an awesome responsibility towards humanity, and the international community has a right to expect that no opportunities will be missed to achieve concrete results. The meeting in Reykjavik was one such opportunity. It proved that high-level dialogue can result in dramatic initiatives, that major shifts are possible on issues long the subject of indecisive negotiations.
It is now, I believe, clearer than ever that, with the necessary resolve, possibilities for significant progress on arms limitation and, indeed, reduction do exist. I consider this a hopeful development. We have seen that compromise can be visualized and defined, that differences can be reconciled.
Progress is needed not only in the nuclear field. A reduction in conventional armaments is important in many respects - not least because of its relevance to the elimination of nuclear weapons. In this connection, the agreement reached in Stockholm on confidence-building measures in Europe is most welcome. While it entails no reduction in weapons, it can encourage the greater trust which such reduction requires.
Disarmament Week was established to foster the objectives of disarmament. The need is now greater than ever to recognize the common interest in a safer world that must bring nations together in fruitful negotiations. We must devote our efforts to the gradual reduction of armaments, both nuclear and conventional. The difficulty and complexity of negotiations must not be allowed to turn nations from this objective which is shared by all the peoples of the world. In this Week we give special emphasis to disarmament, but it must remain a major, universal concern every day of the year.
The CHAIRMAN: I call upon the representative of Benin, who will speak on behalf of the Chairman of the Group of African States.
Mr. SOGLO (Benin) (interpretation from French)» It is a great honour for me to represent the Group of African States on such a special occasion as the observance of Disarmament Week.
It is highly significant mat, according to the annals of our Organization, tie first resolution adopted by the General Assembly, in 1946, dealt with disarmament, particularly the peaceful uses of atomic power and elimination of nuclear weapons. The world was emerging from the most devastating war in history, and Hiroshima and Nagasaki had just given the whole world the apocalyptic and terrifying spectacle of the effects of nuclear war.
That bitter lesson, unfortunately, was not very well learnt, for the myth has persisted that national security is a function of the number of megatons one possesses. There is a ceaseless accumulation of weapons, a ceaseless quest for more and more refined weapons and a growing world arsenal that is already over-supplied with devastating weapons. The so-called balance of terror brings with it a more and more devastating and costly arms race. From the four corners of the world there have been legitimate appeals and protests against this suicidal
race.
Therefore the observance of Disarmament Week is an opportunity for reflection on the deepest aspiration of mankind, namely, peace, whose essential components are disarmament, security and development. This three-sided relationship of disarmament, security and development, recognized for a long time by our Organization, represents a principal prerequisite for a stable world, to which the African States attach special importance. We can only regret that the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which was to have been held in Paris this summer, ultimatel did not take place.
There is no need to recall that Africa was the first to adopt a regional position on an important disarmament measure, namely, on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It was the first unilaterally to renounce the right to acquire nuclear weapons. In 1964, at their first summit meeting, the Africar, Heads of State or Government adopted the famous Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa. By resolution 203j (XX), of 3 December 1965, the General Assembly took note of that Declaration and called upon all states to respect it. Unfortunately, the apartheid régime, strengthened by the complicity of Western Powers, went against the common wil’ of the African States to make their continent a denuclearized zone. The nuclear capacity of racist South Africa constitutes a threat to peace and security not only in the region but throughout the world.
Therefore it is an imperative duty of the international community, and especially ot : '.se that art accomplices, to exert upon the racist Pretoria régime sufficient pressure '•o lead it to renounce its nuclear capability and to ensure that it complies with the Non-Proliferation Treaty and places all its nuclear facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards . That is the only assurance of peace and security for our continent.
(Mr. Soglo, Benin, We will continue to believe in Africa's wisdom in taking that decision, the more so since we feel that the colossal sums invested in the endless arms race are precious resourceri that could help us to emerge from our state of underdevelopment. It Is regrettable that $1 trillion should be wasted every year for the refinement of weapons of war and engines of destruction, whereas populations in Africa, Asia and other parts of the world are dying of hunger, millions of human beings are deprived of essential needs, and the great mrjority live below the recognized health standards.
This is the place once again to congratulate ourselves for the happy initiative of the United Nations Regional Centre for Disarmament in Africa, located in Lomé, Togo. Unfortunately, to enable that Centre to attain the goals set -promotion of the objectives of peace, disarmament and development in the region -necessary resources must be rapidly supplied to it.
We hope that the observance of Disarmament Week will not become a sterile ritual which we repeat year after year. On the contrary, we hope that it will contribute as concretely as possible to promoting the aims of peace and security in the world.
The CHAIRMAN» I now call on the Permanent Representative of Japan, His Excellency Mr. Kiyoaki Kikuchi, Chairman of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. KIKUCHI (Japan)» It is a great honour for me to address the First Committee on behalf of the Group of Asian States on the occasion of Disarmament Week. Today, as we begin the commemorative meeting, it is quite fitting to recall that at the first special session devoted to disarmament in 1978 the General Assembly decided to designate the week of 24 October, the anniversay of the founding of the United Nations, as Disarmament Week. Its dual purpose is, first, to create an atmosphere conducive to progress towards disarmament and, secondly, to increase public awareness of the dangers of the arms race.
In th« eight year« that Disarmament Week has been observed the world's stockpile of armaments - conventional and nuclear - have continued to grow; but, at the same time, I believe it is safe to say that the world's public is more acutely aware than ever before of the dangers inherent in the arms race, and its calls for disarmament are growing louder and more unified with each passing day. The members of the Asian Group commend the United Nations for all its efforts towards disarmament, including those m..de in the First Committee, at the two special sessions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,, and at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. We believe that Disarmament Week is also serving a useful purpose in providing a forum in which international public opinion can participate in this Organisation's disarmament efforts.
This year the First Committee commenced its debate the day after the meeting between the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union in Reykjavik ended. The entire world watched that meeting with great interest in the hope that a disarmament agreement would be reached. Although a conclusive agreement was not attained at that meeting, we are encouraged that considerable understanding over a wide range of issues emerged between the two leaders. We hope that the two super-Powers will make use of every opportunity to continue their dialogue and negotiations so as to make real progress towards disarmament.
At the same time I think it should be emphasized that all of us, as members of the international community, have important roles to play, one area in which we can all make contributions is the dissemination of information on disarmament. Indeed, as stated in the 1978 Final Document of the first special session devoted
to disarmament:
(Mr. Kikuchi, Japan) "Member States should be encouraged to ensure a better flow of information with regard to .he various aspects of disarmament to avoid dissemination of false and tendentious information concerning armaments, and to concentrate on the danger of escalation of the armaments race and on the need for general and complete disarmament under effective international control.- (S-10/2, para. 105) A world made safer through disarmament is a goal shared by all States, developed and developing, large and small, nuclear and non-nuclear, market-oriented and planned economy. Disarmament Week provides the Member States with excellent opportunity to rededicate themselves to United Nations efforts to enha ice international peace and security through the achievement of general and complete disarmament.
The CHAIRMAN; T now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, His Excellency Mr. Anatoly Gurinovich, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic)(interpretation from Russian): The current Disarmament Week fs being held in the International Year of Peace and this makes it particularly significant. In 61 countries, including all the socialist States, International Peace Year Commissions have been set up and they have done a great deal to implement the United Nations recommendations on the International Year arid to ensure the right of peoples to live in conditions of peace and freedom.
The States on whoje behalf I am speaking have done and are continuing to do everything possible to put an end to the arms race on Earth and prevent it in space. The unilateral obligation undertaken by the USSR not to be the firsi to use
nuclear weapons remains valid, as is the Soviet moratorium on all nuclear tests Introduced on 6 August 1985 - although the United States is carrying out nuclear-weapon tests. The USSR is also honouring its pledge not to put anti-satellite systems in outer space. A stage-by-stage programme has been worked out and set forth for the total elimination of nuclear and other types of weapons of mass destruction everywhere by the year 2000. Proposals have been put forward for substantial reductions in armed forces and conventional armaments from the Atlantic to the Urals, on the establishment of zones in Europe free from nuclear and chemical weapons, and for the strengthening of security in other parts of the world. It has been proposed that the United Nations should start work on a comprehensive system of international peace and security which would regulate relations between States in the military, political, economic and humanitarian fields. The socialist countries take into account the positions of various groups of States and are doing everything possible to narrow the differences on specific
disarmament problems.
At the Soviet-American summit meeting held at the prjposal of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the desire and readiness were expressed to take radical steps to achieve nuclear disarmament and to prevent the extending of the arms race into outer space.
Today, hearing in mind that during the general debate at plenary sessions, and in the course of the current discussion of disarmament issues in the
First Committee of the General Assembly at its forty-first session, the delegations of our Group of States have spelled out in detail the contents of those and other proposals and have demonstrated their timeliness and constructiveness, there is no need to dwell in any detail on our position. It is well known.
We reiterate our commitment to dialogue and to the search for agreement based on the fact that there are no weapons tnat the States of the socialist comm-snity would not be prepared to limit or ban on a reciprocal basis with effective ver ification.
May I now turn briefly to the organizational aspect of Disarmament Week, held within the framework of the United Nations. Unauestionably it is a good idea to have a special meeting and for it to be addressed by the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Chairmen of the regional groups. All speak of the desire for peace and the need for disarmament, but clearly that is not enough, We should all give some thought to what specifically can be done during that Week. Without claiming to have a full answer, 7 would suggest that the following possibilities be considered for the
future.
The five nuclear Powers should perhaps meet during one of the Weeks to discuss what could and should ’»e done to strengthen peace and disarmament.
Member States of the United Nations should make statements concerning the unilateral obligations they have assumed.
The representatives of public organizations fighting for peace and disarmament who nave in actual deeds proved their dedication to those goals should be enabled to take part in the events held within the framework of Disarmament Week.
Exhibitions and the screening of films devoted to the struggle Tor peace and disarmament should be arranged.
Holders of United Ne.•■ions disarmament fell hips should be involved in all these events.
The publication of special editions and information on disarmament issued by the Department of Public Information should be timed to coincide with the Week.
The resources of United Nations Radio and other information services should be used more actively during the Week to disseminate ideas of peace and disarmament.
Information from specialized agencies and other appropriate bodies within the United Nations system about their role and plans for tne future in the field of strengthening peace and for disarmament should be brought to the notice of the United Nations General Assembly.
Consultations on these and other possible proposals should be held within the framework of the United Nations Commission on Disarmament at its 1987 session.
These suggestions are certainly not meant to inply that actions of this kind should be undertaken only during Disarmament Week. We should always be at pains to undertake such actions. But something must he done to prevent Disarmament Week from being reduced to the mete hearing of speeches. It should be followed up with practical deeds and fresh momentum.
Of course, what is needed to that end is new political thinking by all of us, as well as new approaches and a willingness to stove from words to action. So we call on all the participants in this solemn meeting to act so that our next meeting, in 1987, will carry more weight ^nd contribute, in the interests of mankind and for the benefit of all peoples, to the inf*lamentation of measures to end the arms race, bring about disarmament and ensure peace and security.
As is demonstrated by the communiaué issued by the meeting of the Committee of Foreign Ministers of the Warsaw Treaty member States held in Bucharest on 14 and 15 October 1986, the socialist countries believe that
"the fundamental issue of our time is the strengthening of peace, curtailment of the arms race, and above all the nuclear- rms race, and elimination of the danger of nuclear catastrophe".
The socialist countries are doing their very best to build a world without wars and without weapons.
The CHAIRMAN; I call on the representative of Mexico, His Excellency Alfonso Garcia Robles, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American States.
Mr. GARCIA ROBLES (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): In observance of this week, which has been designated Disarmament Week, it would seem appropriate to review, albeit briefly, some of the most salient contributions of the Members of the United Nations in this sphere.
In doing so with regard to the States belonging to what is known as the utin American and Caribbean Group, of which my country is a member, I believe that in the first place mention must be made of the instrument officially known as the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, which is known also under the much shorter title of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, named after the auarter of Mexico City in which the instrument was signed on 14 February 1967.
Thanks to that Treaty, to which 25 States are now narties. Additional Protocol II of which has been 4gned and ratified by the five nuclear-weapon States to which it is addressed, the first zone free of those terrible weapons of mass destruction has now been established in territories that are densely populated.
It is a Treaty based on the principle of the total absence of nuclear weapons, a Treaty whose principles and purposes are summed up in its preamble in the following terms:
"That the military denuclearization of Latin America - being understood to mean the undertaking entered into internationally in this Treaty to *ep their territories for ever free from nuclear weapons - will constitute a measure which will spare their peoples from the sauandering of their limited resources on nuclear armaments and will protect them against possible nuclear attacks on their territories, and will also constitute a significant contribution towards preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and a powerful factor for general and complete disarmament, and
"That Latin America, faithful to its tradition of universality, must not only endeavour to banish from its homelands the scourge of a nuclear war, but must also strive to promote the well-being and advancement of its peoples, at the same time co-operating in the fulfilment of the Ideals of mankind, that is to say, in the consolidation of a permanent peace based on eaual rights, economic fairness and social justice for all, in accordance with the principles and purposes set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Charter of the Organization of American States." (A/C.1/946, pp. 4-5)
A similar meaning, at the international level, attaches to the contribution made by the Latin American and Caribbean countries at the first and second special sessions of the General Assembly of the United Nations devoted to disarmament which, as we know, took place in 1978 and 1982 respectively.
In the elaboration of each and every one of the parts of the Final Document -Introduction, Declaration, Programme of Action and Machinery - of the first of the special sessions I have just mentioned, the contribution of those countries played an important role in both the expression of alarm that:
"the continued arms race means a growing threat to international peace and security and even to the very survival of mankind" (resolution S-10/2, para. 2) and in the explicit recognition that:
"The hundreds of billions of dollars spent annually on the manufacture or improvement of weapons are in sombre and dramatic contrast to the want and poverty in which two thirds of the world's population live." (para. 16).
Hence it can be said that:
"There is also a close relationship between disarmament and development.
Progress in the former would help greatly in the realization of the latter." (para. 35).
The same applies to the statements that:
"The cessation of nuclear-weapon testing by all States ... would be in the interest of mankind" (para. 51)
and that:
"fte establishment of r.uclear-weapon~f ree zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned constitutes an important disarmament measure* (para. 60)
(Mr. Garcia Robles, Mexico) as well as to the declaration thati
"The United Nations... has a central role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament"(para. 114)
and to the definition of the organization and mandates of the First Committee of the General Assembly and of the organ now known as the Conference on Disarmament and of the Disarmament Commission.
The contribution of the States to which I have been referring made it possible, in my opinion, for the Assembly unanimously and categorically to reaffirm at its second special session ir. 1982 the validity of its decisions adopted four years previously at the first special session.
We should mention also, since this was due to the initiative of a Latin American State, Mexico, the launching of the World Disarmament Campaign on 7 June 1982 by a unanimous decision of the Assembly and which, since then, has been led by the Secretary-General of the Organization in a manner ensuring in all regions of the worldt
"the widest possible dissemination of information... on questions of arms limitation and disarmament, and the dangers relating to all aspects of the arms race and war, in particular nuclear war." (A/S—12/32, annex V, para. 4) It is true that the Assembly on that occasion did not succeed in adopting a document on the Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament, but it is equally true that the Latin American and Caribbean States, as may be seen in the appropriate document, reaffirmed:
"their determination to continue to cork for the urgent conclusion of negotiations on and the adoption of the Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament, which shall encompass all measures thought to be advisable in order to ensure that the goal of general and complete d sarmament under effective international control becomes a reality in a world in which
(Mr. Garcia Roblea, Mexico) international peace and security prevail, and in which a new international economic order is strengthened and consolidated." (A/S-12/32, para. 63). I should add in this connection that I have had the privilege of presiding since 1980 over the subsidiary body of the Conference on Disarmament entrusted with the preparation of that Programme.
Finally, I should like to mention that the group of six Heads of State or Qovernmnt of five different continents, which since 1984 has been endeavouring to contribu' ■ to the achievement of disarmament and the strengthening of peace, includes amor is leaders no less than two Latin American Presidents - those of Argentina and Mexico - something which is an implicit recognition of the valuable contribution made by the countries of this region to the ci se of disarmament, whose exceptional importance, as , said at the outset, we have sought to highlight through the establishment of Disarmament Week, which we are observing here.
The CHAIRMANi I now call on the Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, His Excellency Ambassador Hans Werner Lautenschlager, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. LAUTENSCHLAGER (Federal Republic of Germany)i I am greatly honoured to be able to address the First Committee on behalf of the C^up of Western European and Other States today, on the very special occasion of the culmination of Disarmament Week. It is a particular privilege for me to do so at a time when the International Year of Peace is drawing to a close and when the recent American-Soviet meeting at Reykjavik >s created prospects for bold new disarmament initiatives on an unprecedented scale.
The decision to । oclain the week commencing 24 October as a period to be dedicated to the objectives ol disarmament dates back to the first special session devoted to disarmament, in 1978. Since that time our Organization has annually
commemorated Disarmament Week, with the purpose of increasing public awareness of the dangers and burdens of the arms race and with the objective of creating an atmosphere conducive to piogress towards disarmament.
We seem to have come nearer to achieving at least one of those objectives during this year's Disarmament Weeki looking at the content of media messages around the world we can stfely claim that disarmament has become the very centre of public interest. Indeed, reports on ongoing events, commentaries, and news analyses all revolve around the prospects for progress in disarmament.
This year's discussion in the General Assembly and its First Oommitt.«* continues to centre on the indisputable fact hat weapon stockpiles, nuclear or conventional, remain much too large all around the world. However, encouraging developments have taken place over past years. In bilateral negotiations between the major military Powers the gap between the positions of both sides is narrowing Recently the European States, the United States and Canada agreed in Stockholm on a set of effective and verifiable confidence building measures that for the first time include mandatory on-site inspections. This outcome of the Conference on Security and Confidence Building Measures and Disa marnent in Europe will contribute to the security of all States in the region and will facilitate further steps towards arms reductions and disarmament.
A similarly positive climate prevailed during the Second Review Conference of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, held at Geneva during the month of September. It proved possible to streng ien significantly the régime of the Convention by agreeing on a comprehensive set of confidence-building measures opening the prospect for future improvement in the field of verification of compliance with the Convention.
May I conclude by expressing, on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, its firmly held view that the United Nations provides a unique public forum for presenting the views of its Members on the vital issue of disarmament and that the States members of the Group remain mindful of the role which the United Nations can play in promoting an exchange of ideas in support of the disarmament process. T.is forum has already done much to shape public opinion world-wide about the necessity of disarmament and arms control, thus furthering the awareness that the maintenance of peace and security is the most important aim we are all •’triving for. Disarmament Week gives us yet another opportunity to rededicate ourselves solemnly to this noble goal.
The CHAIRMANi We have thu , come to the conclusion of this meeting, which has been devoted to the observance of Disarmament Week.
The next meeting of the First Committee will take place tomorrow morning at 10.30. I should like to inform members that the following delegations have placed their nan.es on the list of speakers for that meetings the United states of America, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Austria, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Venezuela, the German Democratic Republic and Australia.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
PLENARY MEETINGS
VERBATIM RECORDS OF THE MEETINGS
UH W^V
DEC 7 _ 1088 UH/SACO^niOM
ANNEXES
27 May-1 June 1986
UNITED NATIONS
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
PLENARY MEETINGS
VERBATIM RECORDS OF THE MEETINGS
ANNEXES
27 May-1 June 1986
UNITED NATIONS
New York, 1988
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
Since the thirty-first session, the Official Records of the General Assembly have consisted of records of meetings, sessional fascicles for each of the Main Committees and the General Committee, annexes to the meeting records, supplements, the List of Delegations and the Check List of Documents. Information on other documents is given in the Check List and in the relevant annex fascicles.
*
* *
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
The Check List of Documents for the thirteenth special session is contained in the present volume.
CONTENTS
Page
Note of convocation.......................... v
Agenda...................................... vi
Check list of documents.................... vii
Part One
PLENARY MEETINGS.
1st meeting
Tuesday, 27 May 1986, at 10.40 dm.
AGENDA ITEM 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of Spain..................... 3
AGENDA ITEM 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation.	3
AGENDA ITEM 3:
Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth
. special session of the General Assembly:
(a)	Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee..................... 3
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS............... 3
AGENDA ITEM 4:
Election of the President of the General Assembly	3
STATEMENT BY T^E PRESIDENT..........	3
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARYGENERAL............................  4
ADDRESS BY MR. ABDOU DIOUF, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL AND CURRENT CHAIRMAN OF THE ASSEMBLY OF HEADS OF STATE AND GOVERNMENT OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY.................... 5
AGENDA ITEM 5:
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work................................ 8
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures 11
Page
2nd meeting
Tuesday, 27 May 1986, at 3.30 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 5:
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work (concluded) .......................	21
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)...........................  21
3rd meeting
Wednesday, 28 May 1986, at 10.30 a.m.
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (concluded) 55
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)............................ 55
4th meeting
Wednesday, 28 May 1986, at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)............................ 73
5th meeting
Thursday, 29 May 1986, at 10.35 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and .
Page
integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)............................. 113
6th meeting
Thursday, 29 May 1986, at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued).............................   129
7 th meeting
Friday, 30 May 1986, at 10.30 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)............................... 151
AGENDA ITEM 3:
Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly (concluded)'.
(b)	Report of the Credentials Committee ... 156
Page
8th meeting
Sunday1 June 1986, at 8.30 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 6:
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (concluded)........................   159
AGENDA ITEM 7:
Adoption, in an appropriate format, of the document or documents of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly.... 159
AGENDA ITEM 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation.. 166
CLOSURE OF THE THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION ...........................   166
Part Two
ANNEXES
Agenda item 3: Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General
Assembly:
(a)	Appointment of the members of the Creden-
tials Committee;
(b)	Report of the Credentials Committee..... 169
Agenda item 5: Adoption of the agenda and organization of work............................... 173
Agenda item 6: Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures................ 175
NOTE OF CONVOCATION
The Secretary-General of the United Nations presents his compliments to the Permanent Representative of ... to the United Nations and, in accordance with rule 10 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, has the honour to inform him/her that the thirteenth special session of the Assembly, on the critical economic situation in Africa, convened under paragraph 2 of resolution 40/40 of 2 December 1985, will open at United Nations Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 27 May 1986, at 9.45 a.m.
The provisional agenda, drawn up in accordance with rule 16 of the rules of procedure, will be circulated under the symbol A/S-13/1.
The Secretary-General wishes to remind the Permanent Representative that credentials should be issued for all representatives to the special session, in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, except with regard to those permanent representatives who are already authorized to represent their Governments at all sessions of the Assembly.
1 May 1986
AGENDA
1.	Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Spain.
2.	Minute of silent prayer or meditation.
3.	Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly:
(a)	Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;
(b)	Report of the Credentials Committee.
4.	Election of the President of the General Assembly.
5.	Adoption of the agenda and organization of work.
6.	Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and longterm development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures.
7.	Adoption, in an appropriate format, of the document or documents of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly.
CHECK LIST OF DOCUMENTS
NOTE. Listed below are all documents pertaining to the thirteenth special session. An asterisk after the agenda item indicates that the document is published in the corresponding annex fascicle included in this volume. For the numerical list of agenda items, see p. vi.
Document No.	Tide or description	Agendo item	Observations and references
A/INF/S-13/1	Communications received relating to General Assembly matters		
A/S-13/I	Provisional agenda of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly	5*	
A/S-13/l/Add.I	Annotated provisional agenda of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly	5	
A/S-13/2	The critical economic situation in Africa: report of the SecretaryGeneral	6	
A/S-13/3	Activities of the organizations and agencies of the United Nations system with regard to the critical economic situation in Africa: report of the Secretary-General	6	
A/S-13/4 and Corr.l	Report of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa		See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 1
A/S-13/5	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the Unital Nations: letter dated 27 May 1986 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General Assembly		
A/S-13/6	[Symbol not used[		
A/S-13/7	Letter dated 26 May 1986 from the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General	6	
A/S-I3/8-E/1986/115	Letter dated 27 May 1986 from the representative of the German Democratic Republic to the Secretary-General	.	6	
A/S-I3/9	Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the text of a message from the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the President of the General Assembly	6	
A/S-13/10	Letter dated 27 May 1986 from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the Secretary-General	6	
A/S-13/I1	Letter dated 28 May 1986 from the representative of Czechoslovakia to the Secretary-General	6	
A/S-13/12	Report of the Credentials Committee	3*	
A/S-13/13	Agenda of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly	5	See p. vi of this volume
A/S-13/14	Letter dated 30 May 1986 from the representative of Poland to the Secretary-General transmitting the text of a joint statement issued by the delegations of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics	6	
A/S-13/15	Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session	6*	
A/S-13/16	Resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly during its thirteenth special session		Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2
A/S-13/AC.1/L.1	Poland, on behalf of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: amendments to the draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990, as contained in document A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V		
A/S-13/AC.1/L.2	Draft resolution	6	See A/S-13/15, para. 8
Document No.	Title or description	Agenda item	Observations and references
A/S-13/AC.1/L.3	Draft report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session	6	
A/S-13/AC.1/SR.1-3	Summary records of the meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session		
A/S-13/PV.1-8	Verbatim records of the plenary meetings held by the General Assembly during its thirteenth special session		See Part One of this volume
A/RES/S-13/1 and 2	Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its thirteenth special session		See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2
Part One
PLENARY MEETINGS
Verbatim records of the meetings, held at Headquarters, New York, from 27 May to 1 June 1986
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
1st
PLENARY MEETING
Tuesday, 27 May 1986, at 10.40 a.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIÉS (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Spain
I.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure, I declare open the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
2.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The representatives observed a minute of silence.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee	,
3.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In accordance with rule 28 of the rules of procedure, and taking into account the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [see A/S-13/4 and Corr.I, sect. IP], I propose that the Credentials Committee consist of the same members as for the fortieth session, namely: Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Canada, China, Papua New Guinea, Suriname, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. If there is no objection, I shall consider the Credentials Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided (decision S-13/11).
4.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In this connection, I draw the attention of members of the General Assembly to a note verbale from the Secretary-General, dated I May 1986, in which it is stated that credentials should be issued for all representatives to the thirteenth special session, in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, except with regard to those permanent representatives who are already authorized to represent their Governments at all sessions of the Assembly.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
5.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before turning to the next item on the
agenda, I should like, in keeping with established practice, to draw the attention of the General Assembly to a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General [A/S-I3/5], informing the Assembly that two Member States are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
6.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now invite the Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of the General Assembly. In this connection, it should be noted that the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa recommended that the President of the General Assembly at its fortieth session, Mr. Jaime de Piniés of Spain, should serve in the same capacity at the thirteenth special session. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that recommendation?
It was so decided (decision S-13/12).
Statement by the President
I.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to take this opportunity to convey to the members of the General Assembly my profound gratitude at the honour which they have conferred upon me by entrusting to me the presidency of this special session. I am sincerely grateful for the confidence that has been placed in me.
8.	A few months ago it was my privilege, during the fortieth session, to preside over the meetings of the General Assembly held in connection with the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. That was a memorable occasion. The leaders of Member States, large and small, from all over the world appeared before the Assembly to reaffirm their commitment to the fundamental principles of the Charter and their support for the United Nations. But we must also remember the words of the Secretary-General at the closing meeting on 24 October 1985, that “devotion to principles needs to express itself in concrete, workable proposals and not in rhetoric only” [see 49th meeting, para. 8].
9.	In my view, therein lies precisely the purpose of the special session on the critical economic situation in Africa. One of the purposes of the United Nations enunciated in the Charter is the achievement of international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural and humanitarian character. All of us have endorsed that purpose; therefore it is our task in these meetings to give practical content to it by agreeing on concrete, workable proposals to support the efforts made by our brothers in Africa fully to develop the possibilities and potential of their continent, and thus
to make a greater contribution to the prosperity and wellbeing of the world.
10.	This is no easy task. We are all aware of the great variety and complexity of the problems facing the countries of Africa. The emergency caused by the recent drought emphasized the fragile nature of the present situation. Many of the questions that have been raised have a bearing on matters which have been debated without results here in the United Nations and in other forums. If it is desired that effective progress be made in this regard, it is necessary to adopt new, imaginative and creative approaches. None the less, the time available to us at this session is extremely limited.
11.	However grave the obstacles we face, I am convinced that there are genuine grounds for optimism. In the first place, I am impressed and extremely satisfied with the level of representation at this session. Member States have thereby demonstrated the importance they attach to our efforts. In this regard, I should like to extend a special welcome to Mr. Abdou Diouf, President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity.
12.	His presence at this session gives ground for optimism and demonstrates the clear and genuine commitment of the Governments of Africa to do whatever is necessary to restore and accelerate the rate of economic and social development in their countries. This is the message contained in the Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa adopted by the Assembly of Heads' of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985, which was given concrete expression in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.2 
13.	The decision of the African Governments means that they have to make real sacrifices. Their will does not depend on external support, but it is clear that this support is necessary if the efforts of the African Governments are to be successful without unnecessary delay and human suffering. In this respect, I am convinced that those that have associated themselves with Africa in the task of development by adopting by consensus at the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [resolution 39/29, annex], and by adopting at the fortieth session the resolution whereby it was decided to convene this special session [resolution 40/40], have shown their determination to respond positively by providing the necessary assistance.
14.	Finally, I welcomed the genuine solidarity with which the international community responded recently to the emergency caused by the drought that afflicted many countries in Africa. Whatever the sceptics may say, that response has shown that human solidarity really exists and that when we all work together it is possible to do the impossible.
15.	Let me take this opportunity also to extend a welcome to the representatives of the intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations invited to attend this session. The constant contribution of those organizations to the solution of the problems of Africa should be a source of inspiration to us in our debates.
16.	For many years I have had the opportunity to take part personally in the work of the General Assembly. I am aware of our failings and weaknesses, but I am also aware of the successes of the Assembly. During the fortieth session, in my closing statement at the end of the meetings commemorating the fortieth anniversary, I said:
“For many individuals all over the world, the United Nations is primarily synonymous with the struggle against hunger, with improving communications, with giving health assistance, and so many other fields in which multilateral co-operation offers benefits in a tangible and direct fashion.” [See 49th meeting, para. 30.]
17.	In the week which is now beginning let us work together to turn this image into a reality for Africa. We must do so because the problem of Africa is our own problem. We must do so because “We the peoples of the United Nations” have solemnly resolved to unite our strength to achieve peace and security and to promote the economic and social advancement of all peoples.
18.	The Secretary-General wishes to address the General Assembly at this time; I now call on him.
Statement by the Secretary-General
19.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): This special session of the General Assembly is taking place at a crucial juncture in the economic life of Africa. The importance which Member States attach to it is indicated by the level and quality of their representation here today. The presence among us of the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, Mr. Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal, further emphasizes the significance that the African countries attach to the work of this session. It is both a great honour and a privilege for us to be able to count on his experience and wisdom, which I am sure will serve as a source of inspiration in our discussions.
20.	The gravity of the economic situation in Africa is a matter of profound concern to me. My memory of the tragedy I witnessed when I visited the drought-affected regions of that continent is still vivid: thousands of men, women and children condemned to starvation and death, populations uprooted, the sick without hope of relief for their suffering because of inadequate medical facilities and supplies, and many of the survivors condemned to be handicapped for life.
21.	I concluded at the time that only through bold measures, within the framework of real co-operation based on international solidarity, would it be possible to avert economic catastrophe on that continent and revive the process of medium- and long-term development. Accordingly, I convened a series of meetings with Member States and representatives of specialized agencies to address the rapidly deteriorating situation, and as a result established an Office for Emergency Operations in Africa with the aim of saving the populations in immediate danger. 
22.	The tragedy of famine brought together the peoples of the whole world, who, in a remarkable movement of solidarity, responded generously to the appeal for assistance. This movement of solidarity, added to Africa’s own efforts, has saved millions of lives. While, with the return of the much-needed rains, the emergency situation has now become localized in only a small number of countries, the need for the international community to maintain the solidarity displayed in the face of the famine and transform it into a force for the recovery and long-term development of the continent remains. We cannot passively accept the possibility that the horrors of famine might again visit Africa in the next drought, as they surely will unless all of us here act energetically to prevent a repetition of the catastrophe.
23.	This session is an opportunity for the international community as a whole, in a joint effort with the African
countries, to adopt the measures that are so urgently needed. Africa has long recognized the need for an effective, concerted programme of action to promote social and economic growth based on self-reliance. The Lagos Plan of Action3 clearly reflects this concern.
24.	This was reaffirmed by the heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] in July last year at their Assembly’s twenty-first session; and was given specific content in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 for the next five years. At the same time, African Governments, convinced/that the United Nations system, in particular the General Assembly is an effective forum for sensitizing and mobilizing the international community, called for the convening of this special session. By agreeing unanimously to the OAU’s call for a special session of the General Assembly, the States Members of the United Nations assumed a clear commitment to work together towards that goal. 
25.	The international community cannot stand by and allow a further deterioration in the ability of the vast majority of African countries to meet their basic needs. Many of them find themselves crippled by their inability to maintain even minimal levels of essential imports on which their economic structures largely depend. Internal and external factors have complicated the situation— among them, on the one hand, the. widespread low level of productivity and the lack of structural transformation and, on the other, steeply rising debt service payments, depressed commodity prices and flagging flows of capital and credit. Furthermore, policies pursued by African Governments have sometimes been based on assumptions which have not always proved to be appropriate, or have not materialized.
[The speaker continued in English.] 
26.	The African countries are fully aware that their economic recovery is primarily their own responsibility. Whatever the magnitude of international assistance, it can only supplement their own efforts and sacrifices. This point was clearly affirmed at the meeting of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government in July 1985 at Addis Ababa. In Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery adopted at that meeting, African countries committed themselves to restructuring their economies and to introducing the appropriate policy reforms and adjustments, The Programme places emphasis on such key areas as agriculture, human resource development and the fight against drought and desertification.
27.	The cost and the sacrifices involved in that endeavour are enormous and well beyond the means of the countries affected. Although the largest part of the resources needed to implement the Programme will be generated locally, an increase in the inflow of external resources, particularly concessional finance, commensurate with the scale of the crisis is indispensable if the effort is. to succeed in a reasonable period of time. In recent months I have been in continuous consultation with President Diouf on the situation, and there has been close co-operation between the OAU and the United Nations.
28.	The international community has extended substantial support to Africa over the years. However, it. is obvious that this assistance has not always met expectations. This also applies to the support provided by the United Nations system. The proliferation and haphazard growth of projects have often harmed the development of recipient countries and made aid as much a part of the problems as their solution. The special session therefore provides the opportunity for the international community not only to make a clear commitment to provide
the necessary resources, but also to undertake the necessary changes in aid practice and co-ordination in order to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of the assistance provided.
29.	The special session has raised considerable hope in the hearts of millions of Africans. It is an opportunity for a new beginning in co-operation between African countries and their development partners. It is of paramount importance that the representatives of Africa who are attending it return to their respective countries with the assurance that a strong and durable partnership is emerging between Africa and the rest of the world.
30.	The special session can mark only the beginning of a fresh effort that needs to be sustained over time. It is therefore important that agreement be reached on adequate follow-up action and the monitoring of results achieved. However, it is essential that the African countries receive during the session a clear indication of their partners’ intentions, so that they may plan their own development on a realistic basis.	-
31.	African countries are embarking on a new course towards development. If they are left to pursue it alone, it will inevitably involve many great sacrifices and much delay. On the other hand, if the international community assists them in a substantial way their suffering will be reduced and delays, which in the final analysis would be detrimental to all, will be averted.
32.	I therefore appeal to all Governments represented here to make this new partnership a success. Failure to do this will not only deprive Africans of an opportunity to lay the foundation for sustainable development, but also deprive the rest of the world of the benefits that would assuredly follow for all humanity. At this special session we share the responsibility to work for a better future for the peoples of Africa, both as a matter of conscience and, above all, because we live in a world in which solidarity is the only guarantee of our survival. We must win the race against time. 
33.	I speak on behalf of all my colleagues of the United Nations system in assuring the Assembly that we are prepared to play our full role in carrying out the decisions of this important session, which must succeed through the common efforts of all.  
Address by Mr. Abdou Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity
34.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):The General Assembly will now hear an address by the President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity. On behalf of the Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United Nations Mr. Abdou Diouf and to invite him to address the Assembly. 
35.	Mr. DIOUF (interpretation from French): Our meeting here today, at the Headquarters of the United Nations, where for the first time a special session of the General Assembly is being devoted to the economic problems of a single continent”, Africa, at a time when a particularly difficult international situation is encouraging nations to concentrate on their own affairs or to defend short-term interests, in my opinion constitutes an act of faith. Jt is an act of faith by Africa in the ability of the international community to act together and in its generosity; it is also an act of faith by our continent’s international partners in Africa’s-destiny; lastly, it is an act of faith by the whole international community,in the
spirit of solidarity, interdependence and international co-operation which remains the solid foundation of the United Nations. That explains the fact that on this highly symbolic occasion I am addressing the international community, with emotion and respect, aware of the privilege afforded to Africa through me. Please believe me when I say that I am fully aware of the honour and the importance of the occasion. From the very outset I would express the fervent hope that the-results of our work will translate this act of faith into well-defined, concrete and manageable measures.
36.	Having made that preliminary comment, I wish to congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your unanimous election to the presidency of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly, an election which eloquently reflects the outstanding qualities you have shown in the ■past. Above all, I assure you of Africa’s spirit of cooperation and availability.
37.	We also fully appreciate the continued, discreet and effective efforts made by the Secretary-General, his staff and all the agencies and bodies of the United Nations system, as well as the high-calibre contribution made by the intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to ensure that this historic session takes place in the best conditions.
38.	We express our gratitude, too, to the Preparatory Committee of the Whole—and, through it, to the General Assembly—for thé positive response which has been given to the African request and which is confirmed bÿ the high-level representation of all States. We are grateful for the outstanding work done in the preparation of this session. No less could have been expected of the Preparatory Committee, headed as it was by Mr. Pisani, with whose special interest and even passionate involvement in all third-world issues we are familiar.
39.	Now that I have paid those tributes, the Assembly will no doubt be wondering what kind of language I shall be speaking here. Well, I can answer that question simply and clearly: I shall endeavour to speak the language of hope, but, above all, the language of truth, of moderation and of responsibility—the very language that I spoke here last October when I addressed the fortieth session of the General Assembly at its 42nd meeting and, on behalf of Africa, requested the convening of this session.
40.	Even though today, thanks inter alia to united and generous action by the international community, the urgent situation that prevailed in most of the African continent is not so acute, the crisis itself remains—indeed, perdures. For, having structural bases and affecting all the world’s economies, that crisis naturally poses a challenge to the social structures, the cultural norms and the values on which our civilization rests. In fact, It may be that the use of the word “crisis”, which economics has borrowed from medicine and which we know it describes as the acute phase of an illness—after which, if the ill person has not died, there is a steady return to health— has contributed to disorienting our analyses.
41.	In respect of the world economy, the idea that the. present situation is temporary and that there will then be a.return to normalcy seems, we must recognize, to be increasingly unrealistic. On the contrary, we are moving towards a new state of the world which , is difficult to describe completely, in all its facets. It is therefore not a crisis that we are experiencing but a situation of enormous change. None the less, this will have proved to be beneficial. It will have served to reveal, to project a harsh light on, our failings and on the wrong courses we have taken and to point a critical finger at our strategy. Indeed, it will have once again shed blinding light on that continent of paràdox, Africa, where—because of the
extraversion of our economies and the weakness of our production and our productivity, but also because of the rigidity and inequity of the international economic system—a vast natural and human potential coexists with famine, illiteracy and the most dire poverty.
42.	These structural deficiencies have been aggravated by natural disasters, the decline in commodity prices, the crushing burden of the debt and its servicing, stagnation—indeed, the decrease in real terms of financial flows towards Africa—and the high concentration of refugees and displaced persons.
43.	A situation as serious as that requires structural change and medium- and long-term solutions. It requires a new approach to development in Africa and the improvement of the framework of international co-operation. That is why, courageously drawing the consequences of that terrible reality, the heads of State and Government, on the basis of the Lagos Plan of Action3 and the Final Act of Lagos,4 devoted most of their twenty-first summit conference, held in July 1985 at Addis Ababa, to a thorough consideration of the African economic crisis and on that occasion adopted Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990? That Programme should make it possible -for Africa to attain food self-reliance and the objective of economic growth and self-focused and self-sustained development at the national, regional and continental levels, and thus to bring about a lasting reversal of the profound trends that have led a large number of African countries to distressing macro-economic changes and to desperate emergency situations.
44.	All the members of the Assembly are familiar with the Priority Programme. I shall not dwell on it, therefore, except to emphasize that agriculture is the core of all our work and the corner-stone of the entire conceptual edifice proposed for the Assembly’s consideration. Each and every African country is invited first of all to see its economy as one based on the rural and agricultural sector. The fundamental needs of the rural population, the supplies that they require, the mobilization of their working hours, their income, their health and appropriate training, the marketing, transport and processing of their goods: all that is the fundamental concern. .
45.	The Priority Programme proposes, in fact, an integrated approach to economic development which gives agriculture the role of the primary sector of production and the centre for intersectoral relations. Thus, agriculture becomes the priority of priorities for Africa, since it is, within the Priority Programme, the subject of specific measures gathered together in a special programme of action for the improvement of the food situation and the rehabilitation of agriculture.
46.	Thus, with the establishment of an early-warning system at the national level, co-ordinated at the regional level, measures are envisaged to handle emergency food situations. Likewise, going beyond the short term, all the member countries of the OAU have committed themselves to devoting 20 to 25 per cent of their public investment to agriculture for the rehabilitation of that sector.' Lastly, with regard to structural reform measures, the African heads of State have recognized that in order to promote agricultural development it is essential to. strengthen agriculture’s support systems. That is why, in order to support the agricultural sector, the Priority Programme attaches very special importance to giving new dynamism to transport, communications and industry, as well as to.the extension of arable land, to the development of human resources and to research on and. struggle against drought and desertification.
47.	As can be seen, the Priority Programme is the very essence of the collective and individual resolve of African countries to undertake the economic recovery of the continent, with agriculture as the central theme. It reflects the profound desire of Africa to put an end to the recurrence of famine, to improve the lot of the poorest sectors of the population, to restore agriculture and to resolve the dreadful problem posed by inexorable desertification. It reflects above all the choosing of new economic development priorities giving the restoration of agriculture and the improvement of the food situation the attention and the role they deserve. The determination and serious approach of the African leaders towards the implementation of reforms have indeed been recognized and welcomed by the World Bank in its latest report devoted to Africa.
48.	It is on the basis of the Priority Programme, and in anticipation of the holding of the present session, that the Permanent Steering Committee of the OAU, taking fully into account the suggestions and contributions made by various bodies of the United Nations system, submitted a document5 to which the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session gave due consideration before submitting its own recommendations to the Assembly. Africa intends that document to be a contribution towards facilitating and stimulating the work of the session. It aims at providing a thorough and objective analysis of the causes of the African crisis; above all, it would demonstrate the efforts the African countries have pledged to overcome the crisis, and also what is expected of the international community. The greatest care was taken in its preparation, since the data serving as its basis was first gathered from member States and then compared with other data from competent international organizations, in particular the World Bank, the African Development Bank and EGA.
49.	As can be seen, our document has above all sought to be specific in arriving at a comprehensive and detailed assessment of the cost and the distribution of the financing for Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery. We sincerely believe that Africa is not asking for something that is impossible, for we know that in these very difficult times, those impatient souls who, like Antigone, “want everything and right away” are mistaken.
50.	In their analyses and recommendations the African proposals have broadly taken into account the emerging consensus in the international community on the causes of and the solutions to the “African ailment”. In other words, what, we have is a shared platform, an effort at reaching a compromise on decisions to be taken to meet the major challenge posed by the critical economic situation in Africa.
51.	As the members of the Assembly will have noted, Africa’s proposals are addressed, it is true, to the other members of the international community, but they are also addressed to the African countries themselves. That is why in their proposals the African countries are stressing the mobilization of internal resources for the development of priority sectors, as well as the improved use of both internal and external resources. That also explains why our countries are asking the international community for only a complementary financial contribution amounting to 30 per cent of the total cost of the Priority Programme in order that they may be in a position to implement that Programme.
52.	In that respect they particularly wish to see the Priority Programme accepted as the general framework for assistance by the international community to Africa, since we are convinced that in order to arrive at consistent
and effective assistance policies it is important that project support be placed in the priority framework of programme support. Similarly, measures aimed at improving the framework for co-operation should be taken especially through consultations between donors and recipients, in order to enhance the co-ordination of aid policies and to see to it that the assistance really does contribute to the development of the recipient country. Lastly, it is important that effective measures be taken to alter the international economic climate, especially through the stabilization of prices for raw materials at remunerative levels, an increase in concessional financing towards Africa and an easing of the debt burden and its servicing.
53.	To mention easing of the debt burden and debtservicing in our recommendations, while at the same time requesting the convening in an appropriate forum of a conference on this subject, deserves some explanation, which I shall now provide briefly. That the debt problem has been touched upon in the framework of this special session is because, in spite of all the efforts our own countries must make, it is illusory to believe that the African economies can experience growth rates that meet their real needs in the absence of adequate solutions to certain outside constraints, such as the debt and debtservicing, which are beyond our control but whose weight places a heavy burden on our development prospects. Hence, if immediate measures are not taken by the African countries and their creditors in order to ease the burden of debt-servicing, the level of payments such debt-servicing implies will constitute a serious handicap to all economic and social development efforts on the continent.
54.	Policy adjustments by the donor countries and by the recipient countries must take place in the framework of ongoing dialogue and in a spirit of equal partnership based on mutual interest. In other words, it will be a matter of arriving at the end of this session at agreements and understandings in which the contribution of each partner will be clearly defined and strictly respected in the next five years on the basis of assessment procedures and follow-up machinery such as those outlined in the African proposals.
55.	For its part, Africa pledges to mobilize all its energy and all its resources for the attainment of the objectives defined in the Priority Programme by taking significant austerity and adjustment measures at the domestic level. Africa has also sought to strengthen and broaden intraAfrican co-operation. Furthermore, the African countries are arduously working with the other developing countries for the implementation of the Caracas Programme of Action6 and the Plan of Action of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.7 In this respect I am pleased to emphasize that the implementation of the Priority Programme must go hand in hand with the intensification of South-South co-operation. Indeed, the objective of Africa’s economic recovery fits into the framework of the North-South dialogue and is included in the efforts aimed at relaunching the process of development in the countries of the South in general. Hence it is an integral part of the consultations and negotiations under way for the establishment of a more just and equitable international economic order.
56.	This brings me to the conclusion of my statement. Forecasts have already been provided to the effect that if things continue on their present course only a few African countries will survive. This is certainly a very pessimistic prospect, even apocalyptic, but it reflects better than any speech what is really at stake at this special session. That is why I am convinced that by agreeing to
meet today to consider ways and means of helping Africa to face up to the twofold challenge of survival and development the international community has shown that it is aware of what is at stake, thereby once again demonstrating that mankind, in the diversity of its components, possesses the moral and material resources that can make it possible to meet the challenges—all the challenges—of our times. ' ■
57.	If, as Livy affirmed, ‘ ‘good faith usually engenders good faith”, then Africa is assured that the work of this session will take place in an atmosphere of total mutual trust. In that case, above and beyond the exchange of ideas, above and beyond the most relevant of analyses and indicators calling on us to mistrust ideological quarrels or confining words that only erect barriers for obscure reasons, we shall be keeping the main point uppermost in mind: the survival of a continent, the economic recovery of Africa.
58.	At a time when the United Nations has proclaimed 1986 the International Year of Peace, I assert that there will be no genuine and comprehensive peace as long as an entire continent, Africa, is threatened by famine, sickness, ignorance and an uncertain future, not to mention acts of aggression and destabilization committed against the independent countries of southern Africa by the scandalous apartheid régime installed in South Africa.
59.	Is development not the new name of peace?
60.	The peoples of Africa, crushed by the weight of the vast changes we are experiencing and torn between hope and doubt, turn to us, and since the recovery of the African economy is a problem of concern to all mankind, the world is observing what we do. All expect of us genuine, concrete and manageable decisions. I fervently hope that we shall meet those expectations fully.
61.	Then and only then will our session be more than an uncertain step forward, more than a glimmer in an approaching night: it will be a new beginning or, in terms of economic performance, a turning-point.
62.	I thank you for your kind attention and wish you every success in your task.
63.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government' of the Organization of African Unity for the important statement he has just made.
AGENDA ITEM 5
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work
64.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa,, Mr. Edgard Pisani of France.
65.	Mr. PISANI (France), Chairman of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole (interpretation from French): For lack of time, the Preparatory Committee has not been able to ensure that the special session has before it from the outset a final text. Accordingly, a whole process of negotiation will have to take place alongside the general debate and will have to be approached by everyone with the political will to bring it to a substantive outcome. This being the case, I trust members will accept that the ideas I have the honour to put before them cannot be binding on the Preparatory Committee itself. They are those of a
man who participated in its work, admittedly from a privileged vantage point.
66.	The Preparatory Committee’s task was both facilitated and made more arduous by the publication at the beginning of April of a major document5 for which the responsibility rests with the OAU, but for which part of the credit is due to ECA. This document, which stems in a direct line from the Lagos Plan of Action,3 presents an unvarnished analysis of the situation in the continent and the policies which prevail there, proposes guidelines and sets priorities. It identifies needs. It is an act of courage and clearsightedness. After reading it, we cannot plead ignorance of the essential facts, but by the same token it is impossible, once we have taken cognizance of it, to engage in a rhetorical exercise on the subject of Africa. The new and commendable rigour on the part of the Governments responsible for it must be echoed by a commitment on the part of the international community.
67.	The work of the Preparatory Committee took place over a period of weeks and in a political environment that was not conducive to reaching agreement. The emergence of the Western Sahara problem, the bombing of Tripoli and Benghazi and the commando operations against three sovereign States of southern Africa reminded us that Africa is'a continent of tension and uncertainties. Over and above the critical situation which the Assembly has chosen to discuss, there remain places of conflict in which neighbour is opposed to neighbour, but not in total isolation from outside forces. This has made us mindful that the.debate is not only economic, and not only African, in scope: it is a world-wide politico-strategic debate. 68. In the very last days of its brief existence the Preparatory Committee followed attentively the course taken around the world by the runner and the flame. The essential is, of course, not the flame itself: the flame is a symbol. The event is the extraordinary upsurge of popular support to which its passage has given rise. Millions of human beings have raised their voices in an indication of their concern and their will. Can it be that this genuine expression of international opinion, this informal but resolute will on the part of the human community, has not yet given rise to agreement on Africa’s needs and on the resources that must be made available to it? The political leaders assembled here can no longer overlook the fact that, as proclaimed by world opinion on Sunday, Africa is their problem, not just that of Africans, that Africa needs assistance and that the world needs to be better organized.
69.	Whatever the sums raised to the beat of orchestras or the champion’s stride, Africa’s problem is of such dimensions that solidarity can come to grips only with its consequences; only the will of the world’s political leaders can remedy its causes. Africa needs substantial outside support, with which only a renewed public effort in the developed countries can provide it. Thanks are due to the non-governmental organizations and to the teeming masses, but their action must be supported and their message heard by those in positions of authority.
70.	The detailed technical and financial negotiations between the African Governments and their development partners cannot take place at the General Assembly session, but no one would understand it if the end result were a text similar in all respects to texts which 10 or 100 times already have set the seal on international debates on the same subject. Neither a conference of donors nor an exercise in rhetoric—what then is the real meaning of this special session?
71.	In deciding to call for it, the African Governments made it incumbent upon themselves to put forward
proposals and enter into commitments. They have put forward these proposals and entered into these commitments. The World Bank is here to say that the African Governments have made the necessary arrangements and that all that is now missing is the external resources required to implement the policies decided upon. These resource requirements have been inventoried by African leaders, and it is time for the international community to take formal note of this and adopt them as a target for the common effort.
72.	In agreeing to the organization of this session the Governments of the North entered into implicit commitments, which to date, apparently, they have not been in a position to honour. The time has come to honour them.
73.	This session has no meaning and will have no effect unless it is the occasion for mutual political commitments and unless the procedures and the bodies to be responsible for monitoring and following up these commitments are decided upon. Africa’s programme of action for Africa must have as its mirror image a United Nations programme of action for Africa.
74.	The United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery 1986-1990 [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V] must acclaim and take into account the effort which, since 1980 and the adoption of the Lagos Plan of Action, the African countries have decided to undertake in order to bring about the recovery of their economies, promote the realization of their populations’ potential, restore their natural balances and play their part in bringing about international equilibrium. It must demonstrate the support the international community intends to give them.
75.	The Programme of Action must embody the commitments which African Governments have made to each other, to their peoples and to the rest of the world. It must take note of the fact that African Governments, measuring the immensity of their task and the dearth of immediately available resources and noting certain negative aspects of the international environment, have shown the international community the extent to which they need additional external support to make their own effort more readily effective, less risky and less severe for their people.
76.	If African Governments do not make their own effort contingent on obtaining the support they seek, the international community cannot make its contribution contingent on their persisting in that effort. African and non-African nations alike must pledge themselves to do all they can, individually and jointly, to bring the critical situation in Africa to an end. They must involve international agencies and organizations in those efforts in that spirit. .
77.	African nations and nations throughout the world must accept the targets which have been identified by the African countries and jointly agreed upon. These are: priority for food production, with all that the development of that production requires: guarantees to farmers, equipment, supporting industries, organization of producers, rural development, agronomic research, extension services; the need for an immediate commitment to a long-term effort to bring about the restoration of natural balances; the need for more effective control of demographic and population phenomena: the population explosion, urbanization, refugees; priority for the training of children and adults and recognition of the role and responsibilities of women; special attention to the needs of their populations and those segments which are most at risk, such as health and food, but also respect for human dignity, the development of democracy and community responsibility; the urgent need for a revitalization
of the structures and management methods of State machinery and the instruments that have been created around it, as well as for the improvement of public services; the importance of establishing a complex and diversified network of autonomous and independent economic actors which can by themselves produce the necessary goods and services and create and tap the savings needed for investment; the need for close collaboration between neighbouring countries—in short, the need to implement a new form of development that respects existing situations and cultures.
78.	Because it concerns the future of the world, the action undertaken by Africa and by Governments requires the support of international organizations and all countries of the world in a position to provide it. Only with their commitment and their efforts will it be possible to: correct, on a case-by-case basis, the liquidity shortages which seriously affect most African countries and prevent them from importing the goods and services needed for their development; attempt, through any measure deemed appropriate, to prevent African countries from experiencing negative financial flows resulting from their debt burden; take social and political factors as well as the special effort which the implementation of the five-year Programme of Action represents into account in carrying out. necessary debt-rescheduling operations; ensure an increase in financial resources provided on concessional terms, as well as an improvement in their quality, availability, predictability and coherence; make their assistance more appropriate; promote investment, for bank credit alone does not suffice for development; open up their markets to African products; soften the effects of the collapse in commodity prices, from which Africa has suffered the most; and provide Africa with all the available scientific and technological knowledge that can be used for its development.
79.	This commitment on the part of Governments and international organizations must be demonstrated in the support provided for the individual development strategy of each African country. It is here that reciprocal commitments will be made, their fulfilment guaranteed and their co-ordination organized so that their effectiveness can be enhanced. But it is also in this area that a genuine agreement on priority needs and on the global resources needed to meet them is called for.
80.	For the Programme of Action to become fully operative, however, African Governments must, at the national or regional level, come forward with programmes and identify both the limits of the efforts they are able to make and the amounts and modalities of the external contributions they require. To achieve this, the Government of each African country must set up a central body for programme follow-up by its administration and by the groups playing a role in its economy, as well as for co-operation with donors. Similarly, joint consultative groups for the review and implementation of the programme and commitments must be either set up or strengthened. It is at this level that specific co-ordination of the external support both promised and provided should be carried out in order to ensure effectiveness. Lastly, the reviews should take place at regular intervals on the initiative of the country concerned. The first such country evaluation should be completed within 12 months of the special session in order to ensure the launching of the programme.
81.	Once he had all these elements in his possession, the Secretary-General would submit an evaluation report and suggestions on the implementation of the Programme of Action. He should do so by a date that is early enough for
the General Assembly to be seized of the matter and consider it at its 1987 session. By the same date, the Secretary-General should submit to the Assembly suggestions on the measures to be adopted so that very longterm action may be taken. At the Secretary-General’s suggestion, the Assembly could on the same occasion establish the circumstances in which a United Nations plan of action for the period 1991-2000 would be drawn up. Thus, because international opinion will be sure that the political commitments made will be fulfilled, it will understand that the financial and technological commitments clearly needed by Africa have not been made today in this forum.
82.	When they take leave of each other in four or five days’ time, the members of the General Assembly must be in a position to say that basically the necessary conditions have been met for the implementation by each African country of rational rehabilitation, restructuring and development programmes leading, in the medium term, to a recovery that, through the economic possibilities that it opens up and the social and economic dynamics that it promotes, will set in motion the self-reliant and self-sustained process of development that the African countries set as their legitimate goal back in 1980. They must also be in a position to say that unequivocal commitments have been made in respect of the corresponding external means. The General Assembly must also reaffirm its satisfaction at the results achieved recently by Governments, international organizations, non-governmental organizations and the public at large in their efforts to help the African populations stricken by natural disasters. A permanent body to alert and mobilize the international community must be established.
83.	The United Nations must proclaim that, despite the crisis and all the hardship suffered because of the volume and variety of its resources and the potential and will of its people, Africa is and will remain a continent with a future both able and determined to participate in international efforts.
84.	It is clearly of great importance that the General Assembly should invite African Governments, Africa’s partner States, international organizations, non-governmental organizations and the media to provide the world public with an objective picture of Africa, with its droughts, disturbances, famine and disease, of course, but above all with its resources, vitality, determination, youth and importance in maintaining world equilibrium. The General Assembly can thus proclaim that the future of Africa, although first and foremost an African concern, is one of the most serious international issues— and that the efforts to ensure that future constitute one of the most promising undertakings upon which the world could embark.
85.	May I conclude by translating an unsigned text that was given to me on Sunday morning, when, like many other people, I was awaiting the runner representing life and the flame representing hope:
“We keep telling ourselves that it will never happen again—never!
“But it does!
“We keep telling ourselves that we care—that we really will do something about it!
“But we don’t!
“And still our children are dying—still our world is threatened by famine, destruction and disease.
“Surely this must be our last chance to make good on our word.” .
“Our word”, ladies and gentlemen.
86.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): May I take it that the General Assembly endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l] and the recommendations contained in paragraph 26 1 thereof?
It was so decided (decision S-13/21).
87.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly concerning the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee and in accordance with the practice of previous special sessions, the chairmen of the Main Committees of the fortieth session will serve in the same capacities at the thirteenth special session, on the understanding that each chairman of a Main Committee who is absent from this special session will be replaced by another member of his delegation. The chairmen of the Main Committees of the fortieth session who are present at this session are: Mr. Ali Alatas of Indonesia, for the First Committee; Mr. Keijo Korhonen of Finland, for the Special Political Committee; Mr. Omer Birido of the Sudan, for the Second Committee; and Mr. Tommo Monthe of Cameroon, for the Fifth Committee. The following replacements have been communicated to the Secretariat: Mr. Miklos Endreffy of Hungary, for the Third Committee; Mrs. Nora Astorga Gadea of Nicaragua, for the Fourth Committee; and Mr. Ismat Kittani of Iraq, for the Sixth Committee.
88.	If there is no objection, may I take it that the General Assembly decides to approve this recommendation?
It was so decided (decision S-13/13).
89.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In addition, the Vice-Presidents of the fortieth session will serve in the same capacity at the thirteenth special session. They are the representatives of the following Member States: Bahamas, Barbados, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Democratic Yemen, France, Gabon, Kenya, Lesotho, Malta, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly approves this recommendation.
It was so decided (decision S-13/14).
90.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): May I take it that the Assembly approves the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee concerning the establishment of an Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session?
It was so decided (decision S-13/22).
91.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Concerning the election of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, it is my understanding that additional consultations are needed. Therefore, the Assembly will elect the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee at its plenary meeting this afternoon.
92.	We turn now to the provisional agenda of the thirteenth special session [A/S-I3/I and Add. 1]. In order to expedite our work, the Assembly may wish to adopt the provisional agenda in plenary meeting without referring it to the General Committee. May I take it that the Assembly agrees to this procedure?
It was so decided.
93.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The provisional agenda which was recommended by the Preparatory Committee of the Whole has already been endorsed by the General Assembly. May I therefore take
it that the Assembly adopts the agenda as it appears in document A/S-13/1 and Add.l?
The agenda was adopted (decision S-13/23).
94.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We now come to the allocation of agenda items. The Preparatory Committee recommends that, while items 1 to 5 and 7 should be dealt with in plenary meeting, item 6 of the agenda should be allocated to the Ad Hoc Committee of the whole for consideration and report, on the understanding that the debate on the item should take place in plenary meeting. The Ad Hoc Committee would be entrusted with the task of considering all proposals submitted and preparing the draft final document or documents for consideration by the Assembly. May I take it that the General Assembly approves those proposals?
It was so decided (decision S-13/23).
95.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I remind representatives that, in accordance with the decision just taken by the Assembly to endorse the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, the list of speakers in the debate on agenda item 6 was closed at 12 noon today.
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures
96.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I would remind representatives that among the recommendations contained in paragraph 26 of the Preparatory Committee’s report [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l], the one concerning the general debate reads as follows:
‘‘Owing to the large number of speakers desiring to take the floor in a limited amount of time, it is recommended that statements should not exceed 15 minutes. It is also recommended that the normal requirement for a quorum to open the meeting be waived for the duration of the general debate.”
97.	The first speaker in the general debate is the representative of India, on whom I now call.
98.	Mr. NARAYANAN (India): May I at the outset, Sir, extend to you our congratulations on your election and express the pleasure of my delegation at seeing you preside over this historic session. We have every hope that your wisdom and experience will enable the session to find a way of harnessing international support for launching the continent of Africa on the path of self-sustained development.
99.	This is the first time that the General Assembly has met in special session to consider the economic situation of a particular continent. It is a recognition of the fact that in the interdependent world of today all nations and all regions are inescapably involved with one another, and that solutions to the major and fundamental problems afflicting them can be found only in the international context and through concerted supporting action by the world community. I venture to believe that this session marks the beginning of a new era in international cooperation for development, so that a tragedy such as the one that recently befell Africa will never again befall any people anywhere in the world.
100.	I consider it a particular privilege to address the Assembly on behalf of my country and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. India has been bound to Africa by ties of cultural affinity and friendship almost from the dawn of history, and in modern times the leaders of our nationalist movement have gone to the extent of asserting that the independence of India would not be complete without the independence of Africa. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, with about half of its far-flung membership drawn from Africa and with its dedication to the objective of the development of developing nations through international co-operation and individual and collective self-reliance, has been intensely concerned with the ongoing economic and social crisis in Africa. The Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries held at New Delhi from 16 to 19 April 1986 welcomed the holding of this special session of the General Assembly and emphasized that “while the development of the African continent was the prime responsibility of the African Governments and peoples themselves, it was essential that their national efforts should be fully supported by the international community”.8
101.	Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi, who is the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, in the course of his recent visit to the front-line States, declared the solidarity of India and the Non-Aligned Movement with the African States and peoples in their efforts to promote economic rehabilitation and development and also in their heroic struggle against the apartheid, colonialism and destabilization represented by the Pretoria régime.
102.	The United Nations system as a whole, and the Secretary-General in particular, played a crucial role in alerting and sensitizing the world community to the African economic crisis and in mounting a massive relief effort by the international community and by the African countries themselves. Thanks to these efforts, the situation facing Africa today is not as tragically sensational as the images of starving populations and parched fields which made the front pages in newspapers until recently. But the race against time will not have been won until the gains of the relief and rehabilitation work have been consolidated and the developmental process in Africa has been revitalized and restructured in order to ensure continuous self-sustained growth.
103.	There has been considerable discussion of an appropriate policy framework for the development of Africa. It is important that, instead of trying to impose a framework from outside, the African Governments should be enabled to determine their own priorities in accordance with their own social, economic and political circumstances. In the past far too many resources have been wasted on projects conceived outside the African experience, which were inappropriate, and on efforts which were unco-ordinated. Fortunately, a general consensus now exists in the international community on the broad spectrum of the efforts required. African Governments have themselves put forward a well-thought-out priority programme for the economic recovery of Africa, a programme which would need for its successful implementation the mobilization of all the domestic resources of Africa and the active material support of the international community. In this context, the OAU and ECA deserve to be complimented on the vision and sense of realism shown by them. I also note with appreciation the very thorough work done by the Preparatory Committee for this session.
104.	Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 is a massive but minimum programme dictated by the magnitude of the problems confronting
the continent. A fundamental point in this Programme is the need to bring about a structural transformation in the respective economies of African countries suffering from problems of historical distortions and arrested economic development. Diversification of the economy, the strengthening of inter-sectoral links, increasing productivity, reducing dependence on imports and controlling the rate of growth of the population are some of the key elements in the Programme. It is noteworthy that the African countries have expressed their determination to mobilize a substantial portion—over 64 per cent—of the estimated resources required for the implementation of the Priority Programme.
105.	India is greatly impressed by the special role assigned to food and agriculture in this Programme. We believe it is an emphasis of strategic importance for the developing countries of Africa. In the developmental history of my country, where, just as in Africa, the immense majority of the people live in rural areas and are dependent on agriculture, primary emphasis has been placed on food and agriculture. In 1948 Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, said, “Everything else can wait, but not agriculture”. The green revolution that took place in India was a result of this particular priority in development. We are today in a position to share the knowledge and the technology that we have acquired in food and agricultural production with our African brethren.
106.	A number of collaborative agricultural projects are under way between India and several African countries. This is indeed a field in which South-South co-operation can be pursued constructively with maximum results, promoting collective self-reliance in the developing world in general and in Africa in particular. Only a few weeks ago the Government of India hosted a workshop in New Delhi in collaboration with the World Food Council. The workshop, which was attended by 20 top-level food policy-makers from different countries in Africa and representatives of international organizations, noted the relevance of the Indian experience in food and agriculture for African development. ‘
107,	The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement has adopted a Plan of Action for Africa,7 focused on the food and agriculture sector, calculated to supplement other international programmes operating in the same field. The Plan of Action is a concrete expression of the principle of collective self-reliance and the promotion of economic co-operation between developing countries.
108.	While we stress the primary role of food and agriculture, the simultaneous heed to accelerate industrial development cannot be overlooked. Even to bring about stable growth in agriculture, it is essential to have a supportive industrial sector that provides agricultural implements and tools, fertilizers and pesticides and the processing of food and other agricultural products. Transfer of methods and technologies in these fields is eminently practicable. It is with this in view that India will be hosting, in collaboration with UNIDO, an Afro-Asian industrial co-operation meeting in November this year, within the framework of the Industrial Development Decade for Africa.
109.	Although a developing country, India has endeavoured to contribute to the fullest possible extent towards meeting the critical economic situation in Africa. Last year we provided 100,000 tonnes of wheat to African States affected by drought and famine; we have also announced a contribution of $10 million to the OAU Special Emergency Fund for the purchase of wheat and
cereals from India. India was the first country outside Africa to make such a contribution. Further, we have made available relief supplies and the services of teams of doctors to certain African countries. Under the Indian Economic and Technical Co-operation Programme, we provide training facilities for about 500 trainees from Africa every year. The Programme also funds more than 80 Indian experts working in various African countries. A large number of feasibility studies and consultancies have been conducted with Indian funding in the past year, and in several cases equipment and materials have been provided. India currently has 48 joint-venture enterprises in Africa in a wide range of areas, including paper, textiles, tyres, machine tools, chemicals and pharmaceuticals. 110. Education and training is another area where we have been able to be of some assistance. A large number of African students are pursuing higher studies in Indian technical and academic institutions, many of them under Indian fellowship grants. Many bilateral and multilateral donor agencies are also making use of Indian training facilities to train African nominees, particularly in fields such as forestry, soil conservation, irrigation and water management, agricultural research and extension and foreign trade.
111.	At the multilateral level, India is providing assistance to specific projects through ECA. This very year we have committed ourselves to implementing a small-scale industrial project for ECA at a cost of $400,000. India has also worked out a programme of co-operation for the next five years with the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference [SADCC], the main features of which are the offer of 300 training fellowships, the services of 100 Indian specialists, the setting up of joint pilot projects in agriculture, and a grant of Rs 15 million for the setting up of an Indo-SADCC Industrial Service Centre.
112.	I have enumerated these items of co-operation in order to emphasize India’s commitment to African development. I am aware that, in the face of the enormous needs of Africa, they may not be of major magnitude. But they are an important part of South-South co-operation and are designed to promote self-reliant development in Africa, which is also the objective of the larger international assistance for Africa.
113.	In the current as well as the medium-term and long-term crisis facing Africa, it is evident that Africa is helping itself, and the countries of the non-aligned and developing world are also extending help to Africa to the best of their ability. But the dimensions of the problem are enormous.
114.	The crisis facing Africa, just as in the case of the developing countries in general, is to a large extent the consequence of external forces beyond its control. In fact, the international economic situation has become particularly harsh and unfavourable for all developing countries, especially those in Africa. The international recession, the collapse of commodity prices to historically low levels, rising and new forms of protectionism, adverse terms of trade, high interest rates, inadequte liquidity, currency fluctuations and reductions in official development assistance and in concessional Ioans from multilateral agencies have imposed unbearable burdens and accentuated the economic crisis in Africa. .
115.	Improvement of the external environment and structural changes in the global economic system are, therefore, essential for tackling the critical economic situation in Africa. In particular, relief from the debt burden is a fundamental and urgent need. It is equally important that concessional assistance from Governments
and multilateral financial institutions be increased sufficiently to implement Africa’s Priority Programme. We hope that forward-looking statesmanship in the great developed countries of the world will rise to the occasion and find ways and means of providing the level of assistance required to overcome the present crisis and launch Africa on the path to self-sustained development, for what is at stake in Africa’s economic and social development and its consequent political stability is indeed incalculable for the world.
116.	I wish to end by reading out the following message from Shri Rajiv Gandhi to this special session devoted to the critical economic situation in Africa:
“The people of Africa are engaged in an epic struggle which compels the attention and respect of the world. It is a gigantic effort to overcome centuries of poverty, neglect and underdevelopment, while fighting to eliminate the scourge of racism in South Africa and colonialism' in Namibia.
“I have recently visited some of the front-line States in southern Africa. I have seen the reality as well as the potential of Africa. Though faced with political challenges and the disruption caused by the world economic crisis, the people and the leaders of Africa have emerged stronger and more determined.
“Much has been achieved through international cooperation to alleviate suffering caused by famine. In this task all have contributed. Much more now needs to be done. We must build on the spontaneous sympathy and fellow feeling which the crisis in Africa has evoked and lay the foundation for self-reliant and sustained development.
“The non-aligned have a keen sense of solidarity and participation with the countries of Africa in their struggle against poverty as well as their struggle against the tyranny of apartheid. Member countries of the NonAligned Movement have contributed generously, within their limited means, towards meeting'the emergency situation. They stand ready to do whatever more is possible for the rehabilitation and longer-term development of the African economies. .
“By working together in a spirit of partnership, the international community has a great opportunity and a challenge to contribute towards building a modern and prosperous Africa. An economically strong and dynamic Africa will be an important factor for world peace and stability.
“I hope that the special session of the General Assembly will be a landmark in Africa’s development and a turning point for international co-operation in general.”
117.	Mr. DIZDAREVIC (Yugoslavia): Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of this important special session of the General Assembly.
118.	With expressions of full solidarity with the countries of Africa, I address the General Assembly on behalf of the Group of 77, of which my country is Chairman, and at the same time on behalf of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
119.	The Group of 77 believes that the convening of this special session reflects our common concern over the worsening of the already critical economic and social situation in Africa, caused by a prolonged stagnation in its development. We have gathered here to adopt concrete decisions which would manifest a general desire by the international community to contribute to the efforts of African countries to surmount the problems threatening the very existence of millions of people and to provide lasting and accelerated development.
120.	We are all aware of the gravity, complexity and urgency of the problems facing the nations of Africa. In his inspiring statement the OAU Chairman, President Diouf of Senegal, not only set out the seriousness of the situation but also pointed to its causes and ways in which it might be overcome.
121.	The recent tragic consequences of the drought in Africa have been only partly mitigated. This year again about 19 million people will be affected by drought and hunger. Emergency relief aid is therefore still necessary. However, without the full support of the international community for the medium- and long-term development of Africa, to which this session is devoted, no substantial solution .to the problems of Africa can be found. These problems are extremely grave and challenging indeed. Today the gross national product per capita, in real terms, in Africa is at the level of 1975, whereas in 14 poorest African countries it is at the level of 1970. Food production is about 20 per cent lower than the production during the 1920s. African national economies predominantly depend on exports of only a few primary products, the prices of which, as indicated in the documents for this session, are at the level of the 1930s. The external debt of African countries amounts to approximately $170 billion, while their debt servicing exceeds 30 per cent of their foreign exchange earnings.
122.	The development crisis in Africa is not the problem of African countries alone: it is the problem of global development. The African continent is most affected by the consequences of its colonial past. Until Africa succeeds in eliminating the ensuing hardships, the entire world will be deprived of its contribution to the overall international development. In its wealth and development potential, Africa is the continent of the future. The prosperity of Africa would contribute to the progress of the whole world. The speedy development of Africa is therefore in the best interest of mankind as a whole.
123.	, African countries are fully aware that the responsibility for their own development rests primarily on themselves. They have shown this by committing themselves to providing the basis for a structural transformation of their economies in the next five years within the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery 1986-1990 [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V]. They are also aware of their own great potential. In order to attain the goals that have been set, however, assistance and support by the wider international community, above all the developed countries, is required. Financial resources are needed to this end, but in addition to that it is indispensable to adopt solutions and measures which would pave the way for and open up prospects of an accelerated economic and social development and a better utilization of vast natural and human resources.
124.	In its quest for faster development Africa has the full understanding, solidarity and assistance of developing countries. The Group of 77 attaches great significance to mutual economic co-operation among all developing countries, believing that this would contribute to redressing the current critical economic situation in Africa. I should like to point out that the Group of 77 views Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 with full understanding and support. We believe that it is of crucial importance to ensure the necessary financial inflow fo African countries. So far that inflow has been far below the actual needs. The proposed cancellation of the debt of the poorest African countries is fully justified.
125.	We expect that this special session will reach agreement on a comprehensive and action-oriented programme
for economic recovery and for the faster development of Africa. The developed countries are rightly expected to fulfil their special responsibility by making their contribution to these endeavours.
126.	I wish to point out that Yugoslavia and the African countries are linked by bonds of traditional friendship and co-operation inspired by a common vision and the struggle of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for just and democratic international relations. As a nonaligned and developing country, Yugoslavia has always had full understanding for the problems of African countries. Despite the fact that it is experiencing economic difficulties of its own, Yugoslavia is doing its utmost to assist African countries. During 1985, in the solidarity campaign with African countries, Yugoslavia provided, through various governmental and non-governmental institutions, aid amounting to 800 million dinars. Soft loans for the development of priority economic programmes and projects are an important form of our co-operation with and assistance to African countries. Yugoslavia also lends technical assistance, including transfer of technology and training of personnel to many African countries. Over 3,000 African students have been educated in Yugoslavia under governmental scholarship programmes, and several hundred are at present attending Yugoslav universities. Yugoslavia will continue to extend all possible support and assistance to the friendly African countries in order to help them overcome the present difficulties and to create a basis necessary for their accelerated, unhampered and independent development.
127.	In order to overcome the stagnation in the development of Africa and to achieve a faster and unimpeded economic, social and cultural development, it is necessary to create a more favourable international environment. There can be no stability or progress in Africa, nor can there be greater contribution by Africa to progress and stability in the world, without the eradication of the last remnants of colonialism, without the elimination of attempts to preserve or renew relations of neo-colonialism and exploitation, without equitable relations and cooperation with African countries and without full respect for their freedom and independence and their sovereign right to choose the ways of their internal development.
128.	Mrs. SCHOO (Netherlands): Speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, I should like to welcome the President of Senegal to the special session. We all recognize the highly important role President Diouf played in the preparations by the African countries.
129.	I should like to express the serious concern we feel at the critical economic situation in many African countries, particularly south of the Sahara. The crisis in those countries is seriously undermining their development prospects and is in some cases threatening the very existence of entire populations. It requires an investment of effort equal to the gravity of the problems involved, both on the part of the African countries themselves and on the part of the international community.
130.	The special session carries forward a process started in the summer of 1984. At the Economic and Social Council summer session the international community paid special attention to the short-term problems of Africa, and the subsequent session of the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [resolution 39/29, annex]. In January 1985 the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa was created and hunger was tackled. The international community reacted in a most exceptional fashion.
131.	Now at this moment we need to commit ourselves to deal with the medium- and long-term problems, and ; I hope that we can come to similar effective solutions. Those will be more difficult to find and more difficult to implement. The special session should therefore pave the way for a concerted approach by the international community and by Africa and should result in a consensus on the need to redefine development priorities and on the means to be applied to that end.
132.	The negotiations on a programme of action should be finalized this week; there is no room for failure here. I should like to highlight three major parts: internal development of Africa, external environment and followup and co-ordination.
133.	Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 which finds its roots in the 1980 Lagos Plan of Action,3 contains a thorough analysis of the development problems in Africa whereby the agricultural sector gets more attention. It focuses on the transition from emergency and short-term actions to the relaunching of long-term programmes for self-sustaining economic development. It suggests a number of priorities for the African countries and the international community. It is our task to translate their points of consensus into potential specific measures to promote the rehabilitation and development of the African continent.
134.	We support fully the attention which the Priority Programme pays to the food and agricultural sector and indeed hope that African countries will never again have to go through the disastrous consequences of famine. The implementation of the Programme should form a basis for a structural transformation leading in the long term to self-reliance in food for Africa as a continent. We recognize that the African countries are making exceptional sacrifices in mobilizing domestic resources, and we are willing to back them up with appropriate policy reforms. In this context we realize that an adequate transfer of resources will contribute to the implementation of APPER’s goals in this sector. Many of the policies in the agricultural area are already supported by aid programmes. Much remains to be done, but consensus on that approach exists. I should like to point out that the European Community and its member States are making a great financial effort, bilaterally and, inter alia, in the framework of the Third Lomé Convention.
135.	In this context I should like to make some general remarks about our views on development. As regards the agricultural policy—which, we agree, is a central issue— small holders should be seen as an essential element for the foundation of agricultural policy. Steps should be taken to enable them effectively to produce both food and cash crops. Appropriate price, fiscal and land tenure policies should encourage their production, something which could also lead to mastering the growing problems of urbanization in Africa. More attention should be paid to the role of women in that sector. Appropriate food strategies should be the framework for such an approach.
136.	We fully agree that the development and efficient • utilization of Africa’s human resources is a basic concern. In our view, basic education, promotion of the role of women in development and the development and strengthening of a country’s capacity in planning and administration at all levels deserve attention.
137.	The demographic imbalance and the degradation of the natural environment, in particular that caused by drought and desertification, are threatening long-term development. The Community and its member States consider it imperative that policies to address these problems are strengthened. We are ready to support policies
directed at conservation of the natural environment and are prepared to assist Governments at their request in the implementation of appropriate demographic policies.
138.	The efforts to be made internally by the African countries need to be supplemented by measures taken by the international community to improve the general economic environment. There have been some encouraging developments recently in the world economy.
139.	As regards trade, we stress the need to encourage liberal access, both in the context of existing commitments and in the framework of the future GATT multilateral trade negotiations. The African countries should be encouraged to take an active part in those negotiations, in view of their specific interests, especially with regard to tropical and agricultural products.
140.	The situation in the raw materials markets on which Africa largely depends for its export earnings is very worrying. These problems can be tackled only as part of an overall approach embracing commodity agreements, compensatory financing and, above all, diversification and productivity measures, which should be reflected case-by-case in the sectoral restructuring programmes.
141.	While definition and estimates may differ, one thing is clear: the African debt problem is very serious. It is an obstacle to recovery. Major efforts on the part of developed countries are desirable. The African countries recognize the need to adjust and the obligation to honour foreign debt commitments. The Community considers that there will be no solution to the financial problems of many indebted African countries unless production grows and economic development is re-established. The measures to be taken should be based on the principle of a case-by-case approach because of the great variety of debt situations in Africa. This approach should be implemented in a flexible manner in support of adjustment programmes in the medium term.
142.	In this connection, we welcome the discussion by the Development Committee of the World Bank in its report Financing Adjustment with Growth in SubSaharan Africa, 1986-90, the growing commitment by African Governments to undertake policy reforms and, in this context, the appeal to the world community to exert its best efforts to meet, through additional flows of official development assistance, the supplementary financing needs of sub-Saharan Africa as estimated by the World Bank. In this context, the Community and its member States consider that for the period from 1986 to 1990 bilateral donors should not become net recipients of official capital flows from African countries undertaking adjustment programmes. Also, we support $12 billion for the eighth replenishment of IDA, a substantial increase in the capital of the World Bank, and the contribution of $2.7 billion of the trust fund within the framework of the IMF Structural Adjustment Facility.
143.	The African paper mentions a number of proposals of a general character, of which we have taken careful note. In this context I should like to draw attention to steps already taken to reschedule debts of African countries and to improve the debt conditions through retrospective terms of adjustment on a country-by-country basis.
144.	Improvement in the quality of assistance should be sought in terms and conditions, sectoral priorities and the strengthening of co-ordination. In general, we consider it important to strive for multi-year aid commitments on the part of donor countries and organizations in support of African development. Direct investment has to be promoted. In this framework, we recall the
commitments under the Lomé Convention to strengthen the role of the private sector in the African development process.
145.	Much has been said, and much will be said, on follow-up and co-ordination; negotiations are not finalized. The programme of action as proposed is a framework under which African Governments should set up their own action plans and their projects and programmes and also determine the possibilities of their own financial and managerial efforts. On this basis the African Governments will be able to assess the needed external support. Whatever form it takes, an effective co-ordination and follow-up mechanism, especially at the national level, has to fulfil a catalytic role.
146.	We support the general principles underlying the establishment of follow-up mechanisms, as set out in the African paper. The mechanism should be simple, operational and not involving substantial addition expenditure. As much emphasis as possible should be placed on strengthening existing institutions rather than on creating new ones.
147.	The Community and its member States intend to contribute to the fullest extent possible to the success of this special session. We consider this to be our duty in view of our involvement in the development of Africa and the special responsibility we have towards that continent.
148.	Having concluded my statement on behalf of the European Community, I would like to continue, speaking on behalf of my country, the Netherlands.
149.	The ideas and proposals described in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery, which was adopted by the OAU in July 1985, and contained in the working document subsequently presented by the African community to this special session, are appreciated by my Government as a bold and courageous effort by the African nations to present a diagnosis of Africa’s problems and to propose methods to cure the negative social, humanitarian and economic results of the existing crisis. We admire the openness and frankness with which the African nations are focusing on their own primary responsibility, not only for prescribing the cures but also, and mainly, for the treatment itself.
150.	My Government agrees fully with the statement in the African documents that the main source for development in Africa, in particular sub-Saharan Africa, is the rural sector. In acknowledging this we want to recognize and underline two different elements.
151.	First, in terms of mid-term development, and realizing the economic structures of the world today, actual progress can be reached, in the vast majority of African States, only by creating economically and socially acceptable living conditions in the rural area, where most African people live. This means a greater focus on integrated rural development and on productive activities, including the development of human resources and the participation of the people, in particular women, who—as in most agriculturally oriented societies—constitute an essential but, in many countries, hitherto neglected element of responsible rural development.
152.	Secondly, I want to stress that the creation of acceptable living and working conditions in the rural areas is, in our opinion, the only way to avoid or diminish the disastrous results of uncontrolled and massive urbanization.
153.	Realizing that need for work is a basic reason for people to move to urban centres, and recognizing that the creation of jobs and better working conditions in the rural area could influence the necessity to move,
another problem comes into focus—that is, population growth.
154.	In all countries of the world, family life, and for that reason family planning, is a symbol of the privacy of every citizen. Decisions in these areas are taken by the people involved based on their personal, religious, cultural, social and/or economic points of view and possibilities. Governments have to be very careful how they tread in this very private sector. Nevertheless, actual figures show that without a slower rate of population growth, the African continent already in the coming decades will have increasing problems supporting its people in a reasonable way. Governments in Africa will be forced to look at this problem and to try to find a solution: not, of course by simply promulgating decrees or enacting laws, but through information, education, the creation of public awareness and activities which generate income for women. I call upon all the States assembled here to support the African countries in this task in all the necessary ways, which will demand immense knowledge and patience.
155.	My Government appreciates very much the fact that, as stated before, the African countries have looked first to themselves and their own responsibilities, considering Africa in terms of drawing lessons from the past in designing the future. Much attention has been given in the African documents to the improvement of economic management. My Government is convinced that technical assistance is needed for the strengthening of the management system, in particular that of governmental and para-statal structures. I might mention in this respect the opening a few weeks ago of a European Centre for Development Policy Management at Maastricht. This Centre will help to create and increase institutional capacity in developing countries.
156.	But in many cases bilateral technical assistance might be less effective, mainly because of suspected possible political, cultural or other influences in the administration of a recipient country. For that and other reasons, I feel that technical assistance to central governmental organizations and important para-statal organizations on a national level, in the areas of policy preparation, policy execution and management, where needed, should in the main be given by multilateral institutions such as the World Bank and UNDP. My Government stands ready to support those institutions in implementing this duty and will make available additional funds to the amount of 12.5 million Dutch guilders, that is, approximately $5 million, to be channelled through UNDP for United Nations activities in technical co-operation for development in the field of public administration and finance. 157. The African States have asked the international community to support their efforts with extended flows of concessional money. My Government wishes to stress the obligations the international community has accepted in principle: 0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance and 0.15 per cent for the least developed countries. I am sure that if all the developed countries would expedite their timing for reaching the targets a substantive flow of official development assistance to African countries could be guaranteed. The Netherlands reached both targets some years ago; our budget is geared at 1.5 per cent of our net national income, which is equivalent to approximately 1.25 per cent of our gross national product. Our aid to Africa almost doubled in the last four years. I can assure representatives that a substantial part of the growth of the Netherlands development budget will be added to the already heavily increased official development assistance flows to Africa.
158.	Substantial amounts of concessional financing have been made available to the African countries in the last 15 years. Even recognizing the immense needs, one wonders in a number of cases about the effective and efficient use of those funds. There is no reason to deny that donor countries and donor organizations bear a great responsibility with regard to the feasibility and costeffectiveness of their financial inputs in African economies. It is in recognition of that responsibility that my Government urges all donors assembled here to adhere to some guidelines which the African community has submitted. The main points are: a focus on rehabilitation of already existing economic capacities, instead of initiating all kinds of new projects; a strong shift from project aid to non-project aid to secure imports essential for development, including incentive goods; close aid coordination under the leadership of the recipient country to secure effectiveness and adherence to the priorities of the recipient country; and longer-term aid commitments through “multi-year indicative pledges”.
159.	With regard to co-ordination, the World Bank and UNDP should play a key role. We think that both those organizations, through consultative groups and roundtables, should support the African countries in their midterm planning and in the execution of their programmes. The World Bank and UNDP should co-operate closely, promoting through their actions a greater willingness and readiness in the donor community, bilateral and multilateral, to co-ordinate and co-operate, following the priorities decided by the African countries and formulated in the documents for consultative groups and roundtables.
Mr. Makekd (Lesotho), Vice-President, took the Chair. 160. No discussion on economic development in Africa is complete without touching on the African debt problem. Debt-servicing is reaching alarming proportions in many African countries and threatens to disrupt all development. Part of this debt is to multilateral institutions and commercial banks and cannot be influenced by us directly. An important part, however, is in the hands of official bilateral creditors present at this session. We have always strongly supported UNCTAD resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11 March 1978.9 In that framework the Netherlands has already converted all regular official development assistance loans to the least developed countries into grants. Today I can announce that we have decided to go further. We are prepared to cancel in principle for the coming five years—that is, the period of the Priority Programme—all debt-servicing on official development assistance loans to the African low-income countries willing to commit themselves to effective adjustment policies. That could lead to a diminution of debt-servicing for those countries of about 200 million Dutch guilders between now and 1990.
161.	We urge all donors to take similar measures. Official development assistance debts are of course only a small part of the problem. Other official debts also warrant special treatment in the appropriate forums. We for our part are prepared to consider favourably initiatives for adapting the rescheduling of those debts to the serious situation of the African countries that qualify. This includes the possibility of longer repayment periods. If possible, reschedulings should be placed in the same medium-term framework as the corresponding structural adjustment programmes.
162.	I shall conclude my statement, on behalf of the European Community and on behalf of my Government, by calling upon all countries represented here in New York to ensure that the session will clearly show the
willingness, the ability and the capacity of the.world to support Africa in its dire needs. The African countries and peoples have shown the purpose and the political will to attack those needs. The world is required to help Africa find the weapons to make the attack as forceful as possible.
163.	Mr. AURILLAC (France) (interpretation from French): With this special session of the General Assembly the moment of truth has come for Africa and, therefore, for us all: the truth about the unprecedented crisis that has stricken most countries on an entire continent and the truth about harshly realistic diagnoses, but also the moment for opportunity, so that the bold step taken by our African friends—so lucidly explained by President Diouf—will be matched by the solidarity they are entitled, to expect from a better-equipped international community, the solidarity without which all their efforts may well fail.
164.	As the prime donor of funds to sub-Saharan Africa and the second in respect of the whole of Africa, France has close, long-standing relations with many African countries north and south of the Sahara. Moreover, the new French Government has clearly shown that it intends to strengthen what it regards as a priority of its foreign policy. Hence France is particularly well placed to assess the gravity of what is at stake in this session and the importance of its results for the future of millions of men, women and children in Africa. It is therefore determined to take an active part in the session and work hard for its success.
165.	Without dwelling on an analysis of a well-known situation, I shall simply say that the sense of reality and responsibility has at last become a part of the diagnosis and is now commonly shared. On the other hand, it seems to me indispensable to determine together the major axes for concerted action to meet the African countries’ most immediate needs and their essential needs over the longer term, and also to spell out the new policies proposed by the French Government in order to meet this high-priority world-wide challenge, that is, the recovery of the African economies and their return to growth.
166.	The profound and persistent economic crisis of Africa requires a resolute attitude on the part of the international community. The whole world was struck last year by the shocking pictures of the famine that had stricken more than 20 African countries. This stark crisis has shed harsh light on the deadlock to which the fragility of development poorly adapted to population growth rates can lead. For more than 10 years individual income and agricultural output per capita have been steadily declining. The estimates for 1986 of ECA and the African Development Bank indicate that the situation will continue to get worse, notwithstanding the undeniable attempts at adjustment made by many States. Their share in international trade is going to decline, the balance of payments will continue to deteriorate, and in 1986 debt service will reach an unprecedented low point.
167.	The middle term is equally disturbing. The outlines provided by the World Bank show that even in the best scenario, per capita income will continue to decline in subSaharan Africa for many years ahead.
168.	The document elaborated by African States has analysed the internal causes of the failure of strategies and economic policies to adapt to the situation. They include: mismanagement, persistently low productivity, the burden of State structures, and practical values and social behaviour which hamper development. To these internal causes we have to add a whole series of external causes: drought, slumping demand in industrial countries
where there is stagnant growth, the high level of real interest rates, monetary disorders and, above all, accelerated deterioration of the terms of trade for most raw materials. All these situations have become precarious today, as we can see from the recent upheavals caused by the collapse of cotton, petroleum and even cacao prices. 169. The African crisis therefore is not comparable to any other. As an overall crisis affecting virtually the whole of a continent where two thirds of the least-developed countries are located, it requires a comprehensive concept of solutions. Yet it is a specific problem, affecting each African country differently. As such, it requires an individual approach tailored to the needs of each country. 170. In dealing with a stricken continent, the attitude of the international community must be resolute. All of us together—African countries, other developing countries and industrialized States—must lay the groundwork for co-ordinated action to provide solutions not only to the immediate problems but also to those which require long-term treatment.
171.	True, Africa has encountered extreme difficulties; yet it has an immense human and natural-resource potential. Hence we must all focus on two general objectives in Africa: exploitation of potential wealth and guaranteeing a lasting way out of the economic and financial crisis. .
172.	Exploitation of Africa’s potential wealth must be the goal of all co-ordinated action. In that regard, the first imperative is to preserve and develop Africa’s natural heritage. African agriculture must be revitalized on the basis of protecting and properly managing natural factors in production, such as soil, water, flora—the basis of all agricultural economies.
173.	At meetings of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel, the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development, the Silva Conference on tree and forest, held in Paris in February 1986, and UNDP, the international community has dwelt on the need for a common approach. Stress has thus been laid on the importance of training and research, strengthening competent African institutions, achievements in the field and the need for improving knowledge and the prediction of natural phenomena. With its SPOT satellite, France intends in this regard to make a special contribution to the understanding and forecasting of desertification phenomena. Moreover, it has undertaken to double in five years the assistance it devotes to the fight against desertification. This is particularly urgent because it is a long-term endeavour.
174.	The second imperative need in exploiting Africa’s potential wealth is to establish better management of human resources. With a population growth rate of more than 3 per cent, the highest in the world, the African continent faces a particularly grave situation: regional food production, which presently accounts for 75 per cent of consumption, is likely, by the year 2000, to meet the needs of only 60 per cent of its 850 million inhabitants. Far from being overpopulated, Africa is nevertheless suffering from demographic growth that outstrips its capacity for the generation of wealth and from severe imbalances in geographical distribution which prevent optimal exploitation of resources.
175.	However, it is not enough to control demographic growth. It is also essential to make better, wider use of Africa’s human resources, to train men and women, who are important factors in the economy. The educational system in Africa is currently in a state of crisis, as emphasized at the UNESCO Conference of Ministers of Education and those Responsible for Economic Planning in
African Member States, held at Harare from 28 June to 3 July 1982. This means a renovation and strengthening of basic education to ensure a minimum level of skills. Saturated administrations and public enterprises, often not viable themselves, must no longer be the normal outlets for an educated person. The goal should be to train people for productive activities in the crafts, in enterprises, in services or in agriculture—sectors which generate wealth and which in Africa are in need of qualified entrepreneurs and agents.
176.	The third imperative need is to improve regional co-operation. In the industrial and agricultural spheres the development of Africa will be viable only if the regional interrelationships are systematically elaborated. This is the South-South co-operation called for by President Diouf. We have seen in recent crop years that despite the drought there were surpluses here and there. But in the absence of adequate, diversified markets and a marketing system, they have gone to waste and have driven prices below the level of profitability.
177.	First of all, Africa must emerge from the economic and financial crisis in which it is now floundering. Economic growth cannot be decreed in Africa anymore than elsewhere, but it is incumbent upon the Governments of the African countries and on the international community to create conditions conducive to the generation of wealth.
178.	The first condition relates to the domestic policies of the African States themselves. Naturally, these are the sovereign choice of each country. Having become aware of the dangers over several years, most African countries have undertaken to put their public finances in order so as to maintain normal relations with the international financial community and assure external resources adequate to their investment needs. States must still make progress, especially in disengaging from activities to which they are not suited and in streamlining the administrative sector.
179.	Over and above the adoption of specific measures, conditions favourable to the producer must be created. Experience teaches that States can help in that regard by implementing pricing policies that reward the most efficient producers and credit policies that permit selection of the most profitable operations and appropriate interest rates. States should also limit public spending on unproductive activities in order to accumulate the savings needed for investment. Such policies imply that the private sector should be given broad responsibility. True “conversion” to the virtues of private initiative and commercial, craft or industrial enterprise seems to me one of the most significant developments of recent years. But the flagrant failure of pervasive State control does not of itself obviate the need to establish, with the support of external financing, public investment programmes having clearly-defined priorities.
180.	The second condition is the improvement of the international environment. Through their internal policies, the industrialized countries can do much to bring about that improvement. The French Government has been working to impart new vigour to the economy of France, and this policy should have beneficial implications for Africa, with which we are an important trading partner. International co-ordination should also be pursued in the appropriate international agencies in the monetary and commercial fields, in order to give the agents of international trade the means to do their job with security and peace of mind. Greater stability of exchange rates, the decline of real interest rates and the balance of prices on the major commodity markets should
make it possible to maximize the benefit to each partner and improve the quality of products. .
181.	The Economic Summit Meeting held at Tokyo from 4 to 6 May 1986 has made it possible to move ahead in this field. I hope that this effort will be continued and that in parallel there will be a renewal, on new bases, of international co-operation with regard to raw materials, which constitute the main source of income for the African countries.
182.	It is true that the financial context of these policies today has been described as a crisis of indebtedness, which is a major concern of African Governments. In order to cope with this problem, they have made great sacrifices and submitted themselves to rigid discipline. But that discipline should not be an end in itself; it should be a way of bringing about growth.
183.	In order to provide Africa with a real prospect of emerging from the crisis, the treatment of the difficulties of indebtedness, which should be flexible in order to take account of specific situations, will have to be associated with an appreciable growth of external transfers towards the African continent, particularly in the form of official development assistance. The support of donors must be strengthened in response to the reforms in domestic policies undertaken by the African States, for the more effective use of aid made possible by those reforms deserves to be accompanied by additional efforts on the part of the international community with regard to the co-ordination, volume and quality of aid.
184.	In the field of co-ordination, it is essential that all the general analyses, those of the multilateral agencies but also those of recipient Governments and of the biggest bilateral creditors, be comparable, in order to establish for each country concerned, under the responsibility of its Government, a single macro-economic document as a source of reference and support for the action of all those involved.
185.	When it comes to the volume of aid needed by the African countries, it is essential to avoid sterile statistical or methodological arguments. What is important is to take note of the evidence that the priority given to Africa must be strengthened and must take the form of progressive growth in Africa’s share of official development assistance.
186.	Effect should be given to this strengthening of assistance in various ways. First IDA should be reconstituted at a level of at least $12 billion to give it the mimimum means necessary for its work, and the African continent should benefit from an increasing share of those funds. Also, the commitment of each donor country to maintain a positive flow of capital to the whole of Africa would substantially improve the situation on the African continent. ••
187.	This is obviously the concern of all the industrialized countries. Is it not surprising, therefore, that the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD] by itself allocates more than 90 per cent of all official development assistance. The member countries of the Development Assistance Committee of OECD could enter into a collective commitment to increase Africa’s share of their total official development assistance above the present 30 per cent. More specifically, each donor might decide on a minimum percentage of its own gross domestic product to be devoted to Africa so as to go beyond the average of 0.09 per cent now reserved for that continent. It is, or course, for each donor to set the degree of priority that it intends to accord to the African countries, but an overall response is necessary so that there can be more predictability regarding the support
accorded by the international community to the African continent.
188.	Africa can no longer afford to service its debts normally. From one rescheduling to another, time will be needed to discharge the effect of the past. For many years ahead the borrowing capacity of the African countries will be very limited, and an objective analysis of the real stakes for each African country and for each creditor makes it clear that the cancellation of debt is at best a deceptive solution and at worst a devious ploy.
189.	In order not to repeat past errors and exacerbate the debt crisis from which most African countries at present suffer, it is indispensable that the quality of aid be improved. Of course, we must first strengthen what is called concessional aid, but that is not the only way, even if it is the most sensitive with regard to the criterion of foreign debt servicing.
190.	As in the past, the diversity of situations requires a combination of aid instruments adapted to specific realities. In one case priority should be given to balance of payments assistance, while in another it might be concessional aid, and in yet another, basic sectoral action such as the rescheduling of the debt. The true value lies in a case-by-case approach. It is a matter not of breaking new ground but of persevering.
191.	The quality of financial operations is no less essential, because it conditions future growth. While it is now fashionable in certain places to ridicule what has been called the “white elephants of Africa”, people sometimes forget that the implementation of those projects was quite often based on studies which had previously been considered sound and complete. The white elephants of today result from the studies of yesterday. Those of tomorrow are perhaps being prepared today in the serious atmosphere of study and research centres. That is why it is indispensable that the capacity for the analysis and the preparation of projects be strengthened.
192.	Account should be taken also of the positive effects, in many ways, of direct consecutive investment in mutually profitable co-operation between the enterprises of the North and those of the South.
193.	This is how the Government of France views the broad aspects of concerted action to help Africa.
194.	In conclusion, ! should like to explain how the French Government has decided to reorganize its policy of co-operation in order to provide a more effective response to the urgent challenge posed by the resumption of development in Africa. For France, co-operation is an exercise in solidarity or social justice at the international level. It is also one of the most reliable ways of keeping the peace, which is the prime condition of development. It is therefore a firm obligation.
195.	France, which will have dispersed more than 25 billion francs in official development assistance in 1986, ranks high among official donors. It is determined, in fulfilling its commitments, to devote 0.7 per cent of its gross domestic product to official development assistance as soon as possible. I need not recall that its effort is already six times higher than the average among the developed countries. Essentially it has already met the other objectives that it had set itself, in particular with regard to least developed countries.
196.	However, a country such as France cannot do everything. Its limited resources as well as the constraints imposed upon it by the need to ensure the recovery of its own economy compel it to choose priorities in its policy of solidarity.
197.	While determined to concentrate its efforts to provide development assistance on Africa, France has also determined to improve the quality of that aid. In particular, the French Government has decided to increase the proportion of grants by comparison with loans in its official development assistance. This is the most realistic way for a donor country with our commitments to contribute effectively and simultaneously to reducing the indebtedness of the African countries and to restoring their financial equilibrium.
198.	This is really the moment of truth. This truth does not lie in the excessive pessimism of certain analysts, the urgings of those who would have us wait and see or the tactical manoeuvres of those who try skilfully to camouflage their indifference to the difficulties of Africa. It lies rather in bold reasoning, sincere dialogue based on equality and the expression of frank goodwill, so that each specific effort undertaken by an African country can be matched by an increase in the support granted by the international community.
199.	As members know, there are close, long-standing ties between France and Africa, a truly whole-hearted attachment. That is doubtless because we share an unswerving dedication to the capacity of man. It is this humanism which is today the best reason for hope for the future of Africa. ■
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
Notes
•A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl.l (XXI).
2Ibid., declaration AHG/Decl.l (XXI), annex.
3	Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.	.
4	Adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session.
5	Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC.229/2).
^Caracas Programme of Action on economic co-operation among developing countries, adopted at the High Level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981.
7	Plan of Action of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to meet the critical economic situation in Africa, adopted by the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries at its extraordinary ministerial meeting on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985 (A/40/341, annex I).
8See A/41/341, annex II, para. 133.	,
9	Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. IS, vol. I, part two, annex I.
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
2nd
PLENARY MEETING
Tuesday, 27 May 1986, at 3.30 p.m.
N E w Y Q R K
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIES (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 5
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work (concluded)	.
1.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): This afternoon the Assembly will first proceed to the election of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session, who will also be a member of the General Committee. It is my understanding that, following consultations, there is general agreement that Mr. Stephen Lewis of Canada should serve as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session. I take it, therefore, that it is the wish of the Assembly to elect him by acclamation.
It was so decided (decision S-13/15*). .
2.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I congratulate Mr. Lewis on behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf. The General Committee for the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly has now been fully constituted.
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)
3.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I would draw the attention of members to two decisions taken by the Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting, upon the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee: first, owing to the very large number of speakers desiring to participate in the debate in a very limited amount of time, statements should not exceed 15 minutes; and secondly, the normal requirement for a quorum to open a plenary meeting is waived for the duration of the debate at this special session.
4.	Mr. AKINYEMI (Nigeria): On behalf of the Government and people of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, I congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your well-deserved election to the presidency of this special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. As the Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, President Diouf, said with so much dignity and eloquence this morning, Africa—and indeed the
•For the election of the other officers of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, see A/S-13/AC.I/SR.1, paras. 1 and 2.
whole world—expects much in terms of concrete results from this session. I wish to echo his every word.
5.	General Assembly resolution 40/40 enjoins us to focus our debate on the challenges facing African countries, with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures. In that regard, I shall focus attention extensively, though not exclusively, on the issue of the development of food and agriculture, the area in which I have been mandated to speak for Africa, 6. Permit me first of all to place on record Africa’s appreciation of Live Aid, Sports Aid and such activities. To watch these people, old and young, engaged in these selfless and soul-inspiring activities is to feel good about being part of the human race. Bob Geldof and the people he has motivated all over the world represent the acceptable face of humanity. Their activities are not necessarily condemnatory of us as Governments. However, they serve to remind us that humanity is not selfish, brutish and non-caring. Let Sports Aid remind all of us representatives of Governments of our capacity to do good and reach out to others if the will is there.
7.	I should also like to express Africa’s gratitude to the international community, including the Governments of individual countries, the United Nations system and voluntary organizations and agencies, for the generous assistance to the relief efforts during the recent drought and famine which affected many of our countries.
8.	We in Africa wish to stress the fact that to establish a prosperous future for our region there is need for our Governments, in concert with the international community, to focus in the short and medium term on specific priorities that will pave the way for the national and collective self-reliant and self-sustained growth and development of our economies. I wish, therefore, to reiterate Africa’s determination to face and overcome the twin challenges of survival and development through the implementation of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985.
9.	The Priority Programme addresses itself mainly to achieving a breakthrough in structural transformation and higher productivity. It also recognizes that the reactivation of African agriculture will not take place unless structural linkages are established between agriculture and industry. This will require the provision of agricultural implements, fertilizers and pesticides, as well as the processing of food and other agricultural products. Indispensable also will be economic infrastructures, particularly feeder and access roads, storage, marketing and distribution, and facilities for research in agricultural technologies.
10.	Food and agriculture are, therefore, the centre of concern, and they have been designated the priority of priorities. No doubt, all other sectors are important in so far as they support and facilitate the structural transformation of the agricultural sector, and in so far as they assist in combating desertification and in developing human resources.
11.	A major concern to Africa has been the long-term deteriorating trend in agricultural production and per capita food production. Major factors responsible for that disappointing performance include, inter alia, overdependence on rain-fed agriculture, inadequate investment, poor incentives to farmers, inadequate application of science and technology, inefficient marketing and distribution systems and institutionalized constraints. Other major factors that are mainly exogenous include, inter alia, the international recession, collapse in commodity prices, adverse terms of trade, decline in real terms in official development assistance, increased protectionism, high interest rates, currency fluctuations and the heavy burden of debt and debt-servicing obligations of African countries. While it is true that Africa is not the only region affected by extraneous trends, the continent does not have the capacity other regions have to cushion the impact of those external shocks owing to the structural rigidities and the excessive outward orientation and dependence of the African economies.
12.	During 1971-1980, agricultural production grew by an average of merely 1.6 per cent per annum. This compares unfavourably with a rate of growth of 3 per cent for the developing countries as a whole. The deterioration is more noticeable in food production. At a time when Africa’s population was growing at an average annual rate of 2.8 per cent during the 1970s, total food production in the region as a whole was increasing by no more than 1.5 per cent. The result was that food selfsufficiency ratios dropped from 98 per cent in the 1960s to 86 per cent in 1980. In the period 1980-1984, food selfsufficiency ratios declined even further, as food production increased by a mere 1 per cent while population grew at a rate of 3 per cent. The cumulative result is that today about one out of five Africans depends for his or her survival on food imports.
13.	It is obvious, therefore, that the widespread low level of productivity of the African economies is the fundamental cause of their continued underdevelopment and persistent crisis. Thus, a substantial increase in the level of productivity in all sectors, especially in agriculture, is a sine qua non for putting the African economies on .the road to development. Together with that should be structural economic transformation, without which many African countries will not be able to attain the stage of-self-reliant and self-sustained development with the implied flexibilities that will enable them to take their place as effective partners in the international system.
14.	We in Africa are fully aware that the task of structural transformation will require, on our part, a radical change in development priority. Nowhere has this realization^ been more clearly demonstrated than in my own country, Nigeria. The Federal Government of Nigeria has consequently embarked upon major changes in the orientation of devèlopment priorities, to lessen the dependence on the monoculture of oil exports and the attendant serious economic and social' problems.
15.	The Nigerian Government, like most other African Governments, and in consonance with Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery, has embarked on a' medium-term self-reliant structural adjustment programme in order to deal with structural distortions, low productivity and a high level of unemployment in the economy. Agriculture is the main priority. Within that priority, sharp focus is placed on the productive capacity arid improvement of the quality of life of the rural community and small-scale farmers who produce over 90 per cerit-of Nigeria’s output of food and fibre and constitute thé Overwhelming majority'of the population.
16.	On the side of African countries, individually and collectively, there is an unshakeable resolve to mobilize their internal resources and capabilities for the accomplishment of all those measures that are outlined in the Priority Programme to ensure the rapid recovery of the African economies and a substantial improvement in the well-being of our peoples. This special session of the General Assembly should, therefore, address the vital issue of external resource flows for Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery.
17.	The World Bank, which has made a study of the economic crisis facing Africa, states that Africa needs up to $35.3 billion a year over the next five years for the continent to be able to effect a gross domestic product [GDP] growth rate of 3 to 4 per cent a year by 1990. There is a growing consensus that Africa needs economic growth to raise the productivity of the existing capital stock and new investment to increase the share of investment as a proportion of GDP, create new job opportunities, increase consumption and enhance its capacity to service debts. African economies will not respond to structural adjustment if they are stripped to the bone, without the injection of additional resources and without policies which stimulate growth, investment and sustained development. .
18.	In terms of external resource flows for African economic recovery, the General Assembly at this special session has a duty to call for higher targets for official development assistance for Africa. Such assistance declined by about 9 per cent from 1980 to 1984. My delegation is aware that a few countries have of their own free will set higher aid targets. The ratios of official development assistance to gross national product for some countries have already exceeded the international target of 0.7 per cent of GDP. In making this appeal for higher aid targets, I am conscious of the fact that a number of donor countries have announced their commitment to increase their aid targets. However, I should like to urge the Assembly to uphold the principle that no donor country should be a net recipient of resource flows from any African country, in order to ensure that Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery-is not starved of resources. . . ■
19.	Several African countries have already begun to restructure their economies within the framework of the Priority Programme. That commitment to structural adjustment should induce commercial banks to step up lending to productive and export-oriented sectors of African economies. In addition, commercial banks should take full advantage of the increased role given to the private sector in African '.economies to stimulate growth’and increase consumption. Africa’s investment rate fell by 14 per cent in 1984. The current level of investment in Africa is less than what is required for sustained development. African countries would like- to urge commercial banks to exhibit a greater willingness to participate in’ the longer-term development of the African continent by seeking, among other things, nonproject lending on concessionary terms to enable African countries to import raw materials, spare parts and equipment in order to rehabilitate industries and increase the capacities of their under-utilized factories. African economies are not strong enough to bear the burden of short-to medium-term credits. The burden of servicing those debts and the attendant effects are known to have thrown African economies deeper into crisis. ' 20. My delegation wishes to stress the central role that multilateral institutions can play in economic recovery in Africa. The World Bank and other multilateral
institutions have an important role to play in promoting adjustment lending to African countries. Thejndustrial nations have to take urgent political decisions^: increase the resources of these multilateral institutions to enable them to respond much more to the development needs of African countries. Resource scarcity is posing one of the greatest threats to the success of the adjustment, lending programmes of these multilateral institutions. Iri most African States, total investment has been/pn the decline as increased debt-servicing payments and reduced external inflows are accompanied by cuts in both M®| and private investment. But severe budgetary cutsxdrtail " investment and growth on which the creditworthiness of African economies depend. The dilemma of the African situation points to the urgent need to take the political decisions necessary to increase the resources of the multilateral institutions that are willing and eager to respond to the economic crisis in Africa.
21.	Debt relief constitutes an important element in the flow of resources. World Bank statistics show that, inj respect of 10 highly indebted developing nations, total debt service absorbs one third of domestic savings and almost 8 per cent of the GDP. Interest payments alone amount to 4.5 per cent of the GDP. For African countries, debt service is calculated at about $24.5 billion a year between 1986 and 1990. This will exceed by far the most optimistic expectation of resource flows to complement internationally generated resources for the implementation of the Priority Programme. It should be recalled that the expected resource gap is put at $9.1 billion annually in the African document. Therefore, unless this special session takes account of the issue of ' debt relief within the context of resource flows for Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery, I maintain that African economic recovery will not be a reality as long as African countries are expected to meet their debt obligations at the current level. The international community has the responsibility to take political decisions that will result in appropriate debt relief. My delegation appeals to creditor nations and credit institutions to agree to multi-year reschedulings with African countries. Repeated reschedulings create a climate of uncertainty that makes sustained development difficult to achieve. Foreign suppliers exploit such uncertainty by increasing the price of their products. Frequent reschedulings lead to further accumulation of arrears, which in themselves halt new loan commitments.
22.	Africa has sought within the GATT framework unrestricted free access tq the markets of its major trading partners for tropical products. That hope has not been attained. Africa’s exports continue to be buffeted by increasing protectionism, low prices and instability in the exchange rates of the world’s major trading currencies. At this special session the General Assembly should urge Africa’s trading partners to roll back protectionist measures, refrain from introducing new restrictions and improve access to exports of African countries as part of the effort by the international community to increase resource flows to Africa. Africa’s share of world trade is currently very low. African States should be enabled to expand their trade with the rest of the world so as to lay a sound foundation for growth without aid.
23.	I wish to affirm anew the determination and commitment of Africa, its peoples and Governments to the creation of a new economic environment in the region that will enable it to function more effectively in (he international trading and economic system. In turn, Nigeria calls on all States Members of the United Nations and urges the Assembly at this special session to lay the
political framework that will encourage and enable the whole international community to mobilize the necessary resources for assisting the process of the rehabilitation and restoration of Africa’s economy. We consider this the real challenge of interdependence. It is an endeavour that will be found rewarding for all, since what ...helps Africa must also contribute to a durable global '’‘prosperity. -
24.	Let us therefore work for such a world in which we ¿will ipt only be unified in words but also united in action. '■^.' §f;<XA¥OTEN (Finland): Echoing my remarks from this rostrum at the fortieth session, last September [6th meeting], I wish to begin my statement by saying how delighted I am at seeing you, Sir, presiding over our deliberations. As always you can count on the full co-operation of.my delegation.	.
26.	I< also want to thank the Preparatory Committee and its Chairman, Mr. Pisani, as well as the Secretariat, for the thorough, preparations for this special session,
27.	My delegation wishes also to pay tribute to the President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity for his statement, which bore impressive evidence of the resolve of the African nations to overcome the present crisis in their continent.
28.	Despite the gradual alleviation of the widespread famine, the economic problems of Africa remain a major challenge to the countries of Africa and to the international community alike. This special session of the General Assembly offers a unique opportunity to establish a political foundation for concerted action for economic recovery of the African continent, especially in subSaharan Africa.
29.	External and internal causes of the critical economic situation in Africa have been thoroughly discussed over the past few years at international forums, and the roots of that situation have been acknowledged to be multiple. At the time of independence, many African countries were ill-prepared to undertake the task of economic transformation and growth. At the same time, expectations for economic and social advance were higher than ever.
30.	Internal constraints, like shortcomings in economic policies, lack of basic infrastructure and inadequate investment in agricultural development, coupled with the lack of proper incentives, especially for small farmers, have been aggravated by natural calamities like drought and desertification. Furthermore, external factors, such as the oil crisis in the 1970s and the international economic recession of the early 1980s, together with the decline in commodity prices, have led to a severe loss of export revenues for the already weak African economies. Adverse trends in terms of trade, high interest rates and the decline of official development assistance in real terms have contributed to the heavy debt burden of many African countries.
31,	In addition to economic misfortunes, Africa has been plagued by political instability, resulting in growing numbers of refugees. South Africa has intensified' its policy of aggression and economic destabilization against the countries in. the southern region, as the latest grave developments demonstrate. The people of Namibia continue to suffer under the illegal occupation imposed by South Africa. All this, combined with internal instabilities and external hostilities, has taken a heavy toll of.the scarce African resources and diverted them from priority economic purposes. International pressure on South Africa must be strengthened. The sovereignty of African
States must be fully respected. Violence in the continent must be stopped.
32.	We have been impressed by the determination of the African Governments themselves to review their domestic policies and to make necessary adjustments in their economies. Finland welcomes the adoption by the African heads of State and Government of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery I986-19901 which covers the remaining years of this decade. Finland fully agrees with the key orientation of the new policy directive aimed at intensified efforts at the national level. A new kind of recognition of the crucial role of sound macro-economic policies and higher priority for agriculture and rural rehabilitation is indeed necessary to pave the way to an ecologically sound and sustainable development process. The high priority of the rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance of existing production facilities, together with the necessary human resources development, well illustrate this approach. Finland has also noted that in all these efforts the effective use of domestic resources, both human and material, is called for.
33.	Finland supports the emphasis given in the Priority Programme to the participation in development of all citizens. The ultimate objective of all development efforts is to increase the well-being of the whole population. On the other hand, without determined utilization of the human potential at all levels and in all sectors agreed targets cannot be reached. The well-known role of women —for example, in agriculture—must be better reflected in economic planning. More attention must also be given to women’s heeds in the fields of health, social services and education. African women need recognition of the important role they already have in African societies.
34.	I should also like to emphasize the importance of population policies. The very high population growth rate in many countries makes it difficult, if not impossible, even to maintain present standards of living. The overall density of Africa’s population is still low, but in certain areas it is increasing at an alarming rate. Migration from rural areas has already created serious urban problems. Finland therefore urges the African Governments to look at population issues with all the seriousness that they deserve and adopt effective policies suited to their own circumstances.
35.	Finland acknowledges the fact that efforts to achieve these objectives and give effect to priorities need to be effectively supported by the international community. The extent to which the donor community is likely to increase aid to Africa will largely depend on the donors’ perception of the determination of the African countries to pursue growth-oriented economic adjustment as outlined in the Priority Programme. Donors—and this applies to my own Government as well—need to be reassured that aid and the recipient countries’ own resources are used effectively and that aid will not delay necessary policy changes or become a disincentive to them. It is imperative that the existing resources are managed in the best possible manner. In the view of Finland, which already now channels the bulk of its official development assistance to Africa, this is vital. Many of the reforms outlined in the Programme are such that the African Governments have to embark upon them in any case, but it is evident that the successful implementation of such reforms requires that the donor community accept its responsibility to support financially the long-term efforts of African countries. My Government is fully prepared to take part in intensified and co-ordinated assistance for the benefit of Africa.
36.	This special session of the General Assembly has been convened to focus the international community’s attention on Africa’s future needs. Our task here is to draw up a synthesis of the critical economic situation in Africa and to agree on joint action-oriented measures. Let me briefly summarize what the Government of Finland considers to be the main elements of concerted action.
37.	First, there should be a commitment on the part of the African Governments that they will reorient their development programmes along the lines indicated in their Priority Programme for Economic Recovery. Secondly, the donor community must support the policies that are to be implemented at the country level. Thirdly, a follow-up mechanism is necessary to make possible joint review of the implementation of agreed programmes. And, fourthly, the specific commitments of the parties in question should be made using existing multilateral and bilateral channels. This special session should, however, indicate the general scope of future resource requirements.
38.	Finland is confident that this special session can establish the necessary political foundation and mutual commitments. I believe also that such understandings will influence the ongoing negotiations to increase the resources of the international financing institutions, such as the eighth replenishment of IDA, as well as discussions on rescheduling the loans of the African countries. The co-ordinated efforts of the United Nations system in the field of emergency work in Africa have also given evidence that United Nations agencies are capable of adjusting their own programmes and working together in an efficient way. This example should be extended to the longer-term.programmes as well. The leadership role of UNDP in the field of co-ordination is important.
39.	My Government is ready to support the proposal to review the situation and the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990 [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex F] in 1988, at the forty-third session of the General Assembly. The message from this session should be unambiguous: the African Governments and the international community have decided to break the vicious circle of economic crisis in Africa and have adopted an action-oriented programme for economic recovery.
40.	Mr. YANEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all I wish to express my delegation’s satisfaction at the holding of this special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. In the General Assembly Spain supported the idea of convening this session and welcomed the fact that the relevant resolution was adopted by consensus.
41.	I also wish to highlight the important work done by the Preparatory Committee for the special session under the able leadership of its Chairman, Mr. Pisani. In recent months intensive work has been done to try to arrive at positions of agreement and converging interest among all participating countries.
42.	The international economic crisis has hit the African continent especially hard, since to the general problems of other geographic areas have been added, in this continent, additional structural factors and political instability. These basic factors have frequently been compounded by the implementation of development policies that later proved to be basically wrong. That is why we find it extremely useful that at this session we should analyse the situation so as to cast light on the major courses of action for the future. My delegation will spare no effort in pursuing these goals.
43.	Since not much time is available, I shall avoid a detailed and exhaustive analysis. Nevertheless, I wish to refer to some of the basic aspects for the future of African economies: financial problems, commodities, access to markets and the formulation of development policies.
44.	With regard to the financial problems of the African countries affected by the burden of external debt, Spain, as it has already pointed out in other forums, cannot but echo the fact that responsibility for their origin is widely shared. As mentioned by the head of Government of Spain in this same Hall during the fortieth session [10th meeting] it is important to recognize that the problem of the debt is not an isolated phenomenon but is an integral part of economic development in an interdependent world and, therefore, that solving that problem is a task for all countries.
45.	As far as the indebted countries are concerned, their inevitable contribution to solving the problem must be centred on the development of policies of economic reform and adjustment. These imply austerity programmes,' but also the updating of resources and productive systems. However, it is also necessary that when these countries practise sound economic policies, they should be able to rely on effective international cooperation so that they may open up visions of hope for their peoples.
46.	With reference to commodities, Spain has maintained a constructive position in the various international forums. We must nevertheless insist on the internal aspects of the problem. Thorough studies are required on the long-term prospects of certain commodities, as well as the adoption of policies that offer incentives for increasing productivity and diversification. Naturally, this does not mean that it is not necessary to continue making progress towards international solutions, especially those geared to favouring stabilization for export earnings.
47.	With regard to access to markets; we consider it essential to have the active and constructive participation of African countries in the forthcoming negotiations in GATT. As far as Spain is concerned, our adherence to the European Economic Community will in the next few years, and depending on the rate of our own integration with the Community, entail a gradual opening of our market to African countries within the Community’s scheme of the Generalized System of Preferences.
48.	Finally, we attach the greatest importance to the attention that has been given, in the African countries themselves as much as in developed countries, to a revision of development policies within a framework of economic policies strictly drawn up and implemented. Appropriate decisions in areas such as size of the public sector, exchange rate, pricing policy and a climate of security for direct investments seem to us to be necessary requirements—if not altogether sufficient—in order to approach the future with hope.
49.	On the basis of this approach, a redefinition of sectoral priorities is of the utmost urgency. During the 1960s and 1970s, major errors of approach were made in which—we must be frank—developed and developing countries alike participated. The excessive priority given to the manufacturing, services and major infrastructure works sectors left the rates of investment in the primary sector, and basically in agriculture, at levels which were not commensurate with the importance of the active population employed in that sector nor with the weight it.had on the GDP of the vast majority of the countries of the African continent. A development was sought that required a leap into the void, and the consequences have been tragic, especially in the area of food. That is why
we consider essential and wise the current analysis and trends towards growth based on rural and agricultural development.
50.	I also wish to refer briefly to what Spain has done in the area of co-operation in Africa. My country has taken part in the regional economic development machinery as a founding member of the African Development Fund and has contributed to all the replenishments of regular and special funds. It also participates with equal interest as a non-regional member in the African Development Bank.
51.	In the multilateral field Spain has since 1980 been a participant in the Food Aid Convention and has also co-operated within the framework of the International Wheat Agreement and the International Emergency Food Reserve, as well as in WFP. Without seeking to add to this list, I cannot fail to mention the contributions in money and in kind made by Spain to ease the lot of refugees in Africa within the framework of the first and Second International Conferences on Assistance to Refugees in Africa. My Government also supported the establishment of the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, whose praiseworthy work of co-ordination has gone a long way towards alleviating the plight of some 20 African countries that have been severely affected by drought, desertification and hunger. Spain took part in the conferences at Geneva and Rome and made financial contributions to some of their programmes.
52.	With regard to Spain’s efforts in the area of development assistance, I should point out that in 1984 that assistance increased by 100 per cent over the previous year. In 1985 we attempted to consolidate that effort in spite of the fact that my Government had to continue to pursue an adjustment policy to meet the challenges of the international economic crisis.
53.	With regard to Africa, we are in the midst of a phase of quantitative and qualitative change in two different but closely interrelated and complementary fields. On the one hand, since 1 January this year Spain has been a •member of the European Community. That has important and positive implications for Africa, since the traditional community effort in assisting that continent is now strengthened by Spain’s special contributions within the framework of the Third Lomé Convention.
54.	In addition, Spain, without altering its special relations with Latin America, is also envisaging an expansion of its bilateral co-operation with Africa. In this area we have in recent years strengthened our action in some North African countries and have undertaken a massive effort in Equatorial Guinea, an effort unprecedented in our foreign-aid policy. In the near future, we intend to expand the scope of what have so far been isolated, minor actions in other sub-Saharan African countries.
55.	In the next few years Spain will increase its resource flows to Africa, channelled either bilaterally or through the Community, to an amount equivalent to 70 per cent of the official development assistance it gave to all developing countries up to 1985. In view of my country’s income level and the fact that it has persisting socioeconomic problems, the effort that assistance represents and the firmness of our political will are clear. However, our resources will of necessity be limited, and we must therefore apply strict and selective geographical and cultural criteria in order to ensure the effectiveness and positive impact of our aid.
56.	We must not forget that there is a pressing need to improve the planning and implementation of co-operation programmes. Evaluations made show that a high percentage of projects turn out not to be viable. We
must not forget that the avoidance of such failures is the principal way in which we can increase available resources, since we are thereby optimizing the cost-benefit ratio.
57.	I do not wish to take up any more of our precious time. As the Netherlands Minister for Development Co-operation mentioned in her statement on behalf of the States members of the European Community [1st meeting], Spain believes that the solution of the serious situation in Africa must be based on close consultation involving the efforts of the African countries themselves and an appropriate international response.
58.	Before concluding, I.should like to reiterate Spain’s concern at the seriousness of the situation in neighbouring countries with which we have special historical ties and to express my Government’s hope that this session of the General Assembly will be an effective catalyst in creating the foundations for sustained and self-reliant growth in the African countries.
59.	Mr. THOMPSON (Fiji): Mr. President, you have already clearly demonstrated your considerable skills and tact during the fortieth session of the General Assembly. It is with great pleasure that I associate my delegation with the congratulations already expressed by preceding speakers. Within the few days allocated for this special session, we are confident that your leadership qualities will guarantee an effective and productive outcome.
60.	While most developed countries continue to enjoy their comfortable standards of living, much of the developing world slides deeper and deeper into poverty, debt and deprivation. This disparity has destablized many countries and poses grave dangers for all nations. It is a time-bomb that must be defused quickly, which task must be tackled comprehensively and with collective determination. Eloquent rhetoric must be replaced by realistic and meaningful support and action, particularly by the “haves” of this world.
61.	The causes of the economic ills of developing countries are many and complex. Some are due to such uncontrollable natural phenomena as drought and desertification; some to the vicious circle of poverty, lack of knowledge and underdevelopment. Others are due to mismanagement and, of increasing importance, to the denial of opportunity through the erection of deliberate barriers against the products of developing countries. This rising protectionism, especially in developed market economies, will reduce or even close the most useful avenue we of the third world have for dignified development.
62.	“A new beginning” was how the President of Senegal described Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990* in his inspiring address this morning. A more purposeful spirit is energizing the vast continent of Africa. The willingness of the nations of Africa to carry out an incisive and realistic analysis of their problems and objectively examine their capabilities is an important first step in the process of selfsustaining recovery.
63.	It is heartening to my delegation to note that the document produced by the Organization of African Unity [0/4 LT]2 and the Priority Programme are forthright and honest and clearly analyse the causes of the current critical situation. The means necessary to provide solutions to set Africa on the road to economic recovery are also outlined. My delegation has been impressed by the thoroughness of the exercise and the considerable amount of soul-searching and priority-setting it has entailed. As an indication of the way the countries of Africa are
prepared to face facts, it indeed augurs well for the future of the continent.
64.	The international community has for some time now been rendering essential emergency relief to stricken areas in Africa. My delegation, like others, pays a tribute to the sterling work carried out by the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa under the able direction of Mr. Bradford Morse. It is clear that without this rapid response by the international community the situation would be far worse. But, while such aid brings immediate relief, it can be only temporary. The countries of Africa have therefore taken a bold and concerted step to find long-term solutions. The recovery will no doubt be painfully slow, but, with the will and the determination that are being demonstrated, real and tangible progress should be visible in a relatively short time.
65.	To a large extent, the recovery will depend on the availability of resources. Because the economy of much of Africa is in a severely ravaged state, there is a limit to the resource input that can come from within. Nevertheless, the countries of Africa are confident of providing the major portion. The rest must obviously come from the international community. We sincerely hope that the international agencies will co-ordinate their activities to avoid unnecessary duplication and waste of very scarce resources.
66.	The world economy is so intimately interrelated that the ills or fortunes of one country have a significant impact on the rest. Taking the whole of Africa together, if its situation does not improve, the calamitous effect on the rest of the world will be dramatic and frightening. Consequently, even we, in our remote part of the Pacific, can readily accept that it is clearly in our interests, and indeed in the interests of the whole world, for Africa to be assisted and encouraged on to a path of strong, stable growth. It is an effort on behalf of us all, to which we must all be prepared to contribute.
67.	The human misery and suffering caused by the calamities that have befallen certain parts of Africa in recent years are not unknown in our region. We have our share, sometimes we think more than our fair share, of natural disasters, so we can empathize with their hardships. Only a fortnight ago a near neighbour, Solomon Islands, suffered a devastating cyclone, with tragic loss of life. Not a month before that, my country was battered by a cyclone and flooding, which caused extensive disruptions to the economy and infrastructure. Other island States regularly go through the same cycles. Therefore, in whatever way we can, even if it is only by strong moral support, we will be fully behind the efforts of the countries of Africa to work their way towards economic recovery.
68.	The main focus of the recovery programme rightly is on strengthening agriculture, and in particular on improving the ability of the countries of Africa to feed themselves. It is a tragedy that food self-sufficiency in many countries has dropped substantially over the past decade, but with the new proposals this situation should be reversed. A high degree of self-sufficiency in food, for most of our agrarian-based economies, appears to be an important pre-condition of sustained economic development.
69.	The fact that a special session on the critical economic situation in Africa is necessary at all provides a grim reminder to the world that problems should not be allowed to reach critical proportions before any concerted effort is made to tackle them. As we are talking about development, I am prompted to make a plea on behalf of the less visible, though no less vulnerable, regions and
the small countries, in particular the developing island countries. Our problems are insignificant compared to those of the scale of Africa’s, but we too need support, understanding and assistance, although on a much more modest scale. The moral we can see in this special session is that it is clearly preferable and much less costly to give assistance and support early, before the problems become chronic and intractable.
70.	' A genuine compact of partnership between developed and developing countries must be fused. Two examples come easily to our mind when forms of international co-operation are considered. One is the Lomé Convention between the European Community and the African, Caribbean and Pacific States. The other, in our part of the world, is the South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement, the regional trade agreement between Australia and New Zealand and the South Pacific Forum island countries. The two are examples of the sort of relationship that needs to be fostered to enable developing countries to earn their way towards a better way of life for their peoples.
71.	The countries of Africa appear determined to take ambitious, and therefore risky, initiatives to get their development processes moving at an acceptable pace. Because the outcome of their efforts is of direct interest and concern to the whole world, we believe it is incumbent on the international community to give its fullest support with all the means at its disposal. Donor countries have a special responsibility to look generously at the supplemental assistance requirements identified by African nations and accept the compact in the spirit in which it is offered. It is an opportunity that might not recur.
72.	Ms. VÉZINA (Canada) (interpretation from French): My first remarks are addressed to the Secretary-General and to the members of the Preparatory Committee, to whom I extend my sincere thanks for having organized this special session of the General Assembly.
73.	We all know why we are gathered here today. The economic crisis in Africa concerns us all. In March 1985 we met at Geneva for the Conference on the Emergency Situation in Africa to respond to an urgent call from Africa, which had been stricken by a disastrous famine. Today, this food crisis, while not entirely behind us, is being resolved, and we are encouraged by this.
74.	As it meets here today, at the request of the OAU, the international community is responding also to the deep concern of our peoples. For Canadians, emergency assistance for those who are dying of starvation is not enough. My compatriots want us to move beyond the catastrophe to address its underlying causes.
75.	I should like to give members some idea of how the whole of Canada has responded to the African crisis of the past two years. I shall then address the economic policy proposals which African Governments themselves have put forward for the renewal of growth and development in the region. Finally, I shall indicate how we foresee our contribution to the development of this continent.
76.	Canadians have been deeply moved by the African crisis. As a people we have mobilized in an unprecedented way in an attempt to come to the aid of those stricken by this disaster. This response has taken many forms. First, there was the remarkable work of the news media, which, with perseverance, compassion and respect, awakened our conscience. There were also tens of thousands of offers of assistance from individuals, groups, institutions and provincial and municipal governments that felt compelled to help. Trade unions, co-operatives, local groups, schools and universities spontaneously organized collections of funds and offered their assistance. More
than $60 million was collected from the general public in Canada. Our volunteer organizations involved in international co-operation spontaneously formed an Africa Emergency Assistance committee. So widespread was this grass-roots reaction that our Government appointed a special co-ordinator to harmonize the activities of all the groups and organizations wishing to assist Africa. Later I shall refer to the lessons that we have learned from this experience.
77.	I have briefly outlined Canadians’ response to the African crisis. I should be remiss if I failed to mention how the Africans themselves have reacted to the situation, for the Governments and the peoples of Africa have not been inactive—quite the contrary. The emergency operations were administered and financed in the first instance by the Africans themselves. As soon as the rains resumed, Africa as a whole increased its grain production to 55 million tonnes, a 34 per cent increase over 1984. Countries with food surpluses, such as Côte d’Ivoire, Togo and Zimbabwe, shared then with fellow African countries. Need I say anything about the extraordinary example of solidarity that the African countries have always given the international community in receiving and assisting refugees?
78.	Canada also attaches considerable importance to the fact that African Governments have themselves taken the lead in identifying long-term solutions and in making their own analyses of the fundamental problems. They have identified many, if not most, of the same principal elements relating to the causes of the crisis as we did in our own analyses.
79.	The OAU has proposed joint responsibility, whereby assistance would be tied to tangible evidence of a determined desire to bring about adjustments. Canada welcomes this approach and undertakes to support the African countries in their efforts. The level of resources that we shall commit to African development will continue to be substantial and will be increasingly flexible. Furthermore, since 1 April, pursuant to a decision made by the Prime Minister of Canada, Brian Mulroney, our official development assistance programme has been implemented entirely through grants.
80.	The OAU recognizes that priority must be given to agricultural development, that economic policies must be adopted which will create the environment needed for that development and that agricultural research must be encouraged. For our part, we shall give those matters top priority in our co-operative activities in Africa.
81.	The OAU emphasizes the importance of continuing the struggle against drought and desertification and improving public investment policies. These also are factors that we consider essential to recovery.
82.	The OAU mentions the role of women in development. As a Canadian Minister and as a woman, I regard this as a basic issue. How can African women contribute fully to the economic development of their continent if we deprive them of the technology, the financial resources and the training that they need?
83.	The OAU mentions the need for the private sector to play a part. Canada is currently undertaking a major review of its co-operation programmes, inspired by a philosophy based on -the dynamism of our commercial enterprises and our voluntary organizations.
84.	The OAU believes that the essential elements of a solution can be found in strengthening management institutions, in reforming monetary and financial policies, in demographic policies and in recognizing the characteristics peculiar to each region. How can Canada help but share that point of view?
85.	We are heartened that the OAU speaks of the need for us jointly to improve the structures for co-operation, especially with respect to programme support, the evaluation of technical assistance and the co-ordination of foreign aid.
86.	The African countries are seeking an economic environment that encourages growth, the elimination of protectionism and the institution of trade and agricultural policies favourable to the developing countries. Canada endorses those objectives. We shall continue to work for the strengthening of growth-oriented policies through IMF and the World Bank. We are already committed to dealing with trade problems in new negotiations within GATT. We are ready to explore, within UNCTAD and at the level of World Bank programmes for structural adjustment, possible solutions to the problems facing raw materials producers.
87.	Other major elements of the specific proposals made by the OAU are debt relief, support for reforms in A.frica, financial support for priority programmes and followup mechanisms at both the national and the international levels. Canada also regards them as very important components of a solution. However, understanding problems does not mean that they are solved. It is necessary to proceed to action—concerted action involving concrete measures.
88.	I have spoken of the grave concern about the situation in Africa felt by Canadians. My Government was therefore confident that it had the full support of our people when it announced on 6 May the launching of an initiative that we call “Africa 2000”. We should like that operation to be the symbol of international hope, hope that one day we shall have a green Africa. I invite the recipient and donor countries to join in. An amount of $150 million of the Canadian International Development Agency’s current funds has been made available exclusively for the operation over the next five years. That is in addition to the already impressive funds earmarked for our aid and co-operation programme on the African continent. It will bring to more than $900 million the money, goods and services transferred from Canada to Africa in 1986-87 alone.
89.	I announced in the Canadian House of Commons that that was only the first phase of our plan of action. I am happy to be able today to outline two additional measures that Canada plans to take immediately.
90.	I have already spoken of the debt problem of the sub-Saharan countries of Africa, which is hindering their development and growth, with tragic consequences for their peoples. A significant part of that debt is made up of outstanding loans originally offered under official development assistance. Such debt to Canada totals more than 700 million Canadian dollars and involves a burden for the countries concerned of 250 million dollars in payments over the next 15 years.
91.	lam announcing today that Canada is offering to the countries of sub-Saharan Africa a moratorium on the repayment of those loans for an initial period of five years. We are prepared to extend that measure in five-year segments until the year 2000. We wish in this way to help give all the countries of Africa that face serious external payment difficulties and have demonstrated a commitment to undertake economic adjustment the room to manoeuvre that they need to put their economies back on a solid foundation.
92.	We are prepared to begin discussing the application of this measure immediately, on a country-by-country basis, within the framework of World Bank consultative groups or in other appropriate forums. This measure is
a modest one, but it is practical and concrete. It is meant to reinforce the support that the international community will provide to countries that are making efforts to adjust. We hope that other countries.will adopt similar measures.
93.	The second measure I wish to announce relates to the lessons we have drawn from the food crisis in Africa. Over the past two years it has been evident to us that Africa’s greatest strength lies in the determination, courage and long experience of its people. It is the Africans themselves who are the masters and the architects of their future.
94.	Our involvement in emergency operations has shown us that in villages, local communities, volunteer agencies and non-governmental organizations there are groups which can play a strategic part in mobilizing Africa’s human energies and involving them in the continent’s own development. In Canada’s “Africa 2000” programme, I announced our objective of introducing 2,000 small co-operation projects in Africa by the end of 1987. Our very first partners in this undertaking will be Canada’s voluntary organizations, and that explains why their representatives are here as official members of our delegation.
95.	Within the same context, Canada is at this session proposing to create a new mechanism within the multilateral aid system. Its role would be to make available to local collectives, village councils and volunteer organizations in Africa funds and technical expertise to help them carry out projects of their own choosing to meet their needs in the fields of the struggle against desertification, the conservation of ground cover and food production. We are convinced that this new approach deserves our best efforts.
96.	Far from abandoning the traditional forms of our country-by-country assistance, in which we together attacked the problem of the under-equipping of Africa by implementing major development projects, we are simply saying that there is also room for innovation. Consequently we have asked UNDP to help us define the nature of such a facility for Africa. My Government is encouraged by the favourable response we have received from the new Administrator of UNDP. He has assured us of his support in setting up a working group to elaborate that concept. We are grateful to him in that regard.
97.	Canada is therefore prepared to contribute $20 million over five years to such a new mechanism once it has been created. We hope that other Governments will want to take part in this initiative, either by contributing financially or by other means. A number of developing countries have already gained a great deal of experience in food production and social forestry. I trust they will be willing to share their knowledge, expertise and resources with those in need in Africa.
98.	We see this initiative as an act of faith in Africa’s greatest asset, which is its population, its small producers, and its men and women farmers.
99.	There is no crisis that does not hold promise. We will bear witness to this here this week through our innovating and common action. That is my firm belief, and that of all of Canada. That is why, as Minister for External Relations and on behalf of my Government, I promise to do my utmost, looking ahead to what Africa can be in the year 2000, the Africa in which you and I believe: a green Africa in which it is good to live.
100.	Mr. VORONTSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (.interpretation from Russian): This special session of the General Assembly has been called to consider a question that is important and urgent for millions
of people: that of working out and approving an effective and comprehensive programme for the solution of Africa’s economic problems.
101.	We in the Soviet Union have been following closely and with great sympathy the grave situation in Africa, where the problems of backwardness, poverty, hunger, disease and horrifying infant mortality have become acute. We understand the legitimate indignation of African peoples at the stepping up of neo-colonialist exploitation and the attempts of imperialism to use a sophisticated system of subjugation in order to try to regain control over the destinies of entire nations and peoples.
102.	The documents of the XXVIIth Congress of the Communist Party of the= Soviet Union stress that the desperate situation of many developing countries has become a major world problem. Yesterday’s colonialists would like to use loans and credits to make African States bargain away their political independence, which they have won in a grim struggle against imperialism. As the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev, noted recently, “This is also a kind of terrorism committed by imperialism; it is economic terrorism”.
103.	The so-called contribution of imperialism, and first of all United States imperialism, to African affairs is not confined to economic diktat. It manifests itself in acts of aggression, armed interference in the internal affairs of sovereign African States, in plots to overthrow progressive régimes, in fanning the flames of regional conflicts and hotbeds of tension, in the crimes committed by terrorists and mercenaries, in the bombs and rockets that have fallen on schools and child-care centres in Tripoli and Benghazi, in the hundreds of killed or wounded Libyan women and children, in the bloody raids of the South African racists against Zambia, Zimbabwe and Botswana, in the millions of dollars spent on maintaining UNITA3 and other anti-Government gangs which have brought suffering and death to innocent Africans.
104.	. A serious and comprehensive analysis of the economic difficulties prevailing in Africa indicates that their real causes are rooted in the ills inherited from colonialism, in the merciless plunder and selfish policies pursued by former colonial Powers towards the African countries. Today there is an abundance of studies convincingly demonstrating that the root causes of the African crisis originated in colonial times. That is demonstrated also by the report of the Secretary-General to the special session.
105.	The attempts of the African States to attain genuine economic independence have come up against. the opposition of the imperialist Powers and their monopolies, which pursue a deliberate neo-colonialist policy of exploiting the natural, human and financial resources of the continent. The ending of neo-colonialist plunder is à vital necessity, an imperative of our time. The crisis faced by African countries cannot be overcome by new injections of financial assistance; That is not the way to cure the disease. Radical measures are required to eradicate its deep-seated causes, which were inherited from colonialism and are being engendered by neo-colonialism.
106.	Imperialism continues to thrive and solve its problems by plundering the developing countries, including African countries, exploiting them with utter ruthlessness. Suffice it to say that in Africa, where since 1980 the per capita income has been declining by an average of 4.1 per cent annually, every dollar invested by transnational corporations has paid a profit of $3.50. As a result, the poor have become poorer and the rich richer in the world capitalist economy. IMF and the World Bank, both of
which are controlled by the West, are becoming increasingly involved in implementing that policy.
107.	Africa has had to pay dearly for the so-called aid of Western States and their monopolies and banks. They want to make Africa phase out the public sector and allow the predatory transnational corporations uncontrolled access to the economic life of African countries. The West is seeking to lay the entire blame for the present desperate situation on the African countries and to explain the crisis exclusively in terms of errors in their national development plans and an “excessive” emphasis on the public sector in their economies, which it claims interferes with the “healthy” play of free market forces.
108.	We categorically reject all attempts to take advam tage of the critical situation of African countries in order to interfere in their domestic and foreign affairs and ultimately to block the process of Africa’s economic emancipation and undermine its economic security.
109.	We fully support the just demands of African countries that the industrialized Western States compensate them for the damage caused to the economic and social development of the continent by the latter States’ selfish, egoistic policies.
110.	The policies of South Africa’s racist régime are directly responsible for the critical economic situation of a large number of African countries. Those policies result in economic, political and military destabilization in southern Africa. The damage inflicted by the South African racist régime on the economies of the countries of the subregion in the past five years alone has exceeded $10 billion, which is four times as much as the amount of the so-called assistance received by those countries from industrialized Western States in the same period.
111.	As a result of United States and South African policies in Africa, many African countries have become involved in the arms race, which consumes huge financial and material resources and has a damaging impact on their economies. If the resources that are today wasted on the arms race—an astronomic sum of nearly $1,000 billion annually—were to be channelled to peaceful purposes, famine, epidemics, illiteracy and economic backwardness could be overcome within a very short time.
112.	The Soviet Union consistently and vigorously pursues its fundamental policy aimed at curbing the arms race, preventing its spreading to outer space, ensuring international security and putting into practice as soon as possible the principle of disarmament for development. The United States has now refused to participate in the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, but the Soviet Union insists that it be held as scheduled.
Mr. Guissou (Burkina Faso), Vice-President, took the Chair.
113.	Ôur peace initiatives are well known. The programme for the complete and general elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2000, put forward by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in his statement of 15 January 1986, is of historic importance. The Soviet Union believes that every measure in the field of disarmament should not only bring with it a greater measure of security, but also make it possible to release more funds for improving people’s lives and overcoming backwardness, including, of course, in the African countries.
114.	The Soviet Union has launched a major initiative regarding the establishment of a comprehensive system
of international security in the military, political, economic and humanitarian spheres. International economic security is inherent in such a system, and it provides for the exclusion from international practice of unlawful discrimination, the just solution of the foreign debt problem, the establishment of a new international economic order and the solution of other serious economic problems that affect the destiny of civilization. We feel that it is important to convene at some time in the future a world congress on the problems of economic security at which it would be possible to discuss as a package all the problems affecting international economic relations.
115.	In making these proposals we were thinking also of African countries whose economic security is in jeopardy. We were mindful of the numerous instances of imperalism taking advantage of Africa’s economic troubles to interfere in its internal affairs, of the United States and several other Western countries imposing illegal “sanctions” against Libya, of the economic blockade of Lesotho by South Africa’s racist régime and of numerous other similar actions. As is justly stressed in the Lomé Declaration4 adopted at the Ministerial Conference on Security, Disarmament and Development, held at Lomé from 13 to 16 August 1985, the concept of security in Africa goes beyond the military aspects and should include social and economic development tasks. And, as has been demonstrated by the most recent acts of piracy committed by imperialism against African countries, it is but one step from economic pressure to direct military aggression.
116.	A close analysis of the roots of Africa’s economic difficulties demonstrates convincingly that they are interrelated and complex and should therefore be dealt with in a comprehensive manner. The Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa,5 adopted at the twenty-first session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, correctly mentions, among the major causes of Africa’s economic problems, the deterioration of the terms of trade and the ensuing reduction of export earnings, the unprecedented rise in interest rates and sharp fluctuations in exchange rates. As a result of all those factors, the external debt of the African countries has become a serious problem, with some estimates putting it at almost $200 billion. Indeed, the noose of debt is strangling Africa’s already vulnerable economy and increasing the net outflow of financial resources from African countries, which, according to estimates by ECA, already exceeds $9 billion annually.
117.	According to the Centre on Transnational Corporations, during the last 15 years the amount of transferred profits from direct foreign investment in Africa has been higher than the average for all other developing countries taken together. In the 1970s the outflow of financial resources from Africa exceeded the inflow by 80 per cent. In the period 1980 to 1983 direct foreign investment in African countries amounted to $5.5 billion, while the outflow was four times higher, that is, $22 billion, so that the net outflow of resources through transnational corporations was $16.5 billion.
118.	We share the view held by the countries participating in the twenty-first session of the OAU Assembly that a lasting solution to the continent’s problems cannot be attained through short-term emergency measures alone. We believe that those measures should be linked to action to improve the overall international political and economic atmosphere and vigorous efforts to curb the arms race. These measures should also be closely linked with the efforts to improve and democratize international economic relations and to ensure international economic
security on the basis of such fundamental United Nations documents as the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)], the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S- VI) and 3202 (S- VI)], and other important decisions adopted by the General Assembly in this field. Those measures should be interrelated with the implementation of the fundamental documents adopted at forums of African countries, particularly the Lagos Plan of Action.6
119.	The Soviet Union supports the proposal to convene an international conference on Africa’s external debt. We believe that this problem should be considered in the context of a search for equitable ways of reaching a global settlement of the external debt of the third world as a whole.
120.	We express our solidarity with the African countries’ efforts to consolidate their sovereignty over their natural resources and all their economic activities and to limit the negative effects of the activities of foreign capital, above all transnational corporations. It is not curtailing the public sector, as the West insists, but rather strengthening its role, making wider use of planning in the economy, increasing efficiency in the management of national economies and implementing progressive social and economic changes, including democratic agrarian reforms, that is the shortest path to overcoming backwardness. In saying that, we are drawing upon our own experience. In our view, that would guarantee the success of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.'
121.	We have always categorically opposed attempts to impose—especially through United Nations documents— on developing countries “models” of economic development alien to them. The choice of social and economic systems and economic policies is the undisputed sovereign right of each nation.
122.	In Africa, like everywhere else in the world, our policy is open and honest. We regard the peoples that have thrown off the yoke of colonialism and embarked on the road of independent development as our friends and equal partners. The Soviet Union, within the framework of equitable co-operation and within the limits of its abilities, and in the forms consistent with its social system and recognized by the developing countries themselves, will continue to provide the peoples of Africa political support and economic assistance in their efforts to achieve genuine economic independence.
123.	The Soviet Union has concluded intergovernmental agreements on economic and technical co-operation with 37 African countries. With Soviet assistance, more than 330 industrial plants have been built and put into operation in African countries, and about 300 are under construction or planned. These include power stations with an installed capacity of 4.6 million kilowatts and industrial facilities capable of producing annually 4.1 million tons of pig iron, 4.5 million tons of steel, 2.4 million tons of rolled metal, 2.5 million tons of cement and 3 million tons of bauxite and of processing 3 million tons of oil. The development of the industrial and energy sectors accounts for about 75 per cent of our total assistance. 124. In the 1980s, in the light of the seriously deteriorating food situation in the countries of the continent, the Soviet Union has been increasing its assistance to African countries in the development of agriculture and related agro-industrial sectors of the economy. The Soviet Union is assisting African countries in land reclamation and irrigation and in land improvement, as well as in the mechanization of agriculture. In the period 1986-1990 it
is planned to triple the scope of co-operation in this field, especially with the sub-Saharan African countries.
125.	More than 450,000 experts and skilled workers from Africa have received training, with Soviet assistance. More than 30,000 nationals of African countries have received higher and specialized secondary education in the Soviet Union, and 22,000 more now are studying in the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has also provided assistance to African countries in establishing about 100 educational institutions.
126.	The total volume of Soviet economic assistance to African countries, calculated on the basis of United Nations methodology, amounted to 1.2 billion roubles in 1985—that is, approximately $1.7 billion.
127.	In providing credits, the USSR is not seeking for itself any privileges or concessions, control over the natural resources of other countries, or any profits. A considerable part of Soviet credits is paid back with export products of African countries, both traditional and non-traditional, as well as with products of enterprises built with Soviet assistance.
128.	At the same time, aware of the objective monetary and financial difficulties faced by most countries of the continent, the Government of the USSR in 1981-1985 deferred debt payments totalling over 1.7 billion roubles —that is, about $2.4 billion—including interest payments, on Soviet credits to African countries. The Soviet Union is also providing grants. For example, Soviet drought-related assistance to Ethiopia, calculated on the basis of United Nations methodology, amounted to $260 million on 1 January 1986.
129.	The Soviet Union maintains trade relations with practically all African countries. South Africa is the only exception, because of its policy of racial discrimination against the indigenous population. Trade relations with African countries continue to be strengthened. Intergovernmental trade agreements concluded by the Soviet Union with 40 African countries have contributed to that process. Trade with a number of countries is being conducted on a long-term basis.
130.	For the Soviet Union, co-operation with African countries and unselfish assistance to them is not a onetime event; it is a manifestation of our consistent policy of solidarity with newly independent States, a policy that is not subject to transitory political considerations. We shall continue to advocate the development of co-operation with African countries for the strengthening and expansion of their economies, so that Africa can cope successfully with its critical social and economic problems.
131.	The Soviet delegation believes that the United Nations should work out an effective comprehensive programme for the solution of Africa’s economic problems. As has been stressed by Mr. Gorbachev, “It is the duty of the United Nations to do its utmost to promote the acceleration of the process of decolonization in the economic field and the restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.” We are ready to work actively and constructively with all interested delegations in carrying out the tasks facing the United Nations and ensuring a successful outcome of this special session of the General Assembly.
132.	Mr. OKITA (Japan): Early this morning I arrived in New York from Ottawa, where I had attended another United Nations meeting—that of the World Commission on Environment and Development. That Commission is chaired by Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, the present Prime Minister of Norway, and the Vice-Chairman is Mansour Khalid of Sudan. We were 22 Commissioners
and we discussed environment and development problems. Many of the issues are closely related to the African issue which we are taking up at this session. In fact, the Commission was set up three years ago on the initiative of the Japanese Government and approved by the General Assembly in 1983 [see resolution 38/161]. We shall be producing our report some time next year, and it will be discussed at the fall session of the General Assembly in 1987.
133.	On behalf of the Government and people of Japan, I should like, first of all, to extend my warmest congratulations to Mr. de Pinies on his assumption of the important post of the presidency of this special session. I hope and trust that under his able leadership this session will achieve the results that we all eagerly anticipate. I should like also to express my profound appreciation to Mr. Diouf, current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, for the devoted efforts he has made since the Assembly’s twenty-first session in connection with the preparation for and realization of this session. I also wish to pay a high tribute to Mr. Pisani, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, for his valuable contributions in preparing for this session.
134.	It is a great pleasure for me to have an opportunity once again to discuss development issues with representatives of other Member States six years after I attended the eleventh special session, in 1980, as head of the Japr anese delegation.
135.	The United Nations, which commemorated its fortieth anniversary last year, is now at a turning point in every respect. Although reference is sometimes made to the sluggishness that has marked the North-South dialogue in recent years, the international co-operation and assistance extended in response to the economic crisis in Africa over the past several years stand as a very good example of North-South co-operation. Although many African countries seem to be emerging from the critical situation, it is essential that they continue with firm determination to strengthen their efforts to overcome their structural economic difficulties and to promote economic reconstruction and development. The co-operation and assistance provided by the international community should serve to encourage and support those self-reliant efforts. In this context, Japan regards this session as an excellent opportunity to ensure that a realistic and constructive North-South dialogue takes root, and we hope that it will impart a fresh momentum to, as well as new prospects for, North-South relations, as well as assistance activities in favour of Africa. '
136.	We know from our own historical experience in Japan that the will to stand on one’s own feet is of crucial and, indeed, overriding importance in overcoming a crisis and embarking on a successful course for development. Geographically, Japan belongs to the Asian-African region, and last year Japan participated in the commemorative meeting in observance of the thirtieth anniversary of the Asian-African Conference—the so-called Bandung Conference—which called for solidarity between Asia and Africa. Incidentally, I participated in that Asian-African Conference some 30 years ago as one of the junior members of the Japanese delegation. I believe Japan has an important global mission to act as a bridge between the North and the South.
137.	Japan was very encouraged by the adoption at the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly of the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [resolution 39/29]. It welcomed the opportunity to serve, at the request of African countries, as co-ordinator of
the consultations and to work for the adoption by consensus of that historic Declaration.
138.	As host to the Economic Summit Meeting of the seven major industrialized States held at Tokyo from 4 to 6 May, Japan took the initiative in focusing attention on the economic situation in Africa. As a result, the Tokyo Declaration7 acknowledged the importance of assistance to Africa for medium- and long-term economic development and affirmed the intention of the seven States to participate actively in this special session.
139.	As stated clearly in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 which the heads of State and Government of the OAU member States adopted last year, the unprecedented crisis in Africa did not arise solely from occasional natural disasters, such as drought, but is the result of a variety of structural and historical factors. Both the Priority Programme for Economic Recovery and the Harare Declaration on the food crisis in Africa, adopted in 1984 at the Thirteenth FAO Regional Conference for Africa, acknowledge that the Governments and peoples of Africa bear the primary responsibility for the rehabilitation and development of the African economy and are determined to make self-reliant efforts to achieve their objectives. This determination of African countries to make such efforts deserves a high tribute, and I am convinced that the peoples of Africa, with their indomitable spirit, will overcome the present hardships and prepare the way for a better future. 140. I am pleased to note that the Priority Programme, emphasizing the need for policy reform, places highest priority on the agricultural sector for the rehabilitation and revitalization of the African economy and allots almost half of its total investment to that sector. Agricultural development will result in greater self-sufficiency in food and help to avoid the disaster of recurring famine. At the same time, it will help to strengthen the purchasing power of rural inhabitants, who represent the majority of the African population, enhance the infrastructure of the rural economy and accelerate the participation of the rural population in the process of national economic development. It is clear that greater agricultural productivity will help to stabilize the national economy as a whole and expand the potential of financial and human resources, as well as contribute to industrial development and the rehabilitation of the transportation and communications infrastructure. As indicated in the Priority Programme, these efforts to improve agricultural production and promote rural development must be supported by measures that would, first, improve storage facilities for the preservation of agricultural products; secondly, rehabilitate and maintain the transportation and communication infrastructure to ensure adequate delivery of those products to the domestic market where they are needed; and, thirdly, rehabilitate and develop the industries for the production of agricultural tools and fertilizers.
141.	The Priority Programme emphasizes the importance of intra-African co-operation in addition to endeavours at the national level. I believe that intra-African co-operation should be vigorously promoted by the existing regional organizations for co-operation. It should also be pointed out that consideration of assistance extended by the international community to Africa must not overlook the economic and technical assistance that is being provided not only by Western industrialized countries but also by other industrialized countries and by developing countries as well. Indeed, economic and technical cooperation among developing countries should be further strengthened, in recognition of the fact that assistance
to Africa for development is not a regional issue but rather a problem to be addressed on a global basis.
142.	Japan is of the view that in the international community, where interdependence is increasing at an accelerated pace, there can be no prosperity for the North without prosperity for the South. In particular, Japan regards the severe drought in Africa as being no less a menace to world peace and stability than armed conflict. From this point of view, Japan quickly extended emergency aid to ease the unprecedented food crisis in Africa. Furthermore, it has strengthened its efforts to extend assistance to Africa based on medium- and long-term objectives, the importance of which Japan’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Shintaro Abe, stressed in the urgent appeal for assistance to Africa that he made in November 1984.
143.	Understanding of and interest in Africa among the Japanese people have increased dramatically in recent years. Last year such events in Japan as Africa Week and the United Nations symposium on Africa further heightened public interest in that continent, and this autumn an African festival is planned. Activities of Japanese nongovernmental organizations and volunteers, including the campaign that resulted in the collection of 1.7 million blankets to be sent to Africa, strengthened solidarity between the African and Japanese peoples. By the way, in addition to the blankets there were monetary contributions amounting to over $50 million from the Japanese general public, and we see this as a very encouraging sign. 144. Japan continues its efforts to enhance its ties with African countries in terms of economic relations, economic co-operation and people-to-people exchanges. The ratio of Japan’s bilateral official development assistance to Africa to its global official development assistance has increased by about four times, and the amount Japan contributed to Africa in 1984, compared with 1973, about 10 years earlier, increased more than ten-fold. This reflects Japan’s increasingly close relations with African countries in various fields, and the trend is expected to continue in the future.
145.	In an effort to help overcome the difficulties confronting Africa, Japan expressed its intention to extend in fiscal year 1985 bilateral grant assistance of around $350 million, in yen at the current rate of exchange, to sub-Saharan Africa, and it set a loan target of roughly $100 million in yen to be extended in co-ordination with the World Bank and other international financial institutions and in co-ordination with technical assistance. I am pleased to say that the level of Japanese assistance for fiscal year 1985 substantially surpassed the targets set. 146. Japan announced last September the third mediumterm official development assistance target, the aim of which is to increase the total official development assistance to more than $40 billion for the seven-year period to come. From 1986 through 1992 the amount of official development assistance disbursed will more than double, because of Japan’s greater gross national product, which is now nearly half that of the United States at the current rate of exchange. Our Government feels that general assistance to the developing world should be stepped up very substantially in the coming years. In accordance with the third medium-term target, Japan intends to increase considerably its assistance to Africa this fiscal year as compared with last year.
147.	Fully recognizing the importance of improving food production and agricultural development, overcoming the food shortage and improving transportation, Japan has extended and expanded its assistance and intends to continue to do so. Furthermore, in providing assistance to Africa, which embraces 70 per cent of all
the least-developed countries, Japan will hereafter give priority to basic, human needs, that is, in such fields as medical and health services, education and water supply, in addition to food and agriculture.
148.	Japan believes that human resources development is the basis for nation-building and that, although it may seem otherwise, it is the quickest way to develop the economic and social structure of a nation, which is basically the product of human activity. It is on the basis of this belief that Japan has always promoted co-operation in human resources development. Incidentally, about a month ago at the United Nations I delivered a Paul Hoffman memorial lecture on “The role of the human element in the development process: Japan’s experience”.
149.	Japan has been promoting such co-operation in Africa by dispatching experts and Japan overseas cooperation volunteers. In fact, Japan sends a greater number of volunteers to Africa than to any other region of the world and is working to double within three years of 1985 the number of countries to which we send them. In addition, Japan regards as an effective measure the establishment of key stations for human resources development co-operation in various places and will consider ways and means of co-operating in human resources development on the African continent. In this regard, Japan intends to send missions to study the feasibility of establishing a human resources development centre in Africa.
150.	I should like to report on the real progress made in developing the green revolution for Africa programme that Japan announced in June 1985 following the summit meeting held at Bonn from 2 to 4 May. It should be recognized that, although the potential of African agriculture is immense, the agricultural environment in Africa is very grave owing to such problems of nature as irregular rainfall, soil erosion and desertification. These great natural constraints on Africa’s agriculture make it all the more important that we bring about the green revolution. The green revolution in Asia during the past 10 to 15 years has been a success, and there should be no reason why the green revolution in Africa should not be successful too.
151.	As regards the strengthening of agricultural research activities, which constitutes the first element in the green revolution for Africa, Japan is extending co-operation to those African universities and research institutions which concern themselves with agriculture, and it intends to make financial contributions to the special research programmes envisaged by the various organs of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research.
152.	Secondly, with regard to the promotion of reforestation, Japan has extended technical assistance in the field of afforestation and plans to dispatch a “green corps”, the members of which will engage in afforestation projects. It also intends to provide financial assistance to the field project on regional social forestry of FAO and to the IFAD Special Programme for Sub-Saharan African Countries Affected by Drought and Desertification. Of all the nations of the world, Japan has the highest percentage of its area covered by forest, and we have accumulated a great deal of experience in this area.
153.	Thirdly, assistance for the formulation of appropriate national development plans presupposes the collection of relevant information on agriculture, as well as on forests and water resources. Accordingly, Japan intends to make a financial contribution to the FAO project aimed at strengthening the early warning system in Africa,
by means of remote sensing. The usefulness of that system was demonstrated during the recent food crisis.
154.	The fourth element of the green revolution for Africa is the improvement of the infrastructures of rural and agricultural development. Between 1980 and 1984 Japan more than quadrupled the amount of bilateral grant aid for the improvement of transportation and storage facilities, and it intends to continue to strengthen its efforts in that area. Furthermore, it plans to make a contribution to WFP to enable it to provide means of transportation to African countries.
155.	Lastly, as regards support to policy reforms for rural development and increased assistance to small farmers, Japan is providing assistance for small-scale integrated rural development projects, particularly those which are directed at helping small farmers, with a view to enhancing the awareness and promoting the active participation of farmers in the process of agricultural development. Again, most of our farmers are small farmers; we do not have large-scale farming. However, our experts feel that some of our experience in small farming will be relevant in Africa’s case.
156.	The United Nations organs and specialized agencies have networks of local offices extending throughout the continent of Africa. Through the assistance activities that they oversee, they have accumulated extensive information and a wealth of experience. The reports on the economic situation in Africa submitted by multilateral agencies such as the World Bank, FAO and the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa and the development strategies that they have recommended are valuable, since they provide fundamental data and relevant perspectives and guidelines for international assistance activities. It should also be pointed out that the assistance provided by these international co-operative agencies is different in nature from bilateral assistance in respect of both the views on which it is based and the form it takes.
157.	Therefore my Government has been making efforts to strengthen its financial contribution to such international organizations. This fiscal year the Government of Japan decided to increase its voluntary contributions to UNDP, FAO, WFP, UNICEF, UNHCR and UNFPA by about 12 per cent over the last fiscal year, to a total of approximately $200 million contribution to multilateral institutions. We estimate that approximately 30 per cent of that sum will be directed to activities relating to Africa. Also, my Government has decided to provide once again this year assistance in the form of special joint financing with the Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa of the World Bank with a view to supporting the policy reform efforts of the countries in the region. This assistance in fiscal year 1986 will be at a level of 15.7 billion yen, that is, approximately $90 million.
158.	In the activities that the international community is undertaking to provide assistance to Africa, international organizations are expected to play an important role, similar to that of donor countries. The United Nations system, multilateral development financing agencies such as the World Bank, and the African Development Bank themselves possess both multinational staff and budgetary resources for assistance activities relating to Africa. They also have responsibility for co-ordinating at the field level the assistance provided by various donor countries and international agencies. In order effectively to utilize the limited funds available and eliminate extravagance and redundance, we expect that the co-ordination of activities among the donors and international agencies will be effected by core agencies such as UNDP and the
World Bank, with the goal of promoting the medium-and long-term economic development of Africa.
159.	Japan fully recognizes that the recent decline in the resource flow to Africa and the increase in the debt service burden constitute a severe constraint on Africa’s stable economic development in the future. I believe that solving the debt problem requires durable measures to be implemented in co-ordination and co-operation with all the parties concerned and on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the respective situations of the debtor countries. Japan for its part intends to give full consideration to solving the debt problem in Africa. Unfortunately, I cannot be as explicit as Ms. Vezina of the Canadian delegation, who spoke earlier this afternoon. But it is definitely our intention to contribute to the solution of the debt problem of African countries.
160.	It is necessary that African countries make appropriate policy-reform efforts with a view to realizing growth-oriented and market-oriented structural improvements on a medium- and long-term basis. Moreover, creditor countries, multilateral financing institutions and others should support these self-reliant efforts by increasing the resource flow and by strengthening their policy advisory functions. In this connection, Japan welcomes the establishment of the IMF Structural Adjustment Facility and expects the immediate realization of the eighth replenishment of IDA at a level of $12 billion, based on the principle of fair burden-sharing among contributing countries.
161.	As the OAU Assembly Chairman stated last year at that Assembly’s twenty-first session, Africa has undeniable economic potential. The kind of economic difficulties it is now facing are therefore a paradox. It is the foremost task of the African people to resolve this paradox and to transform the continent where mankind originated into a place of hope and prosperity as it moves towards the twenty-first century. This is an enterprise which the international community should join hands in assisting.
162.	It is important that the future progress of the self-reliant efforts of African countries and of assistance by the international community be followed up effectively through the appropriate mechanisms already in existence. Whatever decisions or commitments this special session may result in, they must be translated into concrete action. Only then can they help to strengthen and nurture the economy of Africa, as the peoples of that continent work towards a promising future.
163.	Mr. FILALI (Morocco) (interpretation from French'): For the first time in the history of the Organization, the General Assembly has met in special session to focus on a comprehensive and integrated analysis of the critical economic situation in Africa. My delegation understands why this unprecedented session is being held at the ministerial level and why the human tragedy in the African continent is receiving unprecedented international attention. Aware of the special importance of the President’s mission, my delegation is pleased to congratulate him on his unanimous election to the presidency of this historic session. It also congratulates all the members of the General Committee. At the same time, it wishes to convey its esteem to the officers of the Preparatory Committee, who have given their best energies, in sometimes delicate circumstances, in order to initiate a process of negotiation unparalleled in the history of international relations.
164.	I assure the President of our support and express our sincere hope that the results of this session will be in keeping with the hopes Africa and the world have
placed in it. We wish at the same time to renew our faith in the Organization and its Secretary-General, who have shown their unique capacity for mobilizing the international community around one of the greatest challenges of modern times.
165.	I could not state the position of the Kingdom of Morocco without expressing our admiration for President Diouf, who has made tireless efforts throughout the year in the service of Africa. He has reaffirmed the resolve of the entire African continent in its diversity to rise to the challenge of survival and development, while defining the responsibilities it bears before history for the joint realization of African development, development which is rooted, self-centred and self-sustained at the national and continental levels.
166.	While the General Assembly has in the interests of efficiency limited its area of analysis to the economic aspects of the African crisis, how can we ignore the untenable régime of apartheid, which in its persistent challenge to the conscience of mankind continues to subject southern Africa to permanent insecurity and to divert its energies from the vital tasks of peaceful cooperation and economic recovery? And how can we remain silent when the consequences of the colonial past continue even today to handicap Africa in its efforts to ensure its mastery over its economic potential and to attain full sovereign independence?
167.	More than any other region in the world, Africa is immeasurably indebted to the United Nations, which has played an irreplaceable role in the decolonization of the continent, in the condemnation of racial segregation, in the mobilization of emergency aid and in contributing to multi-faceted long-term aid for development. The United Nations has in the recent past adopted measures for special assistance for many African countries and plans of action to combat drought and desertification and has proclaimed decades for industrial development and transport and communications in Africa. Given the worsening of the economic and social situation in the African region, which is now known as the least developed continent of the planet, we found it necessary to convene this special session so that the international community could draw the logical conclusions. As the only institution in the world that can come to grips with the component parts and totality of a stricken continent’s drift towards poverty, the United Nations is for Africa a unique place where suffering can be alleviated and respect for the human person maintained.
168.	At a time when we are living through a profound crisis in multilateral co-operation, Morocco believes it useful to stress that no assistance to the peoples concerned generated by this session can be honourable if, under the guise of selective bilateralism, it represents an interference in matters that come under their sovereignty. We therefore reaffirm the sovereign right of all peoples to choose and implement freely a policy they consider appropriate to ensure their development, adapted to their national plans and priorities, in keeping with their cultural identity, their socio-economic structure and their stage of development. We also reaffirm the principle embodied in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)] of the permanent sovereignty of African countries over their natural resources and economic activities, as well as their inalienable right to choose their political, economic, social and cultural systems in accordance with the will of their peoples, without outside interference in any form whatsoever.
169.	In addition, international assistance, necessary as it may be, especially in the specific circumstances of
Africa, cannot be equated with or replace the establishment of more just and equitable economic regulations in the interdependent areas of monetary and financial questions, foreign debt, resource flows, trade, commodities and development. It has been rightly said that the real impetus for development rests less with aid, concessional as it may be, than with the establishment of a more propitious international environment.
170.	That is why the cause of Africa is closely intertwined with that of the whole of the developing world, which has issued the same challenge to ignorance, poverty, hunger and slums; a challenge to disease, to natural disasters and to desertification; a challenge to the consequences of colonialism, to apartheid and hegemonism; a challenge to economic chaos, to social injustice and to the alienating materialism that reduces man to the level of a producing machine; a challenge to acts of interference, to greed and to resentments; a challenge, finally, to the arms race, to war, to all wars. That common challenge cements the natural solidarity of the developing world in the building of a more just international economic order and a better future for succeeding generations. While Africa is the third continent in the third world, and in spite of the imperatives of recovery dictated by urgency and need, African development is indivisible and cannot be separated from the platform jointly drawn up by the whole Group of 77.
171.	International commitments to Africa are the very raison d’être of this special session, while domestic reforms freely undertaken by African countries will have little effect if they do not, accompanied by outside assistance, form an indivisible whole proportionate to needs in an international environment likely to lead to the mobilization of energies. Indeed, the international community has now recognized that, in spite of its considerable economic potential, Africa, according to every socio-economic indicator, remains the least favoured continent among developing regions, with three fourths of the least advanced countries in the world and more than two thirds of the world’s land-locked countries, while the scourges of drought and desertification periodically ravage vast areas to the point that half of the States of Africa are facing critical and permanent food shortages. At the same time, Africa is the only region in the world where food production is increasing at a slower pace than population and the only continent where living standards have declined, to such an extent that the average income in Africa today is lower than it was in 1970.
172.	The continued existence of colonial-type relations has led to harmful imbalances in all sectors of economic activity, principally in agriculture and industry. Thus, today the sidelining of the African rural areas means that one of every five Africans depends for his survival on imported food that absorbs a fourth of export receipts, thereby generating a devastating spiral of accelerated underdevelopment. Africa is also the least industrialized region of the world. In most African countries, the industrial sector is still a partially foreign, and above all an urban, enclave within a vast sea of rural backwardness that includes a heterogeneous set of burdensome units that are often a drain on foreign exchange. In addition, the action of African Governments, notwithstanding the courageous reforms they have undertaken to improve their economies, is being inhibited by a conjunction of phenomena beyond their control—the extent of debt servicing and the inverse transfer of financial flows, the untenable deterioration in the terms of trade, protectionism and the brutal fall in commodity prices, which has not been equalled in the past 40 years. Thus, until the
developed countries ensure that their economic policies are compatible with the goals of development, no real progress can be achieved in the developing world, nor, a fortiori, in its most vulnerable part, Africa.
173.	All those factors, along with many others, clearly demonstrate that it is improbable that reforms in domestic policies alone can avoid the recurrence of further African tragedies. The future of Africa, the financing of its recovery and the implementation of its development are therefore the joint responsibility of the countries of the region and of the international community, without exception.
174.	The Kingdom of Morocco, whose ancient roots are thrust deep into the land of Africa, has taken as its permanent task, one enshrined in its Constitution, the achievement of unity, peace and co-operation in Africa. In that spirit, the bilateral and regional co-operation my country is developing with other African countries, despite its limited means, stands as a glowing example and has taken various forms: a substantial financial contribution to the Plan of Action adopted by the Movement of NonAligned Countries to meet the critical economic situation in Africa,8 grants to the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel, loans to finance infrastructure projects, grants of transport equipment, participation in mining projects, the training of personnel, technical assistance, the furnishing of medical and veterinary supplies, food aid of all types, the supply of fertilizers and debt moratoriums.
175.	Moreover, wishing to reinforce by all possible means economic co-operation among developing countries, Morocco reaffirms its proposal set forth before the Non-Aligned Movement to establish a programme of action for agricultural and food self-sufficiency focused on products that constitute the nutritional bases of developing peoples, by pooling their respective technical, investment, and human resources. This programme of action will be the main item on the agenda of the Third NonAligned Conference on Food and Agriculture, to be held in Morocco from 28 to 31 July next. In specific terms, this involves achieving mutually advantageous joint agricultural projects to exploit fertile land, to restore regions stricken by drought and to reforest those threatened with desertification, as well as joint maritime fishing ventures in which land-locked developing countries may participate, established on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of States over their natural resources.
176.	With regard to maritime fishing, we know that the Atlantic coast of Africa is one of the richest in fishing resources and that it is subject to systematic plundering by countries outside Africa. Protected and exploited by its rightful owners, the African coast could make a significant contribution to eradicating hunger and malnutrition on our continent. Hence Morocco considers that it is necessary to establish among all States of the region a forum for co-operation, technical exchanges and harmonization of policies to exploit this potential on a regional basis, to assure the conservation of our renewable resources and to guarantee our sovereignty over our natural resources.
177.	Secondly, on the occasion of this special session and in order to develop intra-African horizontal trade, Morocco has decided unilaterally to reduce its customs duties by 50 to 100 per cent on products that have a minimum added value of 40 per cent originating from the least developed countries, most of which, as everyone knows, are African.
178.	Thirdly, Morocco, which attaches the greatest importance to the development of human resources in Africa, has long been active in this field. It has trained
thousands of African professionals at its own expense and intends to step up its efforts in this connection.
179.	Finally, having in mind enhancing the effects of international aid, Morocco suggests organizing, with the co-operation of bilateral and multilateral donors, triangular operations that would make it possible to give priority utilization to available technical and human resources among African countries.
180.	In this way we wish to make a modest contribution to curing our continent of some of its ills by working towards harmonizing efforts aimed at developing the vital sector of food, investing in the human potential by means of education and training, liberalizing South-South trade and improving conditions for international assistance.
181.	The kind of food imports and food aid thus far have given rise to habits and patterns of consumption that Africa cannot sustain from its own soil, climate or techniques. Moreover, with the highest population growth in the history of mankind, Africa’s current population will have tripled in 40 years. Having inherited outward-looking production models, Africa is producing what it does not consume and is consuming what it does not produce. Thus, the factors which determine lifestyles and consumption patterns must quite obviously be integrated in the general system for the long-term development of the continent.
182.	In the short term, the draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery 1986-1990 [A/S-J3/4 and Corr.l, annex V\ is limited to putting the fundamental socio-economic needs at the top of the list of national priorities and international concerns. These fundamental, compelling and unquestionable needs are, especially in Africa, of such scope and urgency that they cannot be met without massive and immediate action, including both national efforts and international cooperation, as well as the restructuring of global economic relations.
183.	Specifically, the very fact that for the first time the Assembly is meeting in a special session to take up the critical situation of a developing continent means, in and of itself, that Africa must receive special treatment directed towards action, including concrete commitments in keeping with the expectations of hundreds of millions of Africans. Hence it is inconceivable that the final declaration oh the work of this session should be limited to juxtaposing the African commitments to a simple counterpart without substance.
184.	Some statements made prior to tne special session are not likely to evoke optimism. Although we hope to see here the launching of synergistic co-operation unprecedented in the history of international relations, we are being told that, at best, Africa will enjoy rhetorical support, conditional promises and parsimonious assistance out of proportion to the scope of its pressing and inescapable needs. If such were the case, we would be taking part in the triumph of partisans of co-operation characterized by inaction, and we would be allowing a unique historic opportunity to slip by while in Africa there remain unbearable tragedies posing a fatal threat to peace.
185.	The Assembly is aware, for example, that yearly expenditures on weapons correspond to twice the amount of investments made in all the third-world countries and that three days of weapons production would make it possible to finance easily the assistance Africa needs, as expressed in its plan for economic recovery. In fact, we know that for every dollar devoted to development aid for confidence-building, the developed countries are spending $20 to build the instruments of certain mass destruction. It is high time for these countries to admit that at a cost
of more than $1,000 billion per year the suicidal arms race will not bring any additional security and that restrictions on development assistance are surely undermining world peace.
186.	At this time when excessive criticism is being levelled against the Organization and specific threats are weighing on its very existence, the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms its faith in the aims and ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which have made such a decisive contribution to the decolonization of Africa and which today remain fully valid to complete that decolonization by giving our continent the means to enable it to overcome the crisis that has been caused by the most extensive change in our history.
187.	Mrs. HJELM-WALLEN (Sweden): During the last few years the attention of the world has been drawn to the emergency situation facing many African countries. Over a million people have died and several more millions have been seriously affected. The immediate crisis has now been alleviated. In this context, the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa has played an important role. When looking towards the future we must learn from the past. In order to avoid new emergency situations, longterm structural problems must be solved. Such solutions are equally essential for the realization of the development potential of Africa.
188.	This special session is a unique expression of the concern of the international community for the economic future of Africa and its people. We must seize this opportunity to analyze and decide together on measures that can be taken collectively and by individual countries to promote the development of African countries, of which the sub-Saharan countries merit particular attention. In the OAU submission to this special session,2 the African States have expressed their views on how to achieve lasting economic development and rehabilitation in Africa. This important document offers us a realistic basis when formulating joint political commitments towards Africa.
189.	Let me first address the problem of agriculture, because measures must first be taken to increase food production. The first, top priority must be rehabilitation efforts within the agricultural and supportive sectors, as outlined in the African document. We all know that the per capita production of food in many African countries has decreased. This is partly explained by the drought and other environmental factors. However, it is also a result of development policies that have favoured urban development and neglected to stimulate agricultural production.
190.	We welcome the fact that many African countries are now re-examining their development policies, with special emphasis on agricultural and rural development. If food production is to be increased, a policy more favourable to the farmers is necessary. Such a policy should include the establishment and strengthening of incentive schemes and better agricultural pricing.
191.	Women have a great responsibility for agricultural production. They are, however, often neglected in development policies. For this reason greater efforts must be directed to improving the situation of women. Particular attention should be given to ensuring their access to and control of such productive resources as land, capital and credit. Such measures will increase women’s possibilities of influencing the development process, which in my view will benefit all members of society.
192.	A second area to which we must attach particular priority concerns the protection and, where possible, restoration of the environment. Desertification, deforestation and soil erosion are threats to survival in Africa.
Neglect of the environment today will severely hamper the possibilities of sustainable development tomorrow.
193.	There is a close relationship between poverty, increase in population and the degradation of the environment. It is the present rate of population growth in Africa that makes the structural crisis'so intractable. It increases food deficits, and the pressure on vulnerable soils and contributes to rapid urbanization. If programmes of environmental protection and the rational use of natural resources are to succeed, the pressure of population in ecologically sensitive areas must be brought under control.
194.	Awareness of the need to halt the environmental degradation has increased. Environmental concerns must be an integral part of all development planning and be taken into account in all areas of development. In order to increase our knowledge of the complex relationships involved, the Swedish Government has initiated a longterm research programme related to desertification and deforestation in a global perspective. A central element in this research programme will be the strengthening of research institutions in some developing countries.
195.	A third area to which we must devote particular attention is the long-term employment situation in Africa. We are already witnessing an exodus from rural areas, resulting in rapid urbanization. This process will probably accelerate in the future. African countries will have to take measures to increase employment in the industrial and service sectors as well as within the agricultural sector. This.is necessary in order to counteract new poverty problems that bring the risk of creating social tensions in vulnerable societies.
196.	A fourth problem with serious consequences for the region of southern Africa is the military and economic destabilization measures carried out by South Africa against neighbouring States. These measures have seriously impeded development in many countries in southern Africa, not least in the field of agriculture and food supply. Trade and communication between the countries in southern Africa, as well as efforts to develop the industrial sector, are hampered. The aggregated costs of the destabilization measures against the Southern African Development Coordination Conference [S/WCC1 countries have been estimated at $10 billion by the SADCC secretariat. Ways have to be found to implement the resolutions adopted unanimously by the Security Council on compensation from South Africa. In the view of the Swedish Government, South Africa’s destabilization policy constitutes a threat to international peace and security. This policy must come to an end. The abolition of the apartheid system is not only a matter of freedom in South Africa, but also a prerequisite for the region’s development.
197.	The fifth important area for action is the refugee situation in Africa. As a consequence of other problems, more than one third of all the refugees in the world, or 5 million people, are to be found in Africa. In addition to drought, the apartheid system and destabilization actions of South Africa, ethnic conflicts, wars and political unrest have forced people to leave their homes and live in camps or other temporary dwellings.
198.	The African countries are thus confronted by serious problems in both the short term and the long term. It is obvious that they must re-examine their development policies and priorities. In many cases they have to bring about radical policy changes in order to promote structural transformation and increase the present widespread low level of productivity.
199.	Responsibility for the necessary reforms must rest with the African countries themselves. The African submission to the special session bears witness to the preparedness of African Governments to reconsider the orientation of their policies and to enhance the mobilization of domestic resources. The Swedish Government welcomes this, since external support can be efficient only when the recipient countries are prepared to bring about the needed reforms.
200.	The Swedish Government agrees that the donor community as a whole must face the fact that Africa’s crisis is a joint responsibility. The tasks facing the African Governments are of such a magnitude and complexity that we have to work together—African Governments, international organizations and donor countries.
201.	There is no doubt that the African countries need, and can rightfully claim, additional assistance to support their substantial structural reforms. In recent years, however, the official development assistance flows to subSaharan countries have stagnated. That is not acceptable. An increase in aid to the poorest countries must be a special concern of the international community. The Swedish Government therefore sincerely hopes that one of the basic results of this special session will be a broad commitment on the part of the donor countries to increase their official development assistance to the African countries. This should be done within the framework of efforts to achieve the 0.7 per cent target and the target of 0.15 per cent for assistance to the least developed countries adopted by the General Assembly.
202.	Sweden, for its part, devotes more than 60 per cent of its total bilateral development assistance—or approximately $420 million for the next fiscal year—to African countries south of the Sahara. Through the multilateral system we are also giving substantial support to development activities in the region. We are prepared to increase further our assistance to Africa during the years to come.
203.	I should like to emphasize that there is a very strong case for allowing the multilateral institutions to play a more active role in assisting the African countries to find ways out of the crisis. The multilateral institutions must be strengthened to cope with the problems, which no individual country can handle alone. All international organizations must mobilize resources in support of the African countries. In particular I should like to emphasize the role played by IDA in regard to the poorest countries of Africa. The Swedish Government is of the opinion that donors should commit themselves to at least $12 billion for the eighth replenishment of IDA, part of which should be used for lending for structural reforms. We also believe that the resources of UNDP, UNICEF and UNHCR should be increased. The Special Programme for SubSaharan African Countries Affected by Drought and Desertification, set up by IFAD, also deserves wider support. ’ 204. The African document has highlighted the debt problems of the low-income African countries. We concur with the view that for many African countries such problems are a serious impediment and clearly call for special action. Sweden is prepared to participate in internationally co-ordinated programmes to alleviate the debt problems of the poorest developing countries. Such programmes should be based on structural reform measures in the developing countries directed towards growth and adjustment with a human face. Sweden has already converted all its official development assistance credits to African countries to grants. Within our increasing programme for development co-operation, Sweden has also set aside funds for further debt relief. Increased technical
and financial assistance for the low-income African countries should be our prime concern. But there is also a need for continued efforts to attack protectionism and dismantle trade barriers.
205.	I hope that at this special session the General Assembly will reach agreement on a number of important measures needed to restore growth with equity, particularly in the low-income African countries. Intensified cooperation between those countries and the industrialized countries is needed.
206.	As I have already stated, the development of the African continent is primarily the responsibility of the African countries themselves. We fully realize, however, that every national effort must be reinforced through action by the international community. Sweden is therefore committed to increasing substantially its assistance to its partners in Africa over the next years. We are also prepared to play a constructive role to make the outcome of this special session a manifestation of the joint responsibility of African countries and the international community for Africa’s future.
207.	Mr. KUSUMAATMADJA (Indonesia): Having fully supported the Assembly resolution to convene this special session at the ministerial level, we are deeply aware of its great significance. Our participation reflects the grave concern of Indonesia at the critical economic situation in Africa and the utmost importance we attach to its resolution. I would also like to take this opportunity to compliment the African countries on their thorough and serious preparations to make this special session a success. '
208.	The enormity of the prolonged economic crisis that has afflicted much of Africa for the past several years has jolted the international community into concrete action. Its appalling proportions struck a responsive chord in Governments, the United Nations, non-governmental organizations, the media and individuals alike. The subsequent flow of international emergency assistance, combined with more favourable weather conditions, has given Africa a welcome short-term reprieve, but no guaranteed long-term remedy. The root causes have not changed, and hence any adverse circumstances obviously could precipitate recurrent crises. The devastating impact of the African crisis is a clear manifestation of the fragility and vulnerability of the underlying socioeconomic structures: first, .the rapid demographic and urbanization growth that has outpaced the growth in production; secondly, an exorbitant refugee problem that accounts for more than half of the world’s refugees; thirdly, run-away desertification that threatens life-sustaining ecological balances with irreversible breakdown; and, fourthly, human potentials that have yet to be given the opportunity to develop fully.
209.	Those are but some of the structural weaknesses that greatly inhibit rather than promote self-sustained development in Africa. Compounding these inherent constraints are external factors, including plunging commodity prices, mounting debt burdens and the heightened insecurity and destabilization imposed by the universally condemned policies of the racist Pretoria régime.
210.	The challenge is indeed formidable. In this regard my delegation whole-heartedly agrees with the conclusions of the thorough analysis of the OAU that bold steps and radical measures are necessary to save the African economy from collapse and to ensure a path of selfsustained development.
211.	As has always been clearly recognized and repeatedly reaffirmed, the primary responsibility for tackling
the African economic crisis and advancing its development resides with the African countries themselves. In this undertaking the African countries have not been found wanting. Nor have they lacked the necessary courage both to draw from the hard lessons of the past and to confront the deep-seated structural problems that have persistently afflicted their economies since colonial times. Their efforts, rooted in the 1980 Lagos Plan of Action,6 the Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at Addis Ababa last year5 and, more recently, Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 demonstrate the depth and seriousness of Africa’s collective resolve and commitment. These dramatic steps, already initiated, have exacted a tremendous effort on the part of the African countries and thus deserve our strongest support and encouragement.
212.	In this era of interdependence, the problems afflicting Africa are not exclusively the preoccupation of Africa alone, but they are rightly the concerns of mankind as a whole. Such tasks as structural transformations and major adjustments in development priorities cannot be effectively addressed without the continuing support of the entire international community. The positive response of the international community during the critical emergency period in the past few years was unprecedented and nothing short of dramatic. It has indeed helped avert a calamity of far greater proportions. Nevertheless, beyond emergency assistance, there is a vital need for continuing support in order to bolster and complement domestic efforts in seeking lasting solutions to the structural and chronic economic problems of Africa, for such entrenched problems yield but slowly to even the most concerned and unified action.
213.	This special session provides us with a unique opportunity to forge a renewed solidarity between the African continent and the rest of the international community in order jointly to ensure the needed transformations and stimuli for self-reliant and self-sustained African development. In this time of great challenge and opportunity such solidarity is imperative if the goals and objectives of Africa’s Priority Programme are to be met. More specifically, if the Programme is to be effectively implemented and its benefits lasting, the continent needs higher levels of financial assistance. In this context, additional international resources for development are obviously required. This session, therefore, should mark a new phase of genuine co-operation based on collective responsibility, which is essential for economic progress in this interdependent world.
214.	Undoubtedly, there is also a dire need to improve the international environment. The collapse of commodity prices, increased protectionism and adverse terms of trade, combined with mounting debt burdens and high real interest rates seriously aggravate the crisis. In addition, declining development assistance and severe currency fluctuations coupled with insufficient international scientific and technological co-operation overwhelm all efforts for sustained African development. Thus, to facilitate a lasting resolution of the African crisis, certain global constraints should be redressed. The Integrated Programme for Commodities of UNCTAD should be diligently pursued and the Common Fund for Commodities should be made fully operational. Moreover, the official development assistance targets as agreed upon in the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade [resolution 35/56, annex] should be realized, while the Substantial New
Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries9 should be fully implemented. Initiatives to reform the international institutions and mechanisms on money and finance for development should be more actively pursued. And it is also crucial that the ongoing international economic negotiations, such as the preparatory process of the new round of multilateral trade negotiations and the code of conduct on the transfer of technology, should be successfully concluded.
215.	The special session on the critical economic situation in Africa presents, above all, a challenge to the developing countries to demonstrate the essential role of economic co-operation among developing countries as a unique manifestation of collective self-reliance in international economic relations. It is precisely because of the present international economic crisis that South-South cooperation, within the context of the critical economic situation in Africa, takes on added urgency.
216.	Significantly, at the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries held at New Delhi from 16 to 19 April, the non-aligned countries expressed their readiness to participate actively in the special session which would assist in the adoption of concerted and action-oriented measures to deal with the rehabilitation and the medium- and long-term development problems in Africa in a comprehensive and integrated manner. In reviewing the progress of the Plan of Action adopted by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to meet the critical economic situation in Africa,8 the offers of assistance received from various member States, including Indonesia, were noted. In addition, the non-aligned and other developing countries were urged to extend further all possible assistance to meet the identified needs of the African countries in the priority sectors.
217.	For its part, within its limited capacities, Indonesia pledges its continued readiness to support the African countries in their valiant efforts to alleviate their economic crisis and to revitalize their development. Last November the President of the Republic of Indonesia, in addressing the twenty-third session of the Conference of FAO, on that organization’s fortieth anniversary, announced the voluntary contributions of Indonesian farmers in the form of 100,000 tons of unmilled rice to be forwarded to those suffering from hunger, especially in Africa. Now, in view of the urgent need to address the medium- and longer-term development problems in Africa, we continue to stand ready to lend our support, in particular through our programmes of technical cooperation among developing countries, especially in the priority sector of agriculture.
218.	In conclusion, as we assembly here in this special session of the General Assembly to meet the dual challenge of economic survival and development in Africa, there are certain basic elements we cannot afford to discount. First, if Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery is to be firmly underwritten by the international community, full respect for the sovereign and inalienable rights of the African people to determine their own political, social and economic systems should be observed. Secondly, while.the price of delay in the Programme’s implementation could be tragic, the risks of failure to support it would be catastrophic.
219.	That being said, it is imperative that at the special session the Assembly adopt action-oriented and concerted measures in support of the African efforts for economic rehabilitation and medium- and long-term development. We hope and trust that our common endeavours will help put Africa back on a solid path towards self-reliant and sustained development and towards prosperity rooted in
an economy freed from the shackles of dependency and alien domination.
220.	Mr. PIRES de MIRANDA (Portugal): I should like to reaffirm, on behalf of the Portuguese Government and on my own behalf, our grateful support for the decision to convene this special session. We support it because it reflects the willingness of both developed and developing countries to combine their efforts in a harmonious way. This is the first time that we have been given the opportunity of discussing the economic situation of Africa as a whole. We support this initiative, which takes place within the framework of the United Nations, in spite of all the difficulties confronting it. This is the role of the Organization as a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations.
221.	Nobody has any doubt that the current economic situation in Africa is critical. For many different countries, that is an alarming situation inasmuch as it evidences a lack of the most elementary living conditions. The underlying causes of this dramatic situation are well known: first, an inability to overcome the effects of adverse climatic conditions, which has a negative effect on agriculture and food crops; secondly, a lack of productive investment and skilled labour; thirdly, agriculture predominantly based on one single crop, and a deterioration in the terms of trade; fourthly, inadequate use of resources and insufficient infrastructures in fields such as transportation, storage, preservation and processing of products; fifthly, a worsening of the foreign debt situation; and sixthly and finally, the inevitable reliance on international assistance with financial constraints.
222.	To those negative elements, mainly economic in nature, we should add several others of a different character which aggravate the already not encouraging social and economic indicators of many regions. Even worse, these additional factors undercut the ongoing effort to improve the situation. I have in mind, in particular, the armed conflicts that have been afflicting many African countries. Indeed, many regions in Africa—particularly southern Africa—do not yet have the peaceful conditions necessary to enable them to concentrate on the immense tasks of development and progress. Acts of violence which took place recently against the integrity of sovereign nations, with total disregard for the most elementary principles of international law, only contribute to the escalation of violence, thus causing immense suffering to the people involved.
223.	Moreover, a political environment that does not permit individual initiative for the promotion of economic development is a serious obstacle to the progress of all countries. And very often this is the result of conflicts that unfortunately still prevail in different forms in many parts of Africa. Political freedom is indeed closely associated with economic freedom. Therefore, individual rights and freedoms cannot be disregarded when trying to achieve increased economic development.
224.	The convening of this special session is in itself encouraging and positive; it reflects a deeper and more generalized international awareness of the economic problems that concern Africa. In our modern world, no country, region or continent can live in isolation, whether it be cultural, political or economic. We are all involved, as all problems have an international dimension, both in their causes and in their effects. Thus, international assistance to Africa is without doubt an important issue. It is of the utmost urgency to seek more efficiency— particularly through better co-ordination both at the national level and between donor countries and those receiving assistance—so that such assistance can become
an effective element in improving the living conditions of inhabitants of the recipient countries and increasing the possibilities for autonomous development in the future.
225.	The Portuguese Government believes that even more important than international assistance is the establishment of equitable conditions of international trade. We are convinced that the wave of protectionism that has been growing in the last few years is an extremely serious threat to the prosperity of developing countries. Furthermore it is, in our view, a short-sighted policy that will affect the long-term interests of the very countries that resort to such protectionist practices.
226.	At the international level, it should be borne in mind that private foreign investment can be an important element of progress. It is a fact that the foreign investor aims at obtaining a profit. But this legitimate aim can go hand in hand with the interests of the countries where the investment takes place. This will enable those countries to have access to the capital invested without the inherent costs of debt service, and at the same time the country will benefit from new technology—including management—and export markets. Good foreign management provides new methods and techniques unknown to certain economies. It is of the utmost importance that Governments recognize these advantages and be willing to provide adequate guarantees of stability and fair treatment to private foreign capital.
227.	The international dimension of the problem of economic development in Africa—as in any part of the world—should not overshadow the fact that the development of these countries depends first and foremost upon the efforts, the determination and the abilities that the populations and Governments of such countries put into their own development. The question of the usefulness of international assistance, to which I have referred, is closely related to what I have just said: indeed, if adequate national policies and structural adjustments are not carried out, international assistance will be of little use. Past experience in this field gives us a clear indication, and we should try to learn from previous setbacks.
228.	The underlying message is indeed clear: whatever the significance of the action by the international community—and we believe it is important—the key to the solution of the socio-economic problems afflicting Africa today will always lie in the hands of the African people, both in regard to their domestic policies and in regard to interregional co-operation.
229.	In that context, the Portuguese Government welcomes the realism shown by the African countries in formulating Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 We believe that this document contains a clear diagnosis of the ills that place constraints on the economies of several African nations and reflects a strong and decisive will to undertake structural reforms in order to achieve self-sustained development. Indeed, the most important items referred to in the Priority Programme—namely, agriculture, trade, human resources, rationalization of economic policies and intra-African cooperation—are dealt with pragmatically, indicating reasonable targets of collective social and economic progress.
230.	Food security is an indispensable element of the successful launching of any programme for development. Of equal importance is the struggle against the desertification and soil erosion which have plagued large regions of Africa, the eradication of which will be possible on a long-term basis only through joint and co-ordinated efforts.
231.	I should therefore like to praise the efforts under way towards creating efficient plans for economic cooperation among African countries, such as those of the African Development Bank and SADCC. Portugal has been giving support to the latter to enable it to achieve its aim of ensuring that Africa achieves a higher level of economic self-sufficiency through a better and more coordinated use of available resources.
232.	Co-operation between Portugal and the African countries, that is, with those that use Portuguese as their official language, has developed in accordance with the general principes I have outlined.
233.	At the governmental level, the relationship between Portugal and the African countries has been based consistently on our policy of respect for the principle of the sovereignty of States and on the understanding that only measures of real interest to the population should be given consideration. Furthermore, we believe that it would be preferable for the efforts of the Portuguese Government to be concentrated on basic sectors such as health, education and professional training, leaving to the free initiative of the private sector other types of activities. In our opinion, a strong and long-lasting relationship between peoples and countries cannot be created without the active participation of private enterprise.
234.	Portugal has been playing particular attention to supporting agriculture and related activities, as well as to infrastructures in transportation and port facilities in African countries. In the area of technical assistance, our efforts have been oriented towards sending special teams to deal with the solution of problems relating to phytosanitation and public administration. Equally important are the programmes for professional training and support in the health and education sectors. As a result of that policy, approximately 1,500 Africans have been trained every year in Portugal and in their own countries.
235.	In spite of our limited resources, significant efforts have been made in the financial area, both through granting loans on highly concessional terms, with State guarantees of an estimated amount of $300 million, and through consolidation of the debt in very favourable terms. Additionally, $180 million of debt is at present being consolidated.
236.	Further, Portugal has contributed to the relaunching of small and medium-size African industries geared to meet the internal needs of the population. We have also stimulated the participation of Portuguese businessmen in the development of African countries, mainly Portuguese-speaking ones. In this context, I should like to emphasize that the private sector must play a decisive role in the economic development of Africa.
237.	The integration of Portugal in the European Economic Community will certainly lead to a reinforcement of the participation of the Community in the programmes for economic development in Africa, within the framework of both the Lomé Convention and the agreements signed with the Mediterranean countries. We endorse the proposals and suggestions made here by the Minister for Development Co-operation of the Netherlands on behalf of the Community psr meeting], and we shall waste no time in translating them into concrete action.
238.	Africa has embarked upon an unprecedented effort to tackle the development problems afflicting the continent. It is now the duty of the international community to respond generously to the appeal that has been made on its behalf by President Diouf by providing the means necessary to ensure that the reforms already accomplished or under way come to a successful conclusion, in particular regarding the well-being of the populations. The
dramatic situation that prevails in most of the African continent demands such action, as do the historical past of Portugal and the bonds arising from the common heritage, language and cultural values that so intimately link the Portuguese people to an important part of Africa. 239. I am convinced that the strong determination of the African peoples and their leaders to shape a new destiny for Africa will enable it to become more selfsufficient and viable, thus laying the basis for a more prosperous and secure future for coming generations. Portugal will not fail to contribute, within the limits of its possibilities, to the attainment of that goal.
240.	Mrs. O’CONNELL de ALURRALDE (Argentina) {interpretation from Spanish): It is a particular pleasure for me to speak in my capacity as special envoy of my Government at this special session of the General Assembly convened to consider the critical economic situation in Africa.
241.	At the outset I should like to congratulate the President on his election and say how pleased I am that the conduct of the proceedings at this special session is in such good hands.
242.	The statement this morning by the President of Senegal on behalf of the member States of the OAU [/st meeting] described clearly the objectives of this special session.
243.	The countries of Africa are proposing a radical change in their production and consumption standards and an economic and social structural transformation which will make possible more rapid growth and development in the next five years. We cannot but express our admiration for the determination and honesty with which the African continent is confronting the critical economic situation that its countries are experiencing. We know from our own experience and that of the sister republics of Latin America, which we experience as if it were our own, the difficulties inherent in the development process and its complex course of achievements and failures. We are also aware of the existence of a series of external conditions that are beyond our control and whose impact on this process can act either as a brake or as a dynamizing factor.
Mr. Agius (Malta), Vice-President, took the Chair. 244. The developing countries concur with the essence of the proposals put forth by the African countries because we see in that continent the sharpest reflection of the common problems afflicting us all: growing instability in the cycles of the international economy, very restricted growth in international trade and its barely perceptible impact on the majority of our economies, deterioration of the terms of trade, growing protectionism by the developed countries, instability of and fall in the prices of raw materials and disproportionate burden of external debt aggravated by high real interest rates. Thus the African countries, like so many others in Latin America and Asia, find themselves obliged to export, in spite of their poverty, huge amounts of capital, sums that are deflected from satisfying the basic needs of their peoples and their efforts to relaunch their own development. It is in the light of this series of external negative factors that we must assess the challenge development of the African continent represents.
245.	This is the first time the General Assembly is holding a special session to consider the economic problems of a given regional area. This compels us to think about the nature of our task, about the apparently rigid standards governing the broad lines of the world economy to the detriment of the weakest. For there are no countries,
there are no regions, that are intrinsically poor. Like wealth, poverty is an historic phenomenon and hence it is reversible. Neither does the past dictate nor geography compel. It is man’s intelligence, his will to work and the strength of his commitment that build the present and design the future. No inventory of material goods has any meaning without reference to the human society that makes use of it. There is no lack in the southern countries —there is certainly no lack in Africa—of skills or intellectual and moral resources to undertake this task and discharge it successfully. That is not what we lack.
246.	Economics is a science whose achievements, in the final analysis, are measured in relation to the concrete benefits deriving from its proper implementation. If it is not imbued with a generous concept of life, its achievement will at best be precarious, for the economic equation cannot be complete without reference to the ethical order and economic justice. That is what the President of the Argentine Republic, Mr. Raúl Alfonsin, pointed out in his posthumous tribute to Raúl Prebisch, whose presence in international bodies where problems of developing countries are discussed will be sorely missed.
247.	This is not a case of a miserly distribution of scarce resources. The rich will not become less rich as the poor become less poor, or at least that is not what should occur. What is necessary is to produce more, to make better choices and to act freely and deliberately in keeping with the common objectives of mutual advantage. In the final analysis, one must do the right thing and work with an eye to the kind of coexistence that will meet the material and moral requirements of our times.
248.	The last decade of a century of mind-boggling technological progress is nearing, so let us take stock. To what course is man’s talent being directed? What good use has been made of man’s prodigious powers? If the benefits of progress are not widely distributed, if the asymmetry of development is made more acute, what kind of future will we bequeath to coming generations? 249. I shall again refer to the words of Mr. Alfonsin in his address to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
“No one should doubt, in reviewing history, that civilizations live and thrive when they are based upon moral premises and that, by contrast, their extinction systematically stems from ethical confusion.
“I believe that the fact that the world order is increasingly defined by the arms race and financial greed is an ethical confusion. Were these motivations to persist, there would be no well-being for the majority of our countries. It is also well to recall that what affects the South will sooner or later affect the welfare of the more advanced countries.” [5th meeting, paras. 51 and 52.] 250. That is the political philosophy of the Argentine Government; it is a guarantee against racial discrimination and disregard for the territorial integrity of States. Hence, in light of the most recent acts of aggression perpetrated by the South African Government against the territories of Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, the Argentine Government broke diplomatic relations on 22 May with the Republic of South Africa. That measure, which is in keeping with our firm condemnation and repudiation of apartheid, is also an expression of solidarity with the friendly nations of southern Africa.
251.	My country has sought to intensify relations with Africa in all areas. Through 14 diplomatic missions, we maintain diplomatic relations with the majority of countries on that continent. Our relations with African countries extend to joint work in the United Nations as well as
in the sphere of co-operation among developing countries. With the establishment of a democratic Government, these relations—which had already been strengthened over time—are becoming even stronger and today cover a broad range of activities. They are nourished by an affinity of attitudes and shared criteria on the difficulties affecting developing countries, on the need to make progress and at the same time preserve our cultural identity, on the defense of our political and economic independence and on demonstrating active regional and international solidarity.
252.	The African countries have put forward their priorities for their development in the document submitted by the OAU at this special session.2 Among them one can note the crucial importance which, without prejudice to emergency situations, is being attached to food and agriculture. Argentina, an exporter of agricultural products and livestock, agrees with the need to maintain increasing productivity in the agricultural sector. We also concur with the idea of focusing on development policies that establish the necessary links between agriculture, industry and services related to this sector, since, as the document itself indicates, only by means of an integral approach will it be possible to bring to all sectors of the population, even the most dispossessed, the benefits flowing from increased productivity in the agricultural sector.
253.	We are convinced that co-operation among developing countries can make an important contribution to achieving the proposals contained in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 This conviction is bolstered by the experience we have acquired in programmes and projects that have already been or are being implemented—to which I shall refer in specific terms.
254.	First, I should like to indicate that our country supports the machinery for economic co-operation established on the African continent. Approximately a year ago, on 2 July 1985, we joined the African Development Bank as a non-regional member, and we have since participated in the African Development Fund. Moreover, the Argentine Government has undertaken activities or signed trade or financial agreements with 19 African countries and has entered into agreements on scientific, technical or cultural co-operation with 10 other countries of the continent. Similarly, lines of credit amounting to approximately $200 million have either been granted or offered or are under negotiation with 14 African countries.
255.	The Central Bank of the Argentine Republic has established facilities for the development of fisheries by means of the transfer of technology. They are being used by the African countries of the Atlantic Basin. Through the National Institute for Agricultural and Livestock Technology and other official bodies, my Government is examining and studying various measures of financing, assistance and technical advice as part of projects related to the production and health of livestock, management and improvement of grazing land, and infrastructure for storage of agricultural supplies and products.
256.	Various private Argentine enterprises have evinced interest in contributing to various African projects dealing with infrastructure, including engineering projects for the construction of highways, bridges, dwellings, schools and hospitals.
257.	Moreover, we have successfully concluded a programme of technical co-operation in the agricultural sector in which technical experts from 14 African countries have participated. Recently, in Corrientes Province, there was a similar experiment with specialists from one
country of the region. Similarly, an offer has been made to different African countries to study and research crops and seeds.
258.	A recently concluded technical and economic co-operation mission explored and established ways and means of co-operation with various countries on the African continent and with the countries members, of SADCC. Areas for co-operation include irrigation projects, production and processing of milk, joint agricultural and livestock projects, rehabilitation of arid soil, creation of health centres, development of the leather industry and consideration of ecological problems relating to lake regions.
259.	Reiterating the importance that we attach to technical co-operation among developing countries, we can say that we have used resources allocated to our country by UNDP to finance missions to some of the sub-Saharan countries to study livestock development and diseases and investigate the establishment of refrigeration plants.
260.	With regard to the specific problem of refugees, at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva in July 1984, my country announced its intention to participate in various projects.
261.	With reference to food, Argentina has reinforced its commitments to WFP. Under that Programme my Government recently shipped to Africa more than 10,000 metric tons of wheat flour, equivalent to 15,000 tons of that cereal. This month an additional 5,000 tons will be shipped. Similarly, next June we shall send 3,000 tons of corn to the region.
262.	But economic co-operation among developing countries has limits which derive from the very difficulties that those countries are confronting. Our country believes in multilateral co-operation instruments, and despite the serious economic situation that we are experiencing, we are trying to participate actively in the United Nations system of co-operation. Our recent contribution to WFP was the second largest among those coming from developing countries. Similarly, Argentina’s participation in the seventh replenishment of IDA was the fifth largest contribution among the 10 developing contributor countries. Our contribution to UNDP has made our country a net contributor to that Programme. Finally, our country has contributed to IFAD since its establishment.
263.	The aforementioned is merely a narration of what my country, afflicted by the burden of its external debt and committed to streamlining its economy consistent with the requirements of a demanding austerity, has been able and intends to do.
264.	Argentina’s co-operation with African countries is of mutual benefit, as should be the case in co-operation among developing countries, marked by a sense of justice, a spirit of solidarity and an overriding desire to contribute with practical acts to the implementation of decisions adopted by the Group of 77. But there can be no doubt that that is not enough. It is necessary for those who can do more to understand that. The debts of justice are debts of honour. However high the price, it can never exceed the value set by one’s own conscience.
265.	What Africa is calling for and needs—and what all the peoples advocating a new international economic order are calling for—is an orderly transformation of relations between an increasingly impoverished South and those who are in a better position to modify the rigid conditions that are delaying our progress. After two decades of development, history seems to have come to a standstill. It is time to begin again.
266.	For the determination and courage with which the African continent has confronted the deficiencies of its own development to be successful, a co-ordinated effort by the international community is necessary: a commitment on the part of the industrialized countries to provide - resources to defray current financial shortfalls, greater to-operation among developing countries and reinforcement of the multilateral machinery for co-operation.
267.	The interdependence of the contemporary world does not allow for a sick Africa. Neither can international economic relations tolerate inequality and underdevelopment. They must be remodelled to give rise to a more just and equitable international economic order.
268.	Mr. ELLEMANN-JENSEN (Denmark): First of all, I should like to congratulate Mr. de Pini& on his election as President of this special session of the General Assembly. I am confident that under his able leadership this session will be brought to a successful conclusion, and he can count on the full support of the Danish delegation in carrying out his task.
269.	This special session on the critical economic situation in Africa takes place at a crucial time. After an unprecedented decline during the first half of this decade, some encouraging elements have appeared on the African horizon. This situation has created new hope—hope which can be fulfilled only if the brighter prospects are taken as a challenge by African countries, by donor countries and by multilateral organizations, individually and collectively.
270.	We are gathered here not just in order to phrase the political intentions to act, but to convert intentions into dynamic action. This is the real task which confronts the General Assembly.
271.	What are the encouraging factors? The drought which has devastated large areas and brought untold suffering to millions of people has been replaced by rainfall and improved harvests in many places. Oil prices have declined, substantially reducing the import bill of oil-importing countries. The drop in the value of the dollar and in interest rates has helped ease the debt-service burden, and the prices of some commodities of significance to African countries have started to rise again. With the recession behind them, industrial countries are now in a position to meet this challenge. No longer can they justify a lack of support for Africa on domestic economic problems.
272.	Most important, however, is the mutual understanding of donors and African countries of the nature and complexity of the problems confronting the continent and the measures required to break the vicious circle of decline and to relaunch Africa on a path of economic and social progress. I sense that the mutual understanding is indeed spreading. For all these reasons, now is the time to transform this understanding into urgent and innovative action.
273.	The documentation submitted to the Assembly by the African Governments reflects their readiness for new approaches.' We appreciate the courage it has taken to make firm commitments to policy reforms and structural adjustment. In this connection we welcome their readiness to intensify the dialogue with the international community in a frank and constructive manner. Denmark is in general agreement with the priorities established by the African countries in their Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990, priorities which in large measure correspond with those prevailing in Danish development co-operation policy.
274.	Agriculture, in particular food production, remains the dominant factor in African economies and must be given the highest priority. In too many African countries the agricultural sector has been neglected. It has suffered from lack of capital. Food prices have been kept down artificially, removing incentives for farmers to increase production. Unrealistically high exchange rates have also worked to the detriment of the production of export crops, and too much government regulation has created unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles.
275.	Radical changes in present policies are required to achieve increased self-reliance in food production. Pricing policies must take account of market conditions. Credit facilities must be made available to the farmer. Exchange rate policies must be realistic. Physical and institutional infrastructures for marketing agricultural output must be improved.
276.	The small farmer is the backbone of food production in Africa. She must be the focal point of agricultural policies. Yes, I said she, not he, for in many areas of Africa women are responsible for more than half—in some cases up to 80 per cent—of a country’s food production. No agricultural policy can be effective without taking this fact into account. The role of women must be enhanced, not just as a matter of equality and social justice but also as an indispensable prerequisite for economic development. Recognizing the paramount importance of the agricultural sector in most African countries, the industrial and manufacturing sectors should especially cater to the needs of agriculture through the production of input and the processing of output.
277.	Two areas dealt with in the documentation give rise to problems of a global and far-reaching nature. I am referring to the environment, in particular desertification, afforestation and soil erosion, and, equally important and interrelated, the problem of the alarmingly rapid population growth. Solutions to these problems require new concepts and changes in social attitudes. Results will materialize only in a longer time perspective. But all the more, the start must be made today.
278.	The formulation of the priorities set out in the Priority Programme is an important step, but it is only the first step if African countries are to achieve sustained economic growth. It must be followed by implementation of the priorities to which the Governments of Africa have committed themselves. It will require many hard and painful decisions. A number of countries have already taken bold steps forward, and rewards are in some cases beginning to show. This should encourage others to follow suit.
279.	At the same time it must be emphasized that the adjustment process can be successful only if it is fully supported by substantive measures undertaken by the international community. Denmark stands ready, today as in the past, to make its contribution. Africa has long held an important place in our development co-operation programme. In fact, two thirds of Denmark’s present assistance already goes to African countries. And we plan to increase our total development aid considerably in the coming years—from the present 0.82 per cent of our gross national product [GNP] to 1 per cent of our GNP in 1992. This implies a substantial increase in the resources available from Denmark for Africa.
280.	During the recent crisis substantial assistance has been provided as disaster relief. We are of the firm belief, however, that emergency aid should not be given at the expense of longer-term assistance. We see this special session as an important opportunity to ensure that the readiness of donors to bring relief to the suffering millions
in Africa will now be transformed into a commitment to support rehabilitation and economic growth on the continent.
281.	All assessments of the situation in African countries conclude that there is a substantial gap between the recognized needs and the availability of external resources. This gap must be filled. If all donors were to honour the commitments they made on the adoption of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade and the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,9 a giant step forward would be taken in filling the gap. I urge them to do so, and I do so against the background of Denmark’s own commitment to increase our development assistance to 1 per cent of our GNP in 1992.
282.	No doubt all African countries can point to substantial difficulties facing them, but the international community must give the highest priority to supporting the poorest among them, through both bilateral and multilateral channels. In the context of increasing assistance to low-income countries in Africa, the eighth IDA replenishment should be at a level of at least $12 billion. We also call for substantial contributions to the IFAD Special Programme for Sub-Saharan African Countries Affected by Drought and Desertification.
283.	The debt burden is weighing heavily on the backs of African countries. For many countries that burden has become unbearable. A weak economy in general and a narrow resource base linked to a single primary commodity or a few such commodities make improvements in the balance-of-payments situation almost impossible. Measures to relieve the debt burden are therefore indispensable. But, since the debt burden varies significantly in both size and composition, any relief measure must be tailored to the concrete circumstances in each individual debtor country. .
284.	Since 1979 Denmark has responded positively to a large number of requests for debt relief from African countries. Official development assistance debt in the amount of 700 million Danish kroner has been cancelled for 11 least developed countries and other low-income countries.
285.	In response to a request from the United Republic of Tanzania, I have submitted a proposal to the Finance Committee of the Danish Parliament for cancellation of all outstanding official development assistance debt by Tanzania to Denmark. That amounts to approximately $83 million. The Committee will act on my proposal tomorrow. I have made that proposal in the light of the efforts made by Tanzania to work out a reform programme that will make possible an agreement with IMF. My country has for a long time been urging Tanzania to come to terms with the Fund. We hope that an agreement will be forthcoming in the near future.
286.	Denmark remains prepared to deal favourably with requests from least developed countries in Africa for cancellation of official development assistance debt. For other low-income countries in Africa we remain ready to consider debt-relief measures, including total or partial cancellation of official development assistance debt, on the basis of concrete assessment of each individual case.
287.	The very theme of this special session is the strongest possible evidence that problems can no longer be solved at the national level but require cross-border cooperation. African countries have recognized the usefulness and even necessity of regional co-operation. Their efforts in that field warrant our support.
288.	For Denmark, co-operation with the countries of the SADCC region has been steadily increasing. Together with other Nordic countries, we have recently initiated.-a new approach to co-operation between the two regions. , In January this year a joint declaration on expanded economic co-operation was signed by the Nordic and SADCC countries. It represents a mutual determination,-to go beyond the traditional donor-recipient relationship and seek new avenues of co-operation between our two regions. A basic idea is to intensify relations on a wide spectrum of activities in trade, joint ventures, investments, commodities and technology transfers, as well as in cultural co-operation, making use of a combination of various resources.
289.	This new Nordic relationship with SADCC should, of course, also be seen in a political context. We recognize that SADCC has developed its own co-operation both in response to and in spite of severe difficulties. Not only do its member countries suffer from the same economic problems as the rest of Africa, but, in addition, they are saddled with the burden of proximity to South Africa. Acts of economic destabilization against its neighbours are a continuous feature of the policies of the South African Government, and just a week ago we saw yet another armed attack on three SADCC countries, resulting in death and injury. We unequivocally condemn that aggression.
290.	I have focused on the encouraging elements in today’s situation as well as on the enormous difficulties that exist and will exist for years to come. I believe a small flame of optimism can be seen, but it is a flickering flame. It is our mutual responsibility to shield and develop that flame so that it may shine with increasing intensity and gradually disperse the shadows of decline and suffering which for so long have been cast over Africa. It is no easy task, and there are no quick solutions. Marginally improved policy performance or slightly increased development assistance will not suffice. We must meet the challenge head on.
291.	Mr. TINDEMANS (Belgium) (interpretation from French)-. A country such as Belgium, whose concern with regard to Africa is based on a long tradition and the many links forged by history, cannot remain indifferent to the range of problems affecting the African continent.
292.	Once again we are gathered here to examine, in a spirit of solidarity, the difficulties which Africa has to face.
293.	In July 1984, the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa met at Geneva. I was touched by the confidence shown in me when I had the honour of being elected President of that Conference, particularly since it constituted a very important step towards increasing international solidarity with Africa.
294.	Today, we have to go beyond emergency relief measures to the deeper roots of the problem. We must define a set of priority measures to promote rehabilitation and development and to ensure the longer-term future of the African continent. We must all think about the causes of the gradual deterioration of the economic and social situation in Africa in order to set in motion policies that will directly address those causes.
295.	It is satisfying to note that the endeavours in this field are shared. On the one hand the African countries are fully aware of the need to initiate the adjustment processes required by the structural nature of their economic difficulties. They have decided to shoulder their responsibilities in this field, and they deserve our congratulations. On the other hand the developed countries, including Belgium, which are deeply concerned about the
welfare of African peoples, are also gradually adjusting their co-operation policies.
296.	Increasingly, views on the objectives to be achieved are converging. A broad consensus exists nowadays on the priority sectors for the rehabilitation and development of the African continent. Obviously, agriculture and integrated rural development must be promoted, but there is ai.parallel need to combat desertification, to develop human resources and to maximize available financial resources through optimum management and co-ordination. In short, development has to become more human and better adapted to local situations and needs.
297.	In the field of agriculture, all development action should include the definition of a pricing policy which would stimulate farmers by means of proper remuneration within the framework of the market. This should be complemented by the promotion, as a matter of priority, of food crops which would benefit the population as a whole and by an appropriate commercialization system. This implies, in turn, the existence of an adequate material and human infrastructure. It is equally important that the development of agriculture be accompanied and supported by integrated rural development. It is time to slow down the rural exodus and to combat the social and economic plagues resulting therefrom.
298.	On the other hand, the fight against drought and deforestation makes it more than ever necessary to take large-scale action at the national, regional and international levels. This should include both direct measures, such as reforestation, and indirect measures, which would depend on the development of sources of energy other than wood and on the social and economic education of rural populations.
299.	Human resources development also play a key role. African Governments would benefit greatly from adapting their education and training systems to the needs of their societies. Given the essential role of women in African societies, in particular in rural areas, these education and training efforts should be directed particularly towards drawing the maximum benefit from their contribution to economic development, while ensuring respect for their dignity.
300.	Finally, we cannot but agree with EC A on the link which must necessarily exist between the volume of financial resources available and the quality of management of development programmes. The best possible use must be made of existing resources by improving the management and co-ordination of develoment programmes.
301.	We recognize that a lot remains to be done, by both North and South, to avoid administrative errors, negligence, duplication and sterile competition. We should, at the same time, harmonize existing bilateral co-operation procedures and better co-ordinate, at the country level, bilateral and multilateral assistance and take fully into account the absorptive capacities of recipient countries. Multilateral mechanisms exist to fill this triple role; it would be preferable to make better use of them rather than to create new ones.
302.	In my opinion, these should be the main features of a medium-term programme for African development. I should like to renew here the solemn commitment of the Belgian Government to pursue its policy of co-operation with Africa and to consider strengthening this policy by all the means available.
303.	Belgium has experience of Africa. This is an advantage in the present general consideration of the African situation. The major part of Belgian bilateral assistance has always been directed towards Africa. In recent years
more than 70 per cent of our bilateral assistance has gone to that continent. Our assistance to the poorest countries has always been based on grants. In addition, Belgian funds are channelled through multilateral bodies of the United Nations system, the European Development Fund or the African Development Bank.
304.	Furthermore, in October 1983 the Belgian Parliament passed a law establishing a survival fund for the third world to assist people threatened by hunger, malnutrition and underdevelopment. This fund, which has financial resources of 10 billion Belgian francs, approximately $200 million, in addition to the bilateral official development assistance given by Belgium, has enabled us so far to take significant action in four African countries: Kenya, Uganda, Somalia and Ethiopia. This action has been carried out in co-operation with the competent United Nations bodies and the Governments concerned.
305.	For a number of years now Belgium has achieved the target of allotting 0.15 per cent of its GNP to official development assistance to the least developed countries, and it is making every effort to achieve the aim of 0.7 per cent of GNP for total official development assistance. My country will take part in the eighth replenishment of IDA, of which sub-Saharan Africa will be one of the main beneficiaries.
306.	I have already stated that Belgium had decided, in consultation with recipient countries, to concentrate its future bilateral assistance on a number of priority areas. These priorities are, essentially, agricultural development, integrated rural development, infrastructure and directly productive investment.
307.	On the other hand, we are convinced of the danger represented by the external indebtedness of the African countries. This problem is so serious that the burden of debt servicing often seems out of all proportion to the economic potential of the countries concerned. In certain cases, financial flows have even become globally negative. 308. Belgium participates actively and with an open mind in negotiations aimed at alleviating the debt on a case-by-case basis. We wish to take into account all the elements of the situation, including the adjustment policies pursued by certain countries to make the management of their development more efficient. Furthermore, and in conformity with the UNCTAD resolution on retroactive adjustment of the conditions of assistance, we have adjusted the methods of reimbursement of State-to-State loans extended to the least developed countries.
309.	Nevertheless, in view of the seriousness of the debt problem in general, I remain convinced that new approaches will have to be sought within the framework of the competent international bodies. I wonder, for example, if the approach could not be based on the possibility of earmarking reimbursements of State loans for a fund through which it would be possible to extend new loans. I think that such a system, which has existed in Belgium since 1983, would indeed be of great assistance to developing countries. One could also, in certain cases, consider the possibility of certain official development assistance debts being reimbursed in local currency. These amounts could then be used to defray local administrative project costs or to pay co-operation personnel in local currency.
310.	In any event, it must be ensured that no African country which has adopted appropriate adjustment measures finds itself, in the final analysis, a net debtor of public financial flows.
311.	Before concluding, I should like to underline the need for Africa to encourage an open attitude to technology and industry.
312.	I should like to see a great number of small and medium-size enterprises develop, corresponding to the spirit of initiative and the aspirations of the African peoples. I intend to direct an ever-greater part of our cooperation towards directly productive sectors, through small and medium-size enterprises. The development of this important economic sector is linked to the technical and technological training of young people—that is, to the development of professional and, especially, technical education. In most cases, middle-level executives are still lacking in African countries. Belgium wants to increase its efforts in this field also, bearing in mind its own experience.
313.	I have not yet mentioned the non-governmental organizations, which have a unique part to play in the processes of developing an economy on a human scale. Their particular orientation is admirably suited to efficient, decentralized action.
314.	The African countries bear the heavy responsibility of defining for themselves, and carrying out, development strategies that will reduce their vulnerability in the face of economic crises and market fluctuations. On the other hand, the community of industrialized States of all regions, and also countries becoming industrialized, must unite their efforts to help all the African countries resolve their problems and modernize their societies and their economies. This interdependence and common responsibility should enable us to mobilize the necessary energy to facilitate in Africa the blossoming of prosperous and dynamic societies which also respect African originality. 315. Mr. WIELAND ALZAMORA (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): In the words of our chief executive, President Alan Garcia, Peru brings to the Assembly its firmest support for and solidarity with the initiative of the African countries which has brought us together. He states:
“At the opening of the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, I extend to our African brothers Peru’s support for and solidarity with the exemplary regional action, taken by individual countries and countries acting together in defence of their legitimate interests and aspirations, which has set Africa moving.
“I am confident that the developed world will know how to respond to the effort at rebuilding and construction that Africa is making to achieve its development, by adopting measures to correct the international economic situation which is today frustrating and suffocating the development capacity of Africa and the other regions of the third world, and will shoulder its responsibilities in this process of rectifying and restructuring world economic relations. A true recovery in the African development process does not require only the eradication of the effects of hunger and desertification.
“A recovery needs above all the international political will to reverse the ominous trends in the terms of trade, a substantial improvement in the value of traditional African exports, a fair settlement of the external debt problem and a positive adjustment of flows of financial resources to the region.
“I reaffirm Peru’s support for the claims that this special session of the General Assembly is called upon to consider in order to find a solution to the short-term and structural problems causing the critical economic situation in Africa, which is harming the well-being and progress of the vast majority of mankind in that and other third-world sister regions.”
316.	For the first time in its history, the General Assembly has decided to deal with the economic problems of a
single region. That is a reflection of the priority demanded by the gravity of the economic situation in Africa as well as the collapse of international co-operation and the failure of the present world economic system and its responsible institutions to face up to the general crisis of the developing countries.
317.	There is just one basic problem. Nothing shows that more clearly than the working paper prepared by the General Secretariat for the Preparatory Committee for this special session, which indicates that there are three adverse external factors—the deterioration in the terms of trade, protectionism and the rise in interest rates— that caused the countries of sub-Saharan Africa the loss of $15 billion between 1980 and 1985, exactly equivalent to the larger part of the external debt that those countries had to contract in the same period. That is a revealing coincidence, requiring no further comment on the origins of the crisis and the responsibility for it.
318.	It will be understood, in the light of that decisive structural problem, that the palliatives attempted at the bilateral or multilateral levels, preferential and selective treatment and so-called stabilization systems have not had sufficient effect to check the crisis. Today, with its political dimensions and importance understood, it has been brought before this important world political forum for an attempt to be made, on the basis of the facts, to find a formula combining wisdom, realism, and effectiveness to help solve the African economic crisis and the structural and temporary problems that have caused it, which are rooted in the world system whose injustices and contradictions we have been trying for so long to correct.
319.	We should emphasize several aspects of preparations for the session that is starting today.
320.	The first is the courageous example of concerted regional action that the joint African initiative, efficiently co-ordinated by its own regional institutions, gives other regions of the third world.
321.	Secondly, I would refer to the high political and technical quality of the African documents, whose diagnoses and estimates have been endorsed by the international financial institutions, as well as to the courage and honesty of the self-criticism they contain and to their commitment to work and put things right.
322.	The third matter is the lack of any result from the negotiations carried out so far because of the absence of political will on the part of the international community to which the African proposals are addressed, and the political need to respond to the African regional initiative and its commitments and shoulder the reciprocal responsibilities that it legitimately calls for.
323.	The fourth matter is the need fully to respect the sovereign right of each State to formulate, implement and administer its own development programmes and projects, in keeping with its national interests and needs.
324.	It is also worth highlighting, because of its moral value and the warning it contains, the grave statement made by the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee about the biased distortion of the concept of international aid, which is often aimed at benefiting the donor country and its agricultural, industrial, trade, technological and financial policies, to the eventual detriment of the recipient country and its chances of true development.
325.	Particularly valuable, because of their honesty and integrity, are the denunciations of the frequent attempts of donor countries—frequently associated with the elites of the South who have been trained in the North—to impose on recipient countries models and patterns of
development divorced from the reality in and the aspirations of those countries, which models and patterns end up destroying, along with the myth they are pursuing, the national values and potentials that are decisive in a genuine process of development and submerging those countries in economic and political subordination, the destruction of their potential for food self-sufficiency, dependency upon alien consumer patterns and the financial subjugation of the debt accompanying the process. 326. We must now come to the help of our African brothers. We must re-experience the painful process of international co-operation. We must define the corresponding political responsibilities and try a new, rational, equitable and far-sighted form of universal coexistence. We must remember the errors of the past so as not to repeat them, and at this particular time—one of abundance for the rich and of scarcity for the impoverished— we must define the future with vision, generosity and grandeur.
327.	Peru reiterates its faith in the capacity of peoples for understanding and in their sense of justice and solidarity. We extend the firmest support possible to the joint initiative taken by our African brothers to defend the structural, temporary interests of their development and the autonomy of their national decisions, and we reaffirm our support for the process of genuine international cooperation the Assembly is called upon to organize.
328.	I should like warmly to commend the debt remission measures and the moratorium on interest on official assistance loans that have been announced by the ministers of the Netherlands, Canada and Denmark, which will blaze the path for hope called for by the President of Senegal this morning.
329.	Ms. VETLESEN (Norway): This special session is indeed a historic occasion. It is the first time ever that the General Assembly has devoted a special session to the economic and social problems of one continent. The present crisis in Africa is one of the greatest and most urgent challenges for the international community and thus amply justifies the special attention of this world body.
330.	Initially I should like to stress the importance of the work done by the OAU and its member States. The elaboration of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19901 and the draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990 are impressive contributions to the preparations for this special session. My delegation is of the opinion that those documents provide a sound basis for our work.
331.	There is little need for me to repeat the statistics describing the serious and even desperate economic situation of many African countries. It is sufficient to point out that the decline in Africa’s per capita output during the 1970s and 1980s will wipe out all increases in per capita output gained in the 1960s. As a result low-income Africa is poorer today than it was in the 1960s.
332.	As for the causes of the crisis, we note that there is a convergence of views in the analysis in the OAU document and the World Bank’s recent report on the matter, Financing Adjustment with Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1986-90. In both documents it is a basic thesis that the drought years and the current economic crisis have merely accentuated the underlying structural problems. There is full agreement that these structural problems have been caused by a combination of domestic and external factors. In this context it is encouraging to note the frank way in which the OAU document discusses certain shortcomings of policies pursued by African
Governments themselves. It is also satisfactory to note that the reform process has already started.
333.	Certainly, external factors have had a negative impact, even to the extent of playing havoc with many African economies.
334.	The general picture I have given should not lead to undue generalization. It goes without saying that the situations of individual countries differ and policies and remedies will therefore have to be adjusted accordingly. 335. In the African submission to the special session,2 the highest priority is given to the rehabilitation and development of agriculture and supportive sectors. My delegation fully supports this priority setting. Food selfsufficiency ratios have dropped from almost 100 per cent in the 1960s to the situation of today, in which one out of every five Africans depends on food imports to survive. Through national food strategies the basis should be laid for long-term development leading to self-sufficiency in food for Africa.
336.	As stated in Africa’s Priority Programme, the focus of attention must be the peasant small-holder, with special emphasis on female farmers, who play such an important role in food production in many countries. And steps should be taken to enable small-holders effectively to produce both staple food and cash crops for domestic and external markets. Appropriate price incentives are important in this connection, as is pointed out in the OAU document. In many cases low producer prices have resulted in low production. In other cases the distribution and marketing of crops represents the bottleneck. Increased food production should lead to increased rural employment. This is all the more important in view of the growing problems of urbanization in Africa and the fact that for a long time to come agriculture will have to provide the greatest employment opportunity.
337.	While we agree with the priority given to agriculture, we should not lose sight of the broader structural problems of the African economy. Structural transformation and economic diversification must be a continuous process, and that process should be accelerated.
338.	Development, however, is not a one-dimensional concept linked to economic growth alone. Development must also be considered in a social context. Therefore I should like to emphasize that as much attention should be paid to the distribution of wealth as to the necessity of economic growth. Measures which result in social progress and human development have a multiplier effect which accelerates economic growth in the long-term perspective.
339.	We should have liked to see more of an in-depth analysis of the problems raised by the deterioration of the natural environment and the accelerating population growth, which are both posing serious threats to Africa’s long-term development. We believe that a new emphasis must be given to efforts aimed at increasing productivity and production on an environmentally sound basis, as well as to appropriate demographic policies.
340.	If we look at the trends of demographic developments in Africa and take the long-term view, I think it is appropriate to express concern when the population growth rate is so much higher than the growth rate in food production. With this background, new importance should be given to the recommendations for the further implementation of the World Population Plan of Action adopted by the International Conference on Population,10 held at Mexico City in August 1984, as well as the Kilimanjaro Programme of Action for African Population and Self-Reliant Development, adopted by all African Governments at the Second African Population Conference, held at Arusha in January 1984. .
341.	An important factor causing ecological imbalance in many African countries is deforestation, which often transforms productive areas into desert or semi-desert, with a subsequent decrease in productivity. I should like to refer to an old American Indian proverb, which says: “The trees support the sky; destroy them, and disaster follows”. It seems that in many areas of the world the truth of this saying has been proved. We should bear in mind that it should never be taken for granted that, when a tree is cut, new seedlings will pop up by themselves. Experience in our country tells us that forests have to be taken care of and maintained well to be productive. We share this experience with many countries with a long tradition in forestry. In my opinion, it would be a very positive step indeed if we could put our experience behind the growing African efforts to reverse the trend of dwindling forests in Africa.
342.	The question of taking care of the forests brings me once again to the importance of the full participation of women in the development process. African female farmers are among the first to suffer from the declining productivity of the land as well as the burdensome lack of firewood. They will therefore be among the best motivated to apply remedies, given the necessary support and incentives. New agricultural methods, soil conservation and fuelwood plantation schemes are already mobilizing African women. Such mobilization and participation must be encouraged.
343.	As for the broader role and contribution of women in the development process, this is given some attention in the documentation before us. It cannot be too strongly underlined, however, that large numbers of women remain on the periphery of the economic systems and the decision-making processes of many developing, but of course not only developing, countries. There is thus an urgent need to strengthen the participation of women in all areas of the economy and at all levels of development planning and implementation.
344.	Turning to the implementation of the measures foreseen in the draft Programme of Action, it is clear that, in addition to the extraordinary efforts that will be required by the African countries themselves, a substantial expansion of support from the rest of the international community will be needed in the years ahead.
345.	Against this background, my delegation strongly believes that one main objective of this special session must be a broad commitment by the collective donor community to mobilize additional external resources for Africa, in particular increased official development assistance to the poorer countries. Such additional resources could be fully within reach if the donor community met the targets for official development assistance as set out in the International Development Strategy. In the view of my Government, there is an urgent need for donor countries—and especially those with strong economies— to increase their official development assistance effectively and substantially with a view to attaining as soon as possible the 0.7 and 1 per cent targets. And the efforts to increase official development assistance should be taken in parallel with measures to improve the quality of that aid.
346.	As stressed in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery, the support of the international community should not be limited to the flow of financial resources. Equally important is the need for attempts to remedy Africa’s urgent and pressing problems linked to the drastic fall in commodity prices, increasing protectionism and high interest rates. In this context, we
welcome the decision to launch the new round of trade negotiations.
347.	I should like for a moment to turn to some of my own country’s commitments and policies vis-à-vis African countries. Norway has a long tradition of recognizing the special situation and needs of the poorer and most disadvantaged countries. In this connection, I take pleasure in announcing that my Government is now in the process of taking the necessary steps to convert into grants our one and only outstanding official development assistance Ioan to sub-Saharan Africa, that is, to the United Republic of Tanzania.
348.	For several years our total aid disbursements have been around 1 per cent of our GNP, and our disbursements to the least developed countries amount to 0.32 per cent. This is basically given in the form of grants and untied aid. Almost half of our official development assistance goes to multilateral organizations, and Norway is thus an important contributor to multilateral aid to Africa. On the other side, our bilateral aid amounts to more than 60 per cent and is channelled to Africa south of the Sahara. This share of our bilateral aid has increased during recent years, and efforts will be made to continue this trend.
349.	Thus, a new five-year plan for assistance to the Sudano-Sahelian region for the period 1986-1990 has been initiated. Furthermore, plans are being worked out for increased support to agricultural and rural development in the main co-operation countries for Norwegian bilateral assistance in eastern and southern Africa.
350.	Turning to the southern African region, I should like to state that the Norwegian Government has strongly condemned the latest South African attacks on offices and dwellings of the African National Congress in Zambia, Zimbabwe and Botswana. In view of South Africa’s flagrant destabilization policies in neighbouring States, new initiatives have recently been taken by Norway and the other Nordic countries vis-à-vis the members of SADCC. These initiatives foresee broad economic, commercial and cultural co-operation between the two regions, extending much beyond traditional aid frameworks.
351.	In a broader context, Africa’s problems are linked to the global ecological problems. In this connection, I wish to draw attention to the work done by the World Commission on Environment and Development, under the chairmanship of the Norwegian Prime Minister, Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland. From the very start of its work in 1984, the Commission has emphasized that lack of justice in the world’s economic and social order leads to environmental degradation, in particular in developing countries. Much of the same thinking is—and should be—reflected in the documents prepared for this Conference.
352.	In the draft Programme of Action we have noted that two general principles guide the African thinking on the follow-up: the mechanisms should be simple and operational and should not involve substantial additional expenditure; and emphasis should be placed, as far as possible, on the strengthening of existing institutions rather than the creation of new ones. We fully support this approach, and we have an open mind as to the discussion of possible reforms in the working methods of existing forums.
353.	The task of this special session is a momentous one, and we cannot afford to fail. As stated in the Nordic intervention in the Preparatory Committee, the outcome should contain a pledge by the African Governments to adopt national policies and reforms directed at correcting current deficiencies and to mobilize more domestic resources to the priority purposes of the African Priority
Programme. The donor countries and the international community at large should pledge their full and effective support to the African Governments in these efforts. An important overall increase in external assistance must certainly play a significant role in this context.
354.	My delegation pledges its full support to a successful outcome of this special session.
355.	Mr. HUSSAIN (Maldives): At this historic special session, the General Assembly is for the first time focusing on the needs of a single continent. The main purpose is to draw up a programme of activities to deal, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, with the longterm development problems and obstacles confronted by Africa.
356.	Our decision was to devote this important special session not only to the immediate crisis in Africa but also to the critical situation of Africa from a global perspective. It is in that spirit that we must seek the solidarity of all countries and the more realistic side of the interdependence of all continents. ■
357.	We see this special session as part of the process that has evolved during the past two or three years: to focus international thinking and discussions on the nature and causes of the problems surrounding the African economic and social crisis. Now the international community should look beyond the emergency and supplement the domestic actions taken by the African countries to achieve a long-lasting solution. Our attention has been drawn to the fact that the mere flow of financial resources or addressing ourselves to the disturbing external factors is not sufficient; greater efforts must be expended in restoring Africa’s capacity to lay a new foundation for development.
358.	The root causes of the African situation are to be found in historical factors. Most African States achieved their independence only recently. Deprived of the trained personnel needed for dealing with their administrative responsibilities and economies, the majority of those States were compelled to sacrifice their resources to the achievement of nationhood and their unity. They lack either the capability or the resources to pay adequate attention to economic and social development.
359.	The African crisis has grown to its present proportion because of the effects of successive natural disasters. The rural populations of African nations have little or no choice about exploiting their options to alleviate suffering and hardship. The pressure of the population growth, which is far in excess of what can be sustained by the present rate of economic growth, has also been a factor contributing to the current situation.
360.	The present African crisis is more complex than a matter of just feeding the hungry. The population growth, especially of the rural sectors, has further aggravated the problem. The lack of adequate health facilities and basic educational facilities has adversely contributed to the existing dilemma. We therefore believe that the decision taken by the African nations to adhere to the Lagos Plan of Action,6 with the necessary refinements and adjustments, will have far-reaching results.
361.	We are encouraged by the strong commitment expressed by African Governments in this vital battle for survival and development. There is indeed full recognition of the necessity to engage and utilize unsparingly all available resources at home. Therefore, it is our fervent hope that the aim of international co-operation and assistance will be to complement the arduous task which the African nations have undertaken. We, the international community, sharing in the efforts of African
development, must endeavour to make the painful responsibility much easier by adding greater momentum towards preventing more human suffering, which has already been too prolonged. We must not permit any room for doubt in the conviction of the African nations that, given the necessary support from the international community, they have the inherent capacity to bring about change in order to function as an effective partner in the multilateral economic structure.
362.	It is gratifying to note that in recent years a new spirit has emerged in the leadership of many African nations. Having recognized their past errors, they have embarked upon new strategies to put aside failed policies and embrace more pragmatic new approaches. Most importantly, some have declared their acceptance of the responsibility for economic and social change, which rests with Africans themselves. Their desire to deal with this serious problem with fresh minds has strengthened their ideology.
363.	We would be failing in our duty to address this complex problem if we ignored some of the undeniable realities. Most African countries, in spite of all the efforts made in the quarter of a century since independence, still rely heavily on the export of a limited variety of primary products. Although some countries have done better than others, food production has been on the decline. We witnessed this in the poorest countries, where the gross domestic product per capita fell throughout the 1970s. Therefore, the task before us cannot be considered to be merely rehabilitation and restoration of the situation which existed prior to the current emergency.
364.	One disturbing factor that we have observed is the trend of constant and increasingly frequent recurrence of the difficulties, driving the continent of Africa into a morass of underdevelopment. This point is further demonstrated by that continent’s link to the world economy remaining largely based on the inherited colonial structure. Their main exports still being primary commodities, African countries are especially vulnerable to the violent changes in international markets.
365.	We in the Maldives believe that the world economic order needs to be redefined and restructured to create more favourable conditions in which the developed, developing and underdeveloped countries can all participate effectively, in a climate of reduced suspicion. We are convinced that nothing less than clearly defined steps and radical measures are needed to bring about such a change. In order to prevent the collapse of African economies and to guarantee the means for fundamental restructuring and the evolution of a viable policy, a new approach to assistance by the international community is required.
366.	We are of the opinion that long-term endeavours encompassing structural transformation must begin urgently and immediately. A programme of action with long-term remedies must also show change and positive results in the near future to guarantee sustained vigilance and to generate interest. It is fundamentally important that in any programme of action for African recovery and development the highest priority be given to the rehabilitation and development of the agricultural sector. All such programmes must receive the necessary domestic support for effective implementation.
367.	The much-needed external resources will not, we believe, by themselves produce progress, and there is sufficient experience to show that inappropriate assistance leads only to failure. Further, it is the experience of most African countries that grappling with unfavourable terms of trade and rising debt-servicing costs has brought about
a devastating shortage of foreign exchange and crippled the efforts to increase their import capacity in order to make rehabilitation more effective.
368.	We are heartened by the enormous response of the international community through the efforts of both governmental and non-governmental bodies to harness support and channel resources. The fund-raising events organized throughout the world through exploitation of the mass media networks have brought additional relief to those with the most urgent needs. In addition, the activities which have been outlined by United Nations organizations and agencies promise both short-term and long-term impact on the situation. Some of those programmes are aimed at dealing with such fundamental areas of development as improvement of the basic level of education and the provision of management and administrative skills.
369.	We are confident that the conclusions of this important special session of the General Assembly will clearly outline the challenging task before the international community. It is our sincere hope and desire that a true sense of partnership in assistance and development will emerge to alleviate the suffering of our brothers and sisters living in the nations of Africa. World awareness has been generated by the convening of this session and by the numerous international activities which have taken place during the last two years, and the heart of man has been touched and his sympathy aroused.
370.	Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): My delegation would like, at the outset, to join previous speakers in extending its warmest congratulations to the President on his unanimous election to preside over this historic gathering. We are confident that under his wise and experienced guidance and leadership, the proceedings of this special session will yield constructive and fruitful results.
371.	It was indeed a privilege to hear the important and thought-provoking statement of Mr. Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, which served to clarify the overall critical situation on the African continent and its impact on humanity.
372.	My delegation regards the convening of the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa as most important and necessary, in view of the urgency and gravity of the multi-faceted problem facing the entire continent. The fact that the international community adopted by consensus General Assembly resolution 40/40 stresses the global concern at the fact that the economic situation in Africa has reached a highly critical stage and that it is bound to have worldwide repercussions. It also indicates the perception that international interests will be seriously affected by a prolongation of the crisis and that it is in the interests of the international community to assist in its alleviation and eventual elimination. The special session will surely reaffirm all those points. As the Secretary-General said this morning: ■
“At this special session, we share the responsibility to work for a better future for the peoples of Africa, both as a matter of conscience and, above all, because we live in a world in which solidarity is the only guarantee of our survival. We must win the race against time.” [1st meeting, para. 32.]
373.	We note, in particular, the vigorous and praiseworthy efforts that the African countries themselves are making by initiating Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990' and by committing their
indigenous resources, up to 64.4 per cent of the estimated requirement, to the Programme. If the international community can come up with its external contributions, in both financial and other forms of support, including economic and trade measures, self-sustaining development will become a reality for many African countries. This is indeed a long-term challenge for those countries themselves and for the donor community, as well as for the United Nations system.
374.	The underlying causes of the African economic crisis have been described in paragraph 14 of Africa’s submission to the special session2 as follows:
“The African economic crisis is due principally to insufficient structural transformation and the economic diversification that are required to move the continent away from inherited colonial economic structures, typified by a vicious interaction between excruciating poverty and abysmally low levels of productivity, in an environment marked by serious deficiencies in basic economic and social infrastructures, most especially the physical capital, research capabilities, technological know-how and human resources development that are indispensable to an integrated and dynamic economy.”
375.	Perhaps the most serious manifestation of the crisis is food scarcity, with untold suffering for millions of people in sub-Saharan Africa, the causes of which are manifold, including drought and desertification. Such natural calamities have combined with inadequate agricultural inputs to magnify the shortages, which are likely to persist unless concerted measures are taken to reverse the situation. Other manifestations are in general the results of underdevelopment, aggravated by such factors as the policy of destabilization conducted by the Pretoria régime, in particular against the front-line States, and the refugee problem, which constitutes an economic burden on the receiving countries.
376.	The emphasis on food and agriculture and on the need to address the problems of famine and decline in agricultural productivity enhances the prospect of more wide-ranging South-South co-operation. In recent years many countries of the South have grappled with similar problems with a measure of success and have in the process acquired more experience in indigenous technologies which they are willing to share with other countries. Perhaps it is in this area that countries like Thailand can hope to make a contribution towards a long-term solution to the immense problem of food security in Africa.
377.	While Thailand is a developing country with limited resources as well as its own economic problems, it has not been unresponsive to the needs of many African countries. The Royal Thai Government has made contributions to the affected African countries within the framework of FAO and WFP on a regular basis. In addition to its frequent contributions to funds for the benefit of the Namibian people and black South Africans, Thailand has rendered modest financial assistance to 12 African countries under the United Nations trust funds for the special programmes of economic assistance. Thailand also participated actively in the Second International Conference on Assistance for Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva in July 1984, and the Conference on the Emergency Situation in Africa, held at Geneva in March 1985, and made pledges at both conferences. Moreover, my Government has provided technical assistance to several African countries under the programme of technical cooperation among developing countries, as well as scholarships and training assistance under the Government’s own aid programme in Thailand for Africans in the fields of agriculture, rural development and health care.
378.	Before I conclude, my delegation would like to pay a warm tribute to the Secretary-General and to express its deep appreciation to all concerned agencies and bodies in the United Nations system for their valuable contribution to the preparatory work for this session. My delegation earnestly hopes that the special session will conclude its deliberations with success and substantive outcome that will provide a framework for actions by the international community to supplement indigenous efforts to the benefit of African countries, including the island States of Africa. For its part, Thailand will continue to cooperate within the full limits of its capabilities with the affected countries and the world community in dealing with this critical problem of international concern.
379.	The PRESIDENT: In accordance with General Assembly resolution 3208 (XXIX) of 11 October 1974, and the decision taken by the Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting of the current session [decision S-13/21], I now call on the observer of the European Economic Community, Mr. Lorenzo Natali.
380.	Mr. NATALI (European Economic Community) {interpretation from French): On behalf of the European Community, I should like to contribute to the debate on the future of Africa the testimony not only of a witness interested by the changes taking place in a continent neighbouring our own, but also of a protagonist long involved, by virtue of the Lomé Convention and the co-operation agreements with the southern Mediterranean countries, in the development efforts of African countries.
381.	Asa witness, I wish to stress the depth and rapidity of the changes under way in many of these countries. It is impossible not to be impressed by the willingness of most African leaders to admit mistakes and their determination to bring about changes—though clearly, given the magnitude of the crisis and the slim margin for manoeuvring in poor countries, it must be a long time before current reforms can have a real impact. Their completion will call for patience and strength of will, especially since their cost in social and political terms is likely to be high. 382. As a protagonist, the Community with its member States is the largest donor of development aid to subSaharan Africa, providing approximately 55 per cent of official development assistance. The Community is also Africa’s leading trade partner, taking half of Africa’s exports. It is thus deeply committed to the future of the continent. Furthermore, to the extent that it supports the development policies of its African partners, through ongoing dialogue, the Community shares in their failures and successes. It is therefore particularly attentive to changing circumstances so that it can contribute in good time to appropriate solutions.
383.	In that spirit, in response to the hardship caused by the drought, the Community launched a massive emergency aid programme in 1985, followed a year later by a European plan for agricultural revival and rehabilitation for the most affected countries. In total, the supplementary European contribution reached approximately $800 million.
384.	In addition to those emergency measures, the Community is co-operating with African countries south of the Sahara in implementing the Third Lomé Convention, which came into force on 1 May 1986. The Convention expresses a joint desire which reflects contractual co-operation and puts into concrete form a new model for relations between industrialized and developing countries. The financial portion of the Convention is approximately $8 billion—an increase of 60 per cent over the previous Convention. The present Convention
provides sub-Saharan Africa with instruments particularly suitable for coping with situations that require financing on the most favourable terms and flexibility going beyond traditional forms of financial and technical co-operation in order to respond better to the specific needs of African countries as they undertake their reforms.
385.	Furthermore, the Lomé Convention, like co-operation agreements with southern Mediterranean countries, goes beyond simple financial and technical co-operation by according trade advantages as well, offering Africa, without reciprocity or discrimination, privileged access to the Community market.
386.	The initial, programming stage of implementation of the new Convention, which is now under way, has shown a convergence of African views with those of the Community and a common determination to act on the implications by giving general priority to rural development, especially food production, as reflected in the allocation of the lion’s share of funds, ranging from 60 per cent to 90 per cent, to that sector.
387.	Naturally, measures to restore productive capacity must take account of long-term concern over the deterioration of Africa’s natural assets and its soaring population growth. This underlies the decision by the Community heads of State and Government that European aid, both Community and bilateral, will give priority to a campaign against desertification based on longterm commitment and consistent planning. The broad directions of this European plan were mapped out in April 1986. It is fully compatible with the concerns and priorities of the African countries themselves, and the way is thus open for its implementation in the countries and regions concerned.
388.	Furthermore, the Community will be devoting some of its financial resources to strengthening research and development capabilities in both Europe and the developing countries.
389.	In the area of food aid, the Community attaches special importance to the purchase of food in African countries with surpluses, for the benefit of neighbouring countries which are in structural deficit. The Community thus provides help for the balance of payments of the one and food aid better adapted to the nutritional habits of the other. In this sense these triangular actions constitute support for the development of South-South trade. Moreover, this year the Community has established an emergency food aid reserve over and above its annual programme, so that it will be better able to help African countries in the event of another disaster comparable to that which they suffered so recently.
390.	But beyond the efforts which I have just described, the Community finds that the success of assistance to Africa depends fundamentally on improvement in the international economic environment, which in recent years has been very unfavourable to Africa and may so continue despite the economic and financial upturn in the industrialized world. This is shown by the fact that Africa has lost traditional market shares in a number of products, often to other developing countries. But it is also obvious that the effects of this crisis have been materially exacerbated, especially since the end of the 1970s, by deteriorating terms of trade and the problems caused by a rapidly accumulating debt burden. Despite some recent encouraging signs, the result has been a catastrophic decline in foreign currency resources. Two thirds of the export earnings of low-income countries now goes simply to pay for debt-servicing and food and oil imports. This
means that many countries can no longer afford even to keep the economy running, let alone resume growth.
391.	It is generally recognized that in order to change this situation progress is recessary in three areas: trade, particularly in commodities; the debt problem; and financial flows. .
392.	As regards access to the markets of industrialized countries, the Community, as I have already said, accords special treatment to African countries. In general, we would stress the need to promote liberal access, in the context of existing undertakings regarding the status quo and the rollback of barriers to trade. This also applies to the perspective of forthcoming GATT multilateral trade negotiations, in which African countries should be encouraged to play an active part.
393.	Unfortunately, as far as commodities are concerned, prices seem to be on a downward trend. In this situation commodity agreements—provided they are properly conceived and administered—still have their uses, but the primary aim must be measures to improve productivity and diversification. This is what the countries concerned should be concentrating on, with the support of donors. Generally, such efforts will bear fruit only in the medium or long term. It is necessary, therefore, for the international community to undertake action aimed at stabilizing export earnings, similar to the Stabex11 and Sysmin12 systems operated by the Community, in order to tide the economy over the adjustment period.
394.	It was in that spirit that the Community recently decided to introduce a Stabex-type system for least developed countries not adherents of the Lomé Convention. We reiterate our appeal to other countries to bring in comparable arrangements, at any rate for the least developed countries. These compensation systems are particularly important where the effects of the stagnant or falling purchasing power of exports have been exacerbated by a contraction of financial flows or an increase in the debt burden—two factors which are closely linked and must be tackled together in order to maintain an overall net capital flow to Africa.
395.	As regards debt, Mrs. Schoo, speaking at the 1st meeting on behalf of the Community and its member States, has already indicated the main point to bear in mind, namely, a case-by-case approach adapted to the medium-term structural adjustment policies followed by the countries concerned and applied as flexibly as possible. A substantial effort will thus be necessary on both sides to ensure the success of this approach, based on joint efforts by creditor and debtor countries.
396.	As regards the third area, namely that of financial flows, we must do our utmost to ensure a revival of nonconcessionary flows. In the case of the low-income countries in particular, however, it would be unrealistic to expect them to be able to benefit immediately from such a revival, for it must be recognized that the poorest countries in Africa above all are as yet only partially integrated into the world economy. And so, initially, an increase in official development assistance, especially grants, is important in order to break this vicious circle. In this regard, if the need to do more for Africa is recognized—as the Western heads of State or Government indicated yet again at the Economic Summit Meeting earlier this month at Tokyo, and as the European Community has already demonstrated, for example with the renewal of the Lomé Convention—it would be rash to count on immediate massive supplementary transfers, and stress should be accordingly placed on using the available resources in the best and most efficient way.
397.	In any event, a, steadily progressive increase in international aid, which certainly remains indispensable, will be secondary to the determined efforts of Africans to stand on their own feet. • ■ • ' 398. In conclusion, I express the hope that this special session will be the occasion for a political consensus on the need to consider the problems of Africa in all their complexity and for greater and more consistent efforts on the part of the international community to ensure that the sacrifices demanded of African countries are not in vain or do not become too intolerable. In view of our close ties with Africa, I recognize that Europe must show the way. At all events, I can assure our African friends that the European Community will exert its own efforts and influence to ensure that the consensus towards which we are working is given effect in our future decisions. 399. The PRESIDENT: I now call on Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, observer of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. I call on him in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3369 (XXX) of 10 October 1975 and the decision taken by the General Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting of the present session [decision S-I3/21]. 400. Mr. PIRZADA (Organization of the Islamic Conference): It is a privilege for me, on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference [OIC], to address this special session of the General Assembly convened to consider the critical economic situation in Africa. I am confident that under the President’s mature and wise guidance the Assembly will adopt the decisions necessary to undertake concrete measures to combat and overcome the ominous threat that confronts the economic life of the people of Africa.
401.	This morning we were privileged to hear the opening address of President Diouf of Senegal, current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, which has set the tone and direction of our deliberations. We are grateful to him for having placed the problem in perspective for a focused and structured debate. I am confident that his contributions will lead to concrete, pragmatic and practical recommendations for immediate action as well as to the adoption of medium- and long-term measures required to lift the pall of hunger, malnutrition and stunted growth from the great continent of Africa and pave the way for the optimum utilization of the rich human and material resources that Africa is blessed with, for the economic and social well-being of its peoples.
402.	I should like to place on record our appreciation of the comprehensive studies that have been submitted, analysing the situation and suggesting solutions for the multifarious problems facing the countries of Africa, by the OAU and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as well as for the efforts of the Preparatory Committee to arrive at an agreed plan of action for adoption. I am confident that the detailed information made available will enable us to adopt a final document reflecting the consensus of the international community and will set in motion the process of economic recovery in Africa to which we are all committed.
403.	The academic and philosophic debate regarding the underlying causes of the critical economic situation in Africa has been conducted in international forum's for many years. There may be varying explanations for the reasons that have brought matters to this critical pass. It cannot, however, be gainsaid that the present economic crisis in Africa has grown partly out of the deficient economic structures inherited by African countries from the colonial era, which made their economies dependent primarily on the exports of a narrow range of primary
commodities. The problem was compounded by a number of internal and external factors. The internal factors stemmed from the inexperience of planners, which resulted in cumulative policy distortions, including inadequate allocations for rural development, agricultural research, primary health and education, mounting deficits, huge debt burdens and emphasis on large-scale enterprises of dubious economic value. External factors such as global economic fluctuations and recession, deteriorating terms of trade, falling commodity prices, debt-service problems and decreasing capital inflows have served to undermine an already fragile and vulnerable economic environment. Natural phenomena like drought and desertification have been an additional factor in creating a disastrous situation. 404. In the face of all these difficulties, the African leaders have demonstrated their determination to undertake a major effort for structural reforms and the diversification of their economies, as is evident from the adoption, in 1985, of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990' by the OAU Assembly and from Africa’s submission to the special session on Africa’s economic and social crisis.2 The African leaders have thus been engaged in a process of critical self-examination and reappraisal of policies. They have also taken it upon themselves to shoulder the major responsibility for a turnabout in their economies. They have identified for themselves the areas for priority action. They have made the political commitment to implement the Priority Programme for Economic Recovery, at the twenty-first session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, in 1985.
405.	However, that internal commitment by itself will not be sufficient to lift Africa out of the economic morass in which it finds itself. It needs to be complemented by action at the international level through the infusion of necessary financial and capital resources, the lifting of protectionist measures against African exports, the provision of debt relief and the development and transfer of appropriate technological know-how to Africa.
406.	The international consensus to assist Africa already exists; the international institutional framework is in place. What is required at this special session is the commitment to implement the decisions adopted by providing the major financial and other inputs that will be required. The major areas Africa needs to address, with the assistance of the international community, are, in my view, food and agriculture, human resource development, effective use of natural and other resources and the implementation of development policies geared to the needs of individual countries, in order to bring about an economic environment which will release the productive energies of the people of Africa and lead to a transformation of their societies into vibrant, dynamic and selfsustaining economies.
407.	The submission by African countries estimates a total requirement of $128 billion over a period of five years for the implementation of the Priority Programme. Of that amount, the African countries have committed themselves to provide $82.5 million. It should not be beyond the capacity of the international community to provide the remaining $45.5 billion over a period of five years for the implementation of the Programme.
408.	The convening of this special session is evidence of the awareness of the world community that the problems being faced by Africa are the common responsibility of the entire world. We must now build on this awareness to prepare a strategy to eradicate the problem. The African countries and their leaderships, deeply conscious of the responsibility that rests on them for the economic and
social development of their peoples and societies, have submitted specific proposals to tackle the problem. It is now up to the Assembly to adopt integrated and positive measures to combat this pernicious situation. Africa seeks a partnership with the international community to strengthen its development capacity. The success of this special session will be measured in the coming years by the extent of the commitment of the international community to this new partnershp. This is a major challenge, a challenge I am confident will be taken up and met through the realization of the objectives, priorities and targets to be adopted by this session for the economic recovery of Africa.
409.	The Sixteenth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Fez in January 1986, mandated me personally to attend this special session and report to the Islamic Conference on the decisions it adopts. This decision flowed from the vital involvement of OIC for more than a decade in promoting greater economic interaction and co-operation among its membership, countries of the third world and the international community. Since the African countries form the majority of the membership of the Conference, special stress has been laid on the question of assistance to Africa in the economic plans of OIC, and the Islamic Conference has paid particular attention to the implementation of the Lagos Plan of Action6 and, more recently, to Africa’s Priority Programme.
410.	The assistance to Africa from the OIC membership has been channelled bilaterally, through OIC institutions, as well as through international organizations. According to information available to OIC, bilateral financial flows to Africa stood at more than $3 billion at the end of 1985. On the multilateral level, the Islamic Development Bank has contributed $848 million, and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has made $450 million available to our African brothers. Another $250 millior. has been channelled through the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa. The OIC Committee for Solidarity with the People of the Sahel has also co-ordinated material and financial relief to the drought-stricken countries of the Sahel. Resources made available by the Muslim world to such international organizations as WFP and those involved in combating the drought in the Sahel stand at around $300 million. The Islamic Development Bank has recently established a long-term trade-financing facility which has the potential to serve the African member States. I may also mention that the OIC Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial Cooperation has placed the problems of the Sahel countries permanently on its agenda, and during 1985 additional aid pledges of around $50 million were made to assist those countries in their battle against drought and its consequences.
411.	At the institutional level, special technical-assistance facilities are available within OIC and the Islamic Development Bank to help African countries in the area of project identification and feasibility studies. At the level of member States there are also considerable possibilities of increased co-operation in skilled manpower training, rural development, health and basic infrastructure.
412.	The OIC has been deeply aware of the problems confronting the African continent and has not lagged behind in efforts to provide much-needed relief and assistance to the people of Africa. However, we also believe that the international efforts so far have been piecemeal and dispersed. The international community must adopt a more comprehensive and co-ordinated approach to confront the underlying causes and must not seek to address only the symptoms of the deep malaise
that has struck the fledgling nations in Africa. The OIC is prepared to participate in this effort to the maximum extent possible, and the decisions adopted at this session will be placed before the next Islamic summit meeting, scheduled to be held in Kuwait in early 1987, for endorsement and implementation.
The meeting rose at 9.30 p.m.
Notes
1A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI), annex.
2Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s Economic and Social Crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC.229/2). .
3Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola.
4 Lomé Declaration on Security, Disarmament and Development in Africa (see Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1985, document S/17573, annex, part A).
5A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI).
6	Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
7A/41/354, annex !■■
8	Adopted by the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries at its extraordinary ministerial meeting on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985 (A/40/341, annex I).
9Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Paris, J-J4 September J981 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
l0Report of the International Conference on Population, 1984, Mexico City, 6-14 August 1984 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.XIII.8 and corrigenda), chap. 1, sect. B.
11	System of stabilization of export earnings established by the first Lome Convention.
12	System for stabilizing export earnings in the mining sector.
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
3rd PLENARY MEETING
Wednesday, 28 May 1986, at 10.30 a.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIES (Spain).
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations (concluded)*
1.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to bring to the attention of the General Assembly a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General, in which he states that as of yesterday Comoros had made the payments necessary to reduce its arrears below the level specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I take it that the Assembly decides to take note of that information?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)
2.	Mr. RAFFAELLI (Italy): **First of all, Sir, I should like to congratulate you on behalf of the Italian delegation on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session. I should like also to express our warm appreciation to the Secretary-General for his opening statement yesterday at the 1st meeting.
3.	I wish additionally to pay a special tribute to Mr. Diouf, President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, for his important and constructive statement [1st meeting], in which he described the African countries’ view of the economic problems of their continent. We listened with great interest to his eloquent statement yesterday morning, and we wholeheartedly share his opinions on the importance of this special session to the future of Africa. I should like to assure President Diouf that, like all the other members of the international community, we are fully aware of our responsibilities to Africa, to which he has drawn our attention.
4.	This special session of the General Assembly must therefore be viewed not as a formal response to the appeal made last July at Addis Ababa by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, but rather as a session which will lead to decisions expressing the awareness of all the members of the international community—developed and developing alike— of their shared responsibilities and duties in ensuring harmonious progress in respect for the rights of peoples, first among them, in our view, the right to free development.
‘Resumed from 1st meeting.
**Mr. Raffaelli spoke in Italian. The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation.
5.	The Economic Summit Meeting of the heads of State or Government of the seven most highly industrialized countries, held at Tokyo from 4 to 6 May, confirmed that growth in the world economy is tied to co-ordination and compatibility of the macro-economic policies which influence financial and investment flows and trade and hence the development process of developing countries. At Tokyo it was recognized that strengthening the development process is indispensable to making more acceptable the social and political costs of the inevitable structural adjustments in the developing countries.
6.	It is in that context that this special session is called upon to define the guidelines for medium-term and longterm future action in the African continent, within the framework of a dialogue in the appropriate forums. An essential element of that dialogue is the close relationship between the world economic picture and the specific characteristics of the African situation.
7.	In that respect, it is of crucial importance that capital movements and the choice of investments be directed towards objectives which can reconcile satisfactory output and the strengthening of the production base, on the one hand, with employment and exchange flows on the other, along with resistance to protectionist pressure. These objectives naturally require the desired reduction in interest rates, stability in exchange rates and growth in world demand. In that context, we must establish the means for orderly and effective management of the relationship between debt servicing and the exports earnings of African countries. We can no longer ignore the fact that in the absence of corrective measures the problem of indebtedness can destroy any development efforts for Africa.
8.	In fact, the specific problems of African indebtedness will require a new approach. Imaginative and courageous efforts are needed by all parties concerned in order to combine national adjustment policies with regard to debt with financial solutions, selective in their objectives and meaningful in their effect. In other words, between now and the 1990s it is necessary to prevent the transition from stagnation to development from being frustrated by the weakness of the debtors and the mistrust of the creditors. Debt relief must therefore be pursued taking that factor into account. My country is prepared to work in that common effort.
9.	The connection between debt servicing and export earnings, in both the long and the short term, inevitably leads to the subject of trade flows, with special reference to commodities and their relative prices on world markets. The search for solutions to ensure the net transfer of resources to Africa implies, first of all, the need to maintain and perhaps strengthen the support of the international community for the UNCTAD Integrated Programme for Commodities. The entry into force of the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities is a salient factor which could correct some of the structural imbalances in the market; this could weaken the efficiency of the individual commodity agreements, which, of course, is circumscribed by short-term trends. We suggest that.there should be a better balance between
55
A/S-13/PV.3
trade and co-operation under individual agreements and that the international institutions should cover a broader area. For instance, the “second window” of the Common Fund should play a proper role in this regard.
10.	The question of resources for these institutions is more important than in the past. The Italian Government in 1985 provided substantial support for the establishment of the Special Fund for Africa, which fund was indispensable because of the inadequacy of the funds under the seventh replenishment of IDA. Italy recently supported the establishment within IMF of a Structural Adjustment Facility, and we believe that the financing of the eighth replenishment of IDA should be a minimum of $12 billion. Last April, the IMF/World Bank Development Committee outlined a concrete operational framework which the Italian Government strongly endorses. We hope this approach will receive the support of all parties concerned. As to the catalyst and promotional role of the World Bank system, it is urgent that an adequate increase in that institution’s capital be obtained along with the means to promote direct investments. I refer specifically to the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, whose Convention Italy was one of the first to sign, in February.
11.	As to co-operation for development, both the quantity and quality of intervention must be improved. Italy, like other countries, has considerably increased its own contributions in recent years, in particular to Africa.
12.	However, if we analyse the results of the international community’s efforts, we feel bound to state “the bitter truth”: despite aid, most African countries, at least those south of the Sahara, are today in the same situation as before, while some are in even worse straits. It is therefore necessary to view the approach followed to date in a critical light, identify the errors and avoid repeating them in the future.
13.	In our. opinion, the present unsatisfactory situation is due not simply to insufficient assistance but also, and perhaps mainly, to a lack of efficiency. This may be the result of an incorrect evaluation of the needs and priorities, both by donor and African countries, and also of inadequate co-ordination among donors. A greater volume of assistance is no doubt necessary, but it is also indispensable that this assistance be used rationally and therefore efficiently. The African countries should play an important role in that respect. They must, above all, prepare multi-year public investment programmes, be able to redress existing production capacity and create new capacity according to specific priority criteria.
14.	We believe the greatest priority is to enhance the rural sector. The desire to keep food prices at levels compatible with the low income of the urban population has, in many cases, brought on an excessive fall in farmers’ incomes, pushing them towards a subsistence economy and discouraging market production, except for export goods. The most obvious result of that policy is a growing dependency on food imports, excluding many farmers from the monetary economy. Although they are the majority of the active population, they are seriously impeding any attempt at industrialization.
15.	Next on the list of priorities is obviously the strengthening of the industrial infrastructure and support activities. These include the necessary maintenance services needed to avoid progressive deterioration of capital goods. Today this is one of the greatest flaws in the economy of many countries. In fact, the constant need to redress even recent structures diverts a large amount of international aid which could have been used to increase the assets of recipient countries.
16.	Another item of importance is the development of human resources, which should more rightly be a prerequisite for any economic and social development. A solid administrative structure and trained personnel are essential to the management of a country, especially a developing country. In our opinion, and here I am addressing the donors, any development project should be accompanied by a broad training programme for personnel, as a component and not a mere appendage to the programme.
17.	Finally, regional associations, such as the Southern African Development Co-ordination Committee, the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel and the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development are essential to Africa. They not only help overcome the strict and often artificial limitations, thus leading the continent to highly desirable economic and social integration, but also establish the foundation for economic development. This would be impossible in smaller areas. Italy strongly supports these attempts, both politically and financially.
18.	We must understand that the economic and social gap between the African countries and between the poorest areas of individual countries is creating imbalances which may endanger the process of integration of their regional and national development.
19.	A correct approach to co-operation should grant priority to those areas where there are insufficient investments and where they could become marginal. The Italian Parliament and Government were motivated by this issue a year and a half ago when they approved a large financial allocation for emergency aid. These funds were for food and health purposes but could fit into the recovery and medium- and long-term development process which the African Governments intend to launch with the support of the international community.
20.	Italy has allocated most of the resources granted to Africa to the sectors I have referred to, because of their priority character. We welcome the fact that the African countries assign the same priority to these sectors, as demonstrated by Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of States and Government of the Organization of African Unity in July 1985.
21.	We think the international community should now show the same commitment to these priorities and prepare a programme of consistent action and solidarity for the recovery and development of Africa. That programme should include not only adequate assistance but a greater degree of co-ordination among the various sources of bilateral and multilateral aid. This is not only to avoid gaps and duplication of intervention which could jeopardize the efficiency of the development programmes, but also to devise supplementary programmes which could strengthen and support each other. We should use existing multilateral entities for this purpose. We must avoid the creation of new committees or working groups which would further complicate the already complex picture of international structures.
22.	In addition to the economic situation in Africa, the tension and conflicts that persist in the continent are continuing to create victims and suffering and to cause destruction. They are diverting resources from development goals and the struggle against poverty to military purposes, thus perpetuating the precarious status of millions of refugees.
23.	Italy considers that decisive action for development co-operation in African countries is an essential element in overcoming tension and consolidating the peace process: peace for countries of southern Africa, which only
recently endured acts of aggression from South Africa; peace for the South African people, who can achieve it only with the complete elimination of apartheid', peace which will enable all African countries to focus all their energy on their free development. Inspired by these beliefs, Italy promptly supported the initiative to convene this special session of the General Assembly and intends to contribute to it so that it will be a success for Africa and the entire international community.
24.	Mr. GENSCHER (Federal Republic of Germany):* This special session of the General Assembly is an expression of the deep world-wide concern about the African continent. In large parts of Africa famine, hardship, disease and mass flows of refugees have become the depressing daily reality. The economic situation of Africa, especially of sub-Saharan countries, has assumed critical dimensions threatening the very existence of people.
25.	The hardship prevailing in Africa concerns all of us. It is a moral and political challenge of supreme magnitude. It calls for human solidarity and the deployment of all our resources, political and economic alike. Africa and its future constitute an appeal to the world’s conscience, a yardstick of humanity and fraternity.
26.	With its Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [resolution 39/29, annex] adopted at the thirty-ninth session, the General Assembly brought home to all of us the burning issues of that large continent. A development has thus been initiated which, we hope, will generate trend-setting stimuli for a process of analysis and a programme of action outlining important steps on the way to mastering the critical development of Africa.
27.	This special session is of outstanding political importance. We have learned from the painful experiences of many countries that economic problems and social hardships are no basis on which to build lasting political stability.
28.	The policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany towards Africa and its problems is one of partnership on equal terms and respect for the independence of its countries both internally and externally. It is on this basis that our long-standing, proven development co-operation with African countries takes place.
29.	The Federal Republic of Germany supported from the outset the demand by the Organization of African Unity [OAU] that this special session of the General Assembly be convened. The African continent is faced with a twofold challenge. In the short term, the survival of its inhabitants must be ensured, and in the medium and long terms a positive development must be attained. The African continent embraces two thirds of the world’s poorest countries. The present crisis not only impairs its prospects for development, it also threatens many people, the substance of its economy and of its natural resources. That situation must be checked.
30.	Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990' presents a thorough analysis of the internal and external factors of Africa’s economic problems. Its proposals contain important elements for future joint action on a partnership basis to surmount those problems.
31.	The Federal Republic of Germany is willing to assist the efforts of the countries of Africa bilaterally, as a member of the European Community within the scope of the Lomé Convention, and in the multilateral framework of the United Nations. We must not leave Africa alone in its search for a solution to its problems. Let us
♦Mr. Genscher spoke in German. The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation.
therefore use this special session to develop jointly a concept that unites the efforts of the Africans and the international community so as to enhance the results of our co-operation, solve Africa’s economic problems and pave the way towards a better future for the countries of the continent. The diversity of the countries of Africa and of its regions and the varying nature of the problems require approaches that take account of the specific geographical, economic and social conditions prevailing in the individual countries. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany encourages the countries of Africa to improve the possibilities of their economic development through regional co-operation. The European Community is a partner for co-operation on equal terms with regional associations in the third world.
32.	The Netherlands and the Commission of the European Communities have set up a number of priorities on behalf of the European Community and have made proposals of particular importance to the medium- and longterm development of Africa. Permit me to underscore once more some of those ideas. Africa’s economic development can succeed only if Africa itself embarks on the road to economic recovery. Such reforms require bold and decisive action by the African Governments themselves. There are already positive signs of internal policy reforms in Africa. They must be systematically continued.
33.	Absolute priority must be accorded to the development of the rural sector as a whole. Basic food supplies must be ensured everywhere. Before new projects are tackled, existing production facilities and infrastructures, whose functioning has been impaired, must be restored. In this process, the requirements of the natural environment must be taken into account. Also, the gap between population and production growth must not widen. The management of African economies must be improved and the private sector stimulated. Environmental destruction must be curbed and the progressive advance of deserts halted. In this way alone will the problems of rural exodus and urbanization be solved. In this way alone can we open up to the rural population of Africa perspectives for their future. New technological developments must be used to solve the food and energy supply problems of Africa. Existing assistance must be improved and new support initiated. Assistance must be made more effective through better co-ordination among development aid donors themselves, between them and African countries, and within the recipient countries.
34.	Stability and growth of the world economy are a decisive prerequisite for the recovery of the African economies. The Federal Republic of Germany renders an important contribution to this with the economic policies it pursues. But African countries can finance their development and reduce their foreign debts only if industrial nations keep their markets open for African exports. Protectionism poses a serious strain on the development and expansion of Africa’s economies. The Federal Republic of Germany is a staunch champion of free world trade. We realize that no matter how hard the developing countries try to help themselves, their efforts are doomed to failure if their products meet the wall of protectionist measures in the industrial countries. We therefore call for a new round of negotiations in GATT to strengthen the open system of multilateral trade. We pursue our liberal foreign trade policy with determination even where this requires painful structural adjustments.
35.	Our imports from African countries—the Republic of South Africa excepted—were increased by about 9 per cent to 25,650 million marks from 1984 to 1985. In trade
with the Federal Republic of Germany those countries had a surplus of over 10 billion marks in 1985.
36.	We ratified the Agreement Establishing a Common Fund for Commodities, for we understand and share the concern especially of the African countries which derive a large share of their export revenues from their sales of commodities and which are adversely affected by the development in the international commodity markets. However, we must not expect commodity agreements to provide automatic answers to the world’s commodity problems. Our experience with the International Tin Agreement has shown that commodity prices cannot in the long term be kept artificially high irrespective of the market trend. If the situation is to be lastingly stabilized it will be necessary above all to encourage the further processing of commodities in the producer countries and thus improve their market prospects. But such a programme will work out only if the industrial countries remove the barriers to trade and terminate subsidies which hamper and distort competition.
37.	The Lomé Convention is an indication that we are serious about our offer of partnership and co-operation. The Stabex2 and Sysmin3 systems are major instruments in neutralizing the effects of price fluctuations.
38.	The debt burden weighs heavily on the nations of Africa. The necessary adjustments have a broad social and political impact. They cut deeply into the structures of the debtor countries. Adjustments demand persistence in their implementation in the debtor countries, but also comprehension of the limits of the possibilities of the creditor countries. Flexible solutions tailored to each country’s particular needs will therefore have to be worked out. The negotiations on these problems, different from country to country, will have to be continued in the competent international organizations such as IMF, the World Bank and the Paris Club. In drawing up their economic and monetary policies, the industrial countries have to be conscious of their global responsibility, and this applies all the more so the larger they are.
39.	Interest rates are so high that they can be a problem even for some industrial countries. They make it more difficult still for African countries to service their debts and to finance their development. The Federal Republic of Germany has already made sizeable contributions towards easing the pressure of indebtedness on many Africàn countries. Apart from providing non-repayable financial assistance, we have remitted within the context of our financial co-operation debts and interest payments incurred by the poorest countries. This assistance alone has exceeded 4 billion marks.
40.	In spite of all their national efforts, the African nations cannot solve their problems without assistance through development co-operation. Consequently, the Federal Republic of Germany has been co-operating with most African countries since their independence on a partnership basis. At present over 40 per cent of our total bilateral aid goes to Africa, and Africa will remain a focal point of this co-operation and benefit from increases in our development contributions. In recent years this assistance has increased at a faster rate than our national budget.
41.	We want to maintain this trend. Over and above its bilateral assistance, the Federal Government accounts for 26 per cent of the sixth European Development Fund, the biggest contribution. And we are contributing 155 million marks to the European Community’s rehabilitation programme for African countries threatened by drought. Furthermore, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, speaking at the international Silva Conference on tree and forest in Paris
from 5 to 7 February, promised 150 million marks for afforestation projects in Africa. In addition to this aid for Africa, we have also made considerable contributions within the multilateral framework.
42.	In considering how we can help Africa solve its pressing development problems, we cannot avoid the subject of disarmament and development. Colossal sums are being spent on arms. This money cannot be put to use in securing our future, either in the developing or in the developed countries. I have appealed to nations to disclose their military budgets and make them comparable. I reiterate my proposal that the United Nations keep a register of global arms exports and imports. In this way, the basis for global disarmament and arms control could be improved. In Africa, too, more money is being spent on armaments—resources that are so urgently needed in other sectors of the economy. Also in Africa, a policy of mutual understanding and co-operation would release resources that would be of great value for that continent’s development.
43.	Social justice, as well as political and social equality, is essential for the maintenance of internal and external peace. Both of the International Covenants on Human Rights must be realized also for the people of Africa— the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex].
44.	We are deeply concerend at the depressing situation in southern Africa. We reject any form of apartheid and racial discrimination as practised in the Republic of South Africa. It is utterly inhuman. We demand that the South African Government finally eliminate apartheid. The Federal Republic of Germany condemns South Africa’s continued acts of violence, carried even beyond its borders, as violations of international law.
45.	We demand for Namibia the immediate and unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
46.	The Federal Republic of Germany looks back on a long tradition of partnership with Africa. My country will continue to do all it possibly can to further Africa’s development. This special session of the General Assembly must emit a signal of hope. We owe it to the people of Africa to produce tangible, forward-looking conclusions which tackle the medium- and long-term problems of this continent. However, we can achieve results only if the African countries and the international community make their contributions. The Federal Republic of Germany is ready to do so.
47.	Mr. HE Kang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): On the initiative of the OAU and with the support of countries the world over, the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa has successfully opened. This is the first time since the founding of the United Nations that a special session has been held exclusively to discuss the economic problems of a continent. It shows the grave concern of the whole world over the critical economic situation in Africa and the close attention it pays to this problem. The Chinese Government wishes to extend its warm congratulations on the convening of this session and sincerely hopes that it will make positive contributions to the revitalization of the African economy.
48.	The presence at this session of President Diouf, current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, and his important statement [lit meeting] have demonstrated the strong will and common desire of the African countries and peoples to overcome their difficulties and develop
their economies. The analysis of the current economic situation and proposals made thereon by African countries have provided a sound basis for an in-depth discussion of alb items on the agenda of the present session.
49.	We should like to express our appreciation to the OAU Permanent Steering Committee, EC A, the Preparatory Committee for the special session, the United Nations Secretariat and other United Nations agencies for the great amount of work they have done for the convening of the session. The Chinese delegation stands ready to co-operate closely with representatives from Africa and other continents and will do its best to make the session a complete success,
50.	With the unprecedented upsurge of the national liberation movement in Africa after the Second World War, African countries won political independence one after another. The ascension of Africa to the world arena as a vigorous newly emerging force is a great historic event of our time.
51.	Today, most African countries have entered a new phase of history focusing on developing the national economy, consolidating their political independence and improving the people’s living standard. Proceeding from fragile economies which are a legacy of colonialism, African countries have been trudging along a rough and tortuous road of advance. In particular, the continiied deterioration of the African economic situation and the sufferings of the African people over the past few years have aroused the general concern and deep sympathy of the world. As pointed out by the OAU Assembly of Heads of State and Government at its twenty-first session, in July 1985, they are faced with a dual challenge of survival and development.
52.	The present critical economic situation in Africa has deep-rooted historical causes. It should be stressed that the prolonged colonial rule has resulted in massive plundering of Africa’s natural resources, destruction of the ecological balance, a lopsided economic structure and stagnation of economic development, bringing enormous miseries to the African people. Irrefutable historical facts have shown that Africa is the continent that has'suffered most from colonialism.
53.	Africa has not only borne the heavy burden left over from the past, but has also been tightly fettered by the existing inequitable and unjust international economic order. The economic crisis in developed countries has further aggravated Africa’s economic difficulties. The incessant drop in prices for Africa’s raw materials and primary products, the continued deterioration of its terms of trade, the increasingly harsh conditionality applied to loans and credits from international financial institutions and the gradual decrease in real terms of official development aid and the inflow of capital have resulted in a stagnation and shrinkage of production, huge deficits of international payments, heavier debt burdens, a steady fall in per capita income and worsening impoverishment in many African countries. All those unfavourable external factors, in addition to the serious natural calamities of recent years, have so far hindered the economic recovery and development of Africa.
54.	As it has not been long since the African countries won their independence, economic development and national construction are still new tasks for them. When there is no ready model for them to follow and no experience from other countries to draw on, deviations and errors of one kind or another are unavoidable in the course of their exploration and advance. By applying the experience gained in continued practice, African countries
are gradually finding a road of development suited to their domestic conditions. . .
55.	We are pleased to note that many African countries are making praiseworthy efforts in seeking the right way to rehabilitate and develop their economies. While pointing out the grave consequences of unfavourable external factors to African economies, the OAU Assembly last year made an incisive analysis of the adverse effects of mismanagement of their economic strategies and policies. Today, African countries are trying to shift the focus of their national life to economic development by giving priority to agricultural development, especially food production. They are also promoting the interdependence of diversified economic modes to bring into play the initiative of various sectors in developing production. They are carrying out extensive international co-operation and promoting regional economic.exchanges so as to enhance their ability for collective self-reliance. It is encouraging that economic reform and policy readjustment in African countries have achieved some initial results, thus promoting production and improving the people’s living standards. .
56.	In the face of the present grim international economic environment, it is an extremely arduous task for African countries to rehabilitate and develop their economies. The African countries cannot possibly accomplish this through their own efforts alone. The international community should give active support and all-out assistance so as to create the necessary external environment for them. The major task of this special session is to mobilize the international community in a concerted effort to help the African countries revitalize their economies.
57.	We have noted that the international community has rendered some support to the African countries in their economic development, and in recent years it has again-provided a considerable amount of emergency aid to the people of the African countries afflicted with drought,, which has helped to alleviate the sufferings caused by famine. At present, although the famine in Africa has been eased to some extent, the economic difficulties in Africa remain extremely serious, and new and greater efforts by the international community are needed to support the. African countries in fulfilling Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19901 and their medium- and long-term development plans. In this connection, we believe that the developed countries are all the more duty-bound to respond to the appeal of the African countries by adopting a farsighted approach and taking practical and effective steps .gradually to remove the external factors that are seriously hindering economic development in Africa.
58.	First, the development assistance to African countries should be increased and the financing of agricultural and food production in Africa should be stressed so as to help the African countries attain the goal of selfsufficiency in food supplies at an early date. The targets of development assistance specified in the. International Development. Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade [resolution 55/56] and the Substantial New Programme of Action for the. 1980s for the Least Developed Countries4 should be fully realized in Africa.
59.	Secondly, on the debt problem, the creditors should assume co-responsibility with the African debtor countries and help them revitalize their economies. Debt rescheduling should be carried out by the two sides through consultation. The developed countries should reduce the debt burden of the debtor countries or extend the period of repayment according to different circumstances.. And it is particularly necessary to reduce or liquidate the debts
of the least developed African countries out of consideration for their plight.
60.	Thirdly, on the issue of trade, protectionism should be eliminated so as to open more markets to African countries, and in particular the non-tariff barriers on African products should be removed. It is necessary to take measures to raise and stabilize the export prices of African primary products and reverse the trend of sharp decline in their export earnings. Efforts should be made to help the African countries enhance their capability in processing, marketing and transporting their export products.
61.	Fourthly, on the financial issue, inflow of capital to African countries should be increased. The terms of their credits should be softened and more loans on preferential terms should be provided. Interest rates should be further reduced, and consideration should be given to the African countries’ demand for increasing their quotas in IMF.
62.	We hope that the developed countries will give serious consideration to the actual difficulties and urgent demands of African countries and actively strengthen friendly co-operation with them in the interest of common progress.
63.	China and Africa shared similar historical experiences and now face common immediate tasks. The Chinese Government and people have always followed with interest the developments in Africa and deeply sympathize with the African people in their grave difficulties. China itself is a low-income developing country, but we have always regarded it as our bounden international duty to give support and assistance to African countries and peoples. The Chinese Government and people have always stood by the African countries in their struggles to win and safeguard national independence and oppose racism. We have done what we can to provide assistance to the African countries in their national construction.
64.	Africa has all along occupied an important place in China’s programme of foreign aid and economic and technical co-operation. The late Premier Zhou Enlai and Premier Zhao Ziyang both paid visits to Africa, during which they put forward the five principles guiding the relations between China and the African countries, the eight principles on China’s foreign aid and the four principles on economic and technical co-operation between China and the African countries. These principles have several main features. First, support and assistance are always mutual and not a one-way undertaking; China has helped Africa, and Africa has in turn helped China. Secondly, China sees to it that the State sovereignty and national dignity of the recipient countries are strictly respected, and China would in no way try to interfere in their internal affairs or ask for any privileges. Thirdly, the terms for aid should be favourable as far as possible. Fourthly, aid should be provided in light of the actual conditions of African countries so as to meet the needs of developing their national economies and enhancing their capability of self-reliance and not to make them dependent on China. Fifthly, while continuing to provide economic assistance, China makes efforts to explore broader.areas and diversified channels for economic and technical co-operation with the African countries on the principle of equality and mutual benefit and common progress so as to enable economic aid and economic cooperation to promote each other in concerted endeavour to push forward the South-South co-operation.
65.	Following these principles, China has established good relations of co-operation and has developed profound friendship with the African countries. China has
now signed agreements on economic and technical cooperation with more than 40 African countries and has undertaken over 460 economic aid projects, including medium-sized and small industrial, agricultural, railway, highway, marine transport, medical care and public health projects. In times of adversity when Africa was hit by sustained drought, we did our best to donate a certain amount of relief food. The seven projects under the emergency agriculture and livestock rehabilitation programme launched by FAO, to which we have contributed and which we have undertaken to implement, are now being carried out successfully. China’s Red Cross Society launched a nation-wide campaign last year to collect donations for the afflicted people in Africa. The donations are being delivered to the affected countries in the form of medicine, farm implements, food and other materials. Although the assistance we can provide is modest due to the limited strength of our country, China is sincere in rendering assistance to Africa.
66.	The Chinese Government is ready to make continued efforts to study and discuss the question of medium-and long-term development of Africa together with the African countries and the international community. With the growth of its economy and national strength, China will gradually increase its economic aid to and expand its economic co-operation with Africa. We will continue to provide long-term interest-free loans to African countries within our capabilities. If the countries concerned do find it difficult to repay the loans when they are due, the repayment can be deferred. China’s provision of loans to the African countries is a kind of mutual assistance between poor friends. Under no circumstances will China press for debt servicing.
67.	In accordance with the Priority Programme for Economic Recovery put forward by the African countries, we will give priority to our agricultural aid to Africa by increasing the proportion of aid to agriculture and to the farm produce processing industry in Africa so as to contribute to Africa’s self-sufficiency in food grains. We will increase our assistance to intellectual development in Africa, attaching special importance to the training of specialists in agriculture and other related fields. While strengthening and replenishing our work force for agricultural co-operation with Africa, we will create conditions for the establishment and good operation of training centres of Sino-African agricultural co-operation in order to train agrotechnicians and managerial personnel for Africa.
68.	In this connection, I am happy to point out that recently, at Guangzhou, China served as host to an Asian-African Workshop on Food Policy, under the sponsorship of WFC. During that Workshop experiences were exchanged in regard to solving food problems and developing agricultural production and methods, and prospects for the further strengthening of co-operation between China and African countries in the field of food and agriculture were explored. The Workshop was a complete success. ■
69.	We shall join the African countries in our continuous efforts to learn from each other. China and the African countries have both accumulated rich experience, positive and negative, in their economic development, and we both are engaged in economic reforms and policy readjustment. Exchanges of experience and learning from each other to make up for our deficiencies will help achieve our economic prosperity as well as common progress. ' 70. We are determined to work together with the African countries, other developing countries and the whole
international community and to make unremitting efforts for the establishment of the new international economic order, the strengthening of South-South co-operation and the promotion of North-South dialogue so as to seek the sound development of the world economy as a whole. 71. Africa is a developing continent with vast areas, abundant resources and a great potential for development. The rise of Africa in the political arena has had a great impact on the progress of human society and the growth of forces for peace. We are convinced that, through their unyielding efforts and with the close co-operation and energetic support of the international community, the African countries will be able to overcome the serious difficulties facing them and achieve a fundamental turn for the better in their economic situation. An economically prosperous Africa will surely make a tremendous contribution to world peace and development.
72.	Sir Geoffrey HOWE (United Kingdom): I am delighted to have the opportunity of attending this special session. My country has had a long and close association with Africa. The ties of history, language, culture and trade are strong. Personal and public links abound.
73.	When I was Chairman of the Interim Committee of IMF three years ago, the human and economic problems of Africa were already a high priority for the world community. Since then events, often tragic, have brought these problems closer to every one of us.
74.	The problem we face is the development of a whole continent: daunting but not, I think, impossible. Nor, with respect to the economists, is it a problem that can or should be reduced to abstract aggregates. It touches the lives of more than half a billion Africans. It is for those people, and for their welfare, that we at this special session should be working.
75.	Development is not Africa’s only problem. History has left many unresolved political disputes. Foreign interference did not end with the demise of colonization, and South Africa casts a long shadow. Whether or not these problems are successfully resolved, we shall still have to face up to the need for economic development.
76.	The beginning of wisdom in this as in all things is understanding. I have been greatly impressed by the African paper. It is a most perceptive document, which has formed the basis of much of our discussion. It is right that we should begin with African views.
77.	It is right too to begin with the appalling spectre of famine. Hunger in Africa has succeeded, like few other human catastrophes, in touching the consciences of the more fortunate and in releasing a tide of spontaneous generosity that knows no frontier. Millions of ordinary people have made.their contribution to help the starving in response to the challenges of Live Aid and Sport Aid. The British people gave millions of pounds to Bob Geldof’s Band Aid, and a quarter of a million of them ran for Sport Aid last Sunday. Their hearts are in the right place when it comes to Africa. It is for Governments to play their part as well.
78.	For too many years too little attention has been paid to man’s most basic need, the production of food. Africa needs adequate, reliable and cheap supplies. Africa has the capacity to feed itself. Yet in Africa hunger persists in many places. That should be an affront to our consciences. Thankfully, the short-term situation has improved. Through our programmes and through the European Community, Britain has committed <£189 million for. famine relief over the last two years. We stand ready to provide further such help, where it is necessary.
79.	But we must look beyond emergencies to the longer term. We must help Africa to help itself, I know that the policies of developed countries have sometimes aggravated its problems. Pressure from major world food producers to dispose of subsidized surpluses on world markets has discouraged those who could produce food more cheaply. Other restrictions on trade in agricultural products have not helped.
80.	While the surpluses of the developed world were being built up in the last two decades, cereal production in Africa fell. Food aid has thus been needed at times of crisis, but it is a solution neither to our own excess production nor to shortages in Africa. Last month’s Tokyo Economic Summit Meeting stressed that overproduction in the face of famine is a problem that must be tackled on a world-wide basis.
81.	In Africa itself the need for change is certainly recognized. A number of countries are taking steps to establish price and other incentives for farmers and more efficient food-marketing systems. Research capacity is being built up, and scientific methods more practically applied. Britain is already helping in many of these areas. We joined in the international activity co-ordinated by the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, under the leadership of a great philanthropist, Bradford Morse. This was a dynamic response to a grave situation. It brought together the resources of this Organization and donor Governments. Their successful interaction may prove to be a model for the future. Britain will play its full part in further such co-operative efforts.
82.	I spoke of the need for change. There is, I believe, a growing mood of realism and an understanding that mistakes have been made. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 adopted by the heads of State and Government of the OAU last July, provides convincing evidence of seriousness of approach.
83.	Intelligent long-term planning is rightly seen as a key. But a central role for government does not and must not mean huge bureaucracies. Here too there is a growing realism in the approach of many African countries to the size and role of the public sector. Leaner and more efficient administrations are being allowed to emerge. Individual talent must be given commensurate responsibility. Management efficiency must be improved, public spending brought under control, and subsidies adjusted. These are painful decisions; I know from experience the political courage required. •
84.	Development programmes too require careful scrutiny. Many African countries are now reviewing public investment plans with a sharper eye to the real future costs and benefits. They recognize the need for a climate favourable to private investment, freed of the restrictions of the past. •
85.	The development of the right mix of public and private is vital. But there are two areas where the lead has to come from government: safeguarding the environment and facing the problem, of population growth.
86,	For the sake of future generations, a more determined and practical effort is being made to introduce better farming and soil conservation, to rehabilitate forests and to develop more harvesting of timber. Individual farmers will do what they can, but they need guidance and incentives. We ourselves are involved in parts of Africa in precisely this kind of endeavour, and we propose to do more.
87.	Finally, population. It is often said that Africa is an empty continent. Not so. On present trends the population of Africa will approach 900 million by the end of
the century. How is such population growth to be reconciled with decent living standards? Africa, if it is not careful, will find itself having to run in order merely to stay where it is. I know the sensitivities, but the problem does have to be faced. We shall give any help we can.
88.	Development is a partnership. A prosperous Africa means a more prosperous world. In the industrialized countries we recognize the importance of maintaining open trading conditions. At the Tokyo Summit we made a clear declaration on this. We are fully committed to the success of the new GATT round of multilateral trade negotiations. At the special ministerial session of the Contracting Parties in September this year we shall work for early and decisive progress.
89.	Concessionary assistance will still be vital, in all forms and from both bilateral donors and multilateral institutions. We share the strong hope that an eighth replenishment of $12 billion will be achieved for IDA.
90.	I welcome the new IMF Structural Adjustment Facility and the closer co-operation between IMF and the World Bank. These developments, together with the Bank’s Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa, with which we are associating a special allocation of our bilateral aid, are a major demonstration of the concern we all feel for the needs of Africa. So was the outcome of Lomé III.
91.	I also regard as important the creation of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, of which Britain is a founder member. As I indicated earlier, overseas investment has a key role to play. Britain gives high priority to Africa in the allocation of our aid resources: over ¿550 million through bilateral and multilateral channels in 1985. We shall continue to make a substantial effort.
92.	It is not just a matter of prestige projects. Nonproject aid is increasingly important. We are providing substantial sums in this form to a number of countries undertaking programmes of economic reform. We aim, with our partners in Africa, to place more emphasis on a comprehensive approach to particular sectors. Our approach to new projects and programmes reflects the high priority we attach to the development of natural resources.
93.	One aspect of this work is the improvement of public administration and management efficiency. Britain has long helped to provide skilled manpower and training in Africa. We propose to place greater emphasis on this, concentrating in particular on helping to strengthen key institutions.
94.	Our experience in development has taught us that the difficulties, the solutions and the responses from donors need to be tackled individually, on a country-bycountry basis. The same applies to the treatment of debt. The management of a country’s debt cannot realistically be separated from the other elements in its external financial position. I see no alternative but to deal with this issue on an individual basis and through existing international structures. Already for the poorest countries our aid does not add to the burden of debt, since it is provided on a grant basis. For 13 African countries we have commuted past aid loans to grants—a total of £250 million. Britain blazed the trail on retrospective terms adjustment. We are pleased to have been followed down that trail by others.
95.	This is a time for concern but not, I think, a time for despair. I draw hope from the improvement in world trading conditions and from the positive response already made by the multilateral institutions. They have our firm
support. The international community rightly places priority on the needs of Africa. I am certain that in the years to come we shall see the rich potential of Africa and of all its peoples more and more fully realized, and I look forward to that day.
96.	Mr. MAJEWSKI (Poland): May I express our satisfaction, Sir, at working once again under your wise guidance as President of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly. Our work will also be facilitated by the illuminating statement made yesterday [1st meeting] by Mr. Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal and Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity. We also wish to express our satisfaction with the Secretary-General’s personal contribution to our task.
97.	In addressing this debate the Polish delegation is well aware of the extreme complexity and gravity of the problems facing us at this session, for they have a macro-economic dimension, embracing the whole of the continent and dozens of Member States of the Organization. This is a debate on the mechanisms which have generated the present situation on the African continent and a debate on what should be done in order to help Africa overcome its current difficulties.
98.	The situation under discussion has not only economic and political dimensions; it has also human and social dimensions because of the millions of Africans of, whole nations who every day are exposed to the cruel effects of this situation. Therefore, the solutions and decisions to be adopted at this session are of utmost urgency.
99.	We realize, however, that the extremely difficult and complex economic realities of Africa cannot be remedied at a special session of the General Assembly unless a change takes place at the very roots of the problem in African countries—unless a change occurs in their relationship with the outside world and they are given a due share in the international division of labour. .
100.	But, first of all, we wish strongly to emphasize our inability to solve these problems in a comprehensive manner as long as the broad context of the global political situation within which they arise remains unchanged. Nations do not develop in isolation. We are living in a world of feedback between politics and economics. Meanwhile, the course the international situation is taking causes our gravest concern.
101.	The policy of confrontation and armament imposed by the forces of imperialism has been extended to the African continent as well. Attempts are being made to divide Africa and include some areas in the strategic plans of the West, to instigate regional conflicts, to utilize economic aid as an element of political pressure and even to commit outright armed aggression, such as the act recently carried out against Libya. Those who pursue this policy are ready to sacrifice the aspirations of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia for freedom. They tolerate the aggressiveness of South Africa, which was demonstrated on the eve of our session by the absolutely unprovoked criminal assault carried out by South African troops against Botswana, Zimbabwe and Zambia. This is aimed at the destabilization of the whole southern part of the continent, forces increased spending on legitimate defence and creates obstacles to the development of Africa.
102.	By reversing this dangerous course—above all through halting the arms race and returning to détente and constructive dialogue, including dialogue on the reconstruction of international economic relations—we would be providing the world with the greatest of benefits
and creating the proper conditions for the solution of the problems of Africa.
103.	It is in this spirit, with feelings of traditional solidarity and friendship with African peoples, that Poland is participating in this session, for there exists an intimate relationship among peace, disarmament and social and economic development. In our foreign policy we have consistently attached the greatest importance to questions of the maintenance of international peace and security. Our activities and initiatives in the General Assembly have been aimed at precisely that goal.
104.	In the economic field we recently submitted a proposal on confidence-building measures in international economic relations. We did this with a view to creating an internationally approved system to protect those relations from the negative impact of political tension. We are well aware that this cannot offer a substitute for the restructuring of international economic relations in keeping with the principles of justice, equal rights and mutual benefits. At the present stage, however, the adoption of relevant confidence-building measures would considerably improve the international climate and international relations. We believe that this session offers a good opportunity to promote this idea and to include it in the final document to be adopted at the end of our deliberations.
105.	The implementation of this idea would prevent the use of the economic weapon for political ends. There will be no new international economic order unless the developed capitalist States accept the fact that the rest of the world is not a mere appendix to their system. Interference in the internal relations of other States by imposing specific patterns of development has become a permanent feature of the policy of some of those States. We reject such practices. We believe that it is brutal interference in the internal affairs of numerous developing countries to criticize their economic policies from the position of the vested interests of capitalism. This is also incompatible with the fundamental principles of the Organization, which provide for free choice of social and political system and of organizational form of economic life.
106.	Attempts to shift the blame for the ills of Africa exclusively to patterns of development, structural factors or institutional solutions are seen by us as a way of abdicating responsibility for the destructive social and economic processes in Africa, which were born of colonialism and which continued by way of neo-colonial subordination of a number of States there. We believe that the former colonial Powers cannot shirk their responsibility for the situation on the continent where colonialism has inflicted the greatest damage and where neo-colonial-ism deepens economic backwardness. Attempts by the former colonial Powers to disclaim their historical responsibility for the situation in Africa and to enforce new systems of dependence and subservience give rise to particular concern.
107.	The current massive foreign debt incurred by a number of States, including African States, is a very serious obstacle to their economic growth. The problem of the relationship between foreign debt and development and the negative impact of debt on development should become a matter for deeper study. That conviction of ours gave rise to the proposal made by Polish leader Wojciech Jaruzelski at the 12th meeting of the fortieth anniversary session of the General Assembly, that an international debt and development research centre be created under the auspices of the Secretary-General, and that its organizational meeting be held in the Polish city of Cracow. We reiterate that proposal. The debt burden,
which has created a barrier to development not only in Africa but in practically the whole world, has become today the most urgent international economic problem and is in dire need of a solution. Therefore, we believe that the African debt problem can be effectively solved only if it becomes part and parcel of a comprehensive general solution. However, we are realistic; frankly speaking, we do not expect a speedy solution of this complex problem, although we realize the urgency and immediacy of it.
108.	We approach the present economic and financial problems which so seriously affect the African continent with utmost concern. For our part, we lend permanent and consistent support to efforts to restructure international economic relations to take into consideration the interests of all developing countries. Co-operation with developing countries is a priority of Polish foreign policy. 109. The Polish delegation came to this session with a record of time-honoured close co-operation with African States stemming from our solidarity with and support for their struggle, first for political liberation and later for the consolidation of their economic sovereignty. It is worth mentioning here that it was the initiative of our country, Poland, that led the United Nations to adopt a resolution on the permanent sovereignty of States over their natural resources. We have never failed to carry out and promote a fruitful dialogue with Africa. We support the aspirations of Africa to life in peace, free from tension, under a just international economic order. We pursue stable and concrete co-operation in the fields of the economy, science and technology. We shall continue to render support and assistance where it is particularly needed: the struggle of the African National Congress of South Africa to abolish apartheid in South Africa and the struggle of the South West Africa People’s Organization to liberate the Namibian people from South African occupation. In our relations with the African continent we are open to a deepening of a mutually advantageous division of labour based on longterm programmes of economic co-operation in trade, services and joint ventures.
110.	For the discussions on the critical economic situation in Africa, many papers and documents have been prepared to acquaint us, through comprehensive statistics and facts, with the problems faced by that continent. Yet not all these documents provide a thorough analysis of the causes of the present situation and offer realistic ways and means for resolving the crisis. This applies also to some of the documents prepared for this special session of the General Assembly.
111.	The absence of a clear allocation of responsibility for the present situation, the essence of which we have tried to explain in our statement, creates a tendency to saddle all countries in equal measure with responsibility for improving the situation. In our view, that is not the right approach, and we do not consider ourselves bound by recommendations and obligations arising from it. We also think that it is a serious lapse that the documents omit the question of the interdependence of disarmament and development, especially as this is precisely the area in which the means of overcoming the economic crisis in Africa could be sought. On the other hand, we find those parts of the documentation which expand our knowledge of African countries and their pressing problems useful. Such information could be of great assistance in planning co-operation with those countries on both the bilateral and the multilateral level.
112.	In the documents prepared for this session stress is put on the development of agriculture and food production as a special measure in overcoming the present
economic crisis in Africa. In the opinion of the Polish delegation, one measure that would contribute to the attainment of that goal is the adoption of the principle of the free flow of experience, technology and organizational arrangements in the area of food production, processing and storage. Poland could share with African countries its experience in the manufacturing of farm machinery and implements and provide relevant documentation in that field, as well as make available the results of research into high-yield plants adapted to dry climates.
113.	Furthermore, we could share our experience in the area of co-operatives, the organization of rural centres for production, the training and dissemination of advanced farming techniques, the organization of veterinary services and so on. Upon request, we would be prepared to assist in the adaptation of technology and organizational arrangements to local conditions, in co-operation with United Nations specialized agencies.
114.	Thousands of top-class specialists in different fields from African countries have been trained and educated in Polish schools and universities. We shall continue and, wherever possible, expand the training of African personnel in Poland, as well as continue to send our specialists to Africa. There are thousands of Polish experts working in Africa in various sectors of agriculture, industry and construction. Polish design and consulting firms participate in many construction and industrial projects in Africa. There is growing co-operation in science and technology. We are ready to promote such forms of cooperation on terms convenient to African countries. Within the limits of our possibilities, we have been extending emergency aid to Africa; this is especially true of famine relief for Ethiopia.
115.	In a spirit of solidarity and friendship, we shall consistently develop and broaden the possibilities I have mentioned.
116.	Mr. SHULTZ (United States of America): This special session could—and we hope will—mark a historic turning point for the African continent. We meet in a year when the world is still anguished by the terrible images of famine and starvation that have scarred so much of Africa during the last two years. With an extraordinary outpouring of support, people from across the globe have rallied to Africa’s side and saved millions of lives.
117.	Today we are gathered here to address a more fundamental and enduring task: that of meeting the requirements of long-term development for Africa. The United States comes to this special session with hope. We salute the work of the OAU at the meeting of its Assembly in 1985 for the new directions which the African nations have pledged for themselves. And we welcome this session of the General Assembly as a way of translating their pledge into action.
118.	Our search for solutions to the problems of development is one of the forces that bring us together today, but it is not the only force. We are united, too, by respect and admiration for the dignity of the African peoples in the face of shared hardships. Thirty years ago the United Nations joined in support as Africans fought for freedom from colonial rule. Today we come together to seek Africa’s liberation from other ills: disease, chronic poverty and hunger.
119.	The United States has consistently sought a constructive role in Africa’s struggles. We have provided unprecedented levels of foreign assistance. During this
Administration aid to Africa has increased by over 50 per cent. Current levels of aid are four times those of the early 1970s. In the last three years alone we have provided $2.4 billion in food and emergency assistance.
120.	Effective partnership requires a shared understanding of past mistakes and present goals. This special session holds unique promise, because we seem to be closer than ever to reaching such understanding. We have learned a great deal together about what does and does not work. We have seen how now discredited orthodoxies about State-directed development gave rise to misguided policies that stifled individual initiative, policies that in practice have given inadequate incentives to African farmers and created a long-term decline in food production.
121.	Today, as a result, millions of Africa’s people depend on food imports for their very survival. The burden of foreign debt, which in sub-Saharan Africa rose by an annual average of 21 per cent throughout the 1970s, has reached crisis proportions. Measures of standard economic performance reveal that economic conditions on the continent as a whole are no better, and are perhaps worse, than they were some 25 years ago—all this despite massive injections of foreign aid.
122.	The purpose of this special session is to chart a course that will reverse those trends. According to the draft basic final document prepared by the African States for this session, our task requires that “the African countries adopt fundamental changes in their development priorities and policies” [see A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V, para. 7], And I think we can agree that successful development in any nation—in Africa as anywhere else—lies fundamentally in the expansion of individual human opportunity.
123.	Even modest advances in material well-being can accelerate development. With rising income, a farmer is able to save and provide some economic insurance to his family against natural misfortunes such as drought. With rising income, a small-business owner may be able to send another child to school, increasing the promise of his family’s future. In any walk of life, people freed from dire deprivation are better able to seize the opportunities before them.
124.	The United States firmly believes that our own development experience is a useful guide to productive economic policies. What is the most fundamental lesson of that experience? It is that the talents of individual human beings are the greatest resource a society can bring to the tasks of national development. America has seen this truth at work in its agricultural era, in its industrial phase and in its post-industrial development. And we have seen our dedication to that truth translated throughout our society into better opportunities for succeeding generations.
125.	Our experience is hardly the only example of this truth. Today many countries are reawakening to the fundamental connection between individual initiative and economic process. In East Asia, the liberation of the individual talent from State-imposed economic direction has produced in recent years nothing less than an economic miracle among developing nations. Their experience confirms that there is nothing culture-bound about the creation of material well-being. Even communist nations are awakening to the fact that individual initiative, not State direction, is the source of growth. China’s unprecedented experiment with unleashing individual incentives has been remarkably successful in recent years, and we note that the Soviet Union, at its XXVIIth Party Congress, called for less emphasis on central planning and more on individual initiative.
126.	Many African nations, too, have undertaken bold reforms of economic policy. Across the continent major programmes are under way to stimulate growth. In Senegal, Zambia, Guinea, Zaire, Somalia, the Central African Republic, Mali, Rwanda, Togo and Madagascar exciting changes are taking place as leaders seek to stimulate economic growth. These leaders are recognizing, as the OAU declared last July, that the primacy accorded the State has hindered rather than furthered economic development. Agricultural pricing is being reformed to give farmers a fair and profitable return on their output. Private marketing channels are being revived to bring food to the cities and consumer goods to the countryside. Exchange systems are being revamped to reflect market value and tó permit allocation of scarce resources to the most productive sectors.
127.	These are historic changes, and they point to a new generation of African progress. The United States is supporting this trend through bilateral and multilateral programmes. This special session provides an opportunity for all of Africa to join in what is a world-wide movement by rejecting failed orthodoxies and giving greater scope to individual initiative.
128.	Our agreement on the simple truth of the critical role of the individual in development is the cornerstone of the new partnership emphasized by this session. But the tasks of economic liberation do not fall to individual Africans, their Governments or to foreign donor countries alone. We must search together for policies that will work across the full range of our partnership, as the following examples suggest.
129.	First, donor countries must design assistance programmes that increase self-reliance and discourage dependency. Some of our assistance has been counter-productive, contributing to stagnating public sectors rather than to vital private enterprise. As a result, we are starting to shift more assistance from public to private entities. Two years ago, through the Economic Policy Reform Program, we began using our foreign aid resources to give incentives and support to countries that had undertaken such internal reforms. In 1985, under this Program, we gave $75 million to five African countries: Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Rwanda and Zambia. This year we are engaged in discussions with four other African countries which may join our Program. We can do more for Africans who are trying to reform their economies, and we will.
130.	Secondly, African and donor nations alike must work together to create conditions favourable to investment. The continent’s natural resources offer great promise. Africa has some 220 million hectares of arable land. Only half of this has ever been cultivated. Only 3 per cent of its hydroelectric power has been harnessed. And the continent is rich in the vast amounts of fresh water needed to bring growth to barren fields.
131.	But these resources cannot be put to work without investment, and investment requires confidence. Political stability creates the conditions for economic advance, not vice versa. If countries want to attract foreign and domestic capital they must begin by recognizing the imperative of creating an environment of confidence. Here, too, the United States can help, through diplomatic and other assistance aimed at securing individual rights, social justice and political stability. And I might say that a system of apartheid, and the across-border violence that seems to go with it, destroys confidence and is antithetical to the kind of investment climate we are seeking to set up, apart from being unacceptable in its own right.
132.	Thirdly, we must keep trade opportunities open. The United States has taken a series of steps to maintain
free and fair trade. In the new GATT round of multilateral trade negotiations we will be seeking to liberalize trade for the benefit of all countries. African countries should note that our Generalized System of Preferences programme emphasizes benefits for the less advantaged nations. For their part, Africans must guard against protectionist policies that discourage broader trade on the continent and elsewhere.
133.	Fourthly, assistance must come not only from individual donor States, but also from the multilateral arena, and I might say from the non-governmental organizations as well. These organizations have made and continue to make important contributions to the mobilization of private resources and to the development of essential human resources. Africa remains the neediest continent. The United States, with its own budgetary concerns, cannot meet all the African requests for assistance. So we are exploring creative alternatives.
134.	Last fall, we proposed a plan to IMF and the World Bank which would substantially increase the flow of concessional resources to Africa and other least-developed areas of the world. The IMF has adopted the Structural Adjustment Facility, which should result in an increase of $1.5 billion in low-interest loans for Africa in the next five years. We are currently engaged in negotiations with other donors on the eighth replenishment of the World Bank’s IDA. The final decision on the eighth replenishment remains open, but the United States does want to secure a substantial, increased share of IDA for Africa. Together with the new IMF Structural Adjustment Facility, the eighth replenishment will provide a major source of support for the steps that African nations have agreed to in recent OAU documents and here at the special session.
135.	Finally, we must develop production technologies appropriate to the African environment, especially in the critical area of agriculture. Agricultural production, the continent’s one-time mainstay, has regressed drastically in the last 20 years. It is now 15 years since Norman Borlaug received the Nobel Peace Prize for his pioneering research. That research helped launch the green revolutions that started India and Mexico along the road to self-sufficiency in food grains. For years many have tried to bring the same revolution to Africa, although thus far without success.
136.	The good news is that this may be changing. We seem to be standing at the threshold of an agricultural revolution adapted to African conditions. Last year an African geneticist by the name of Gebisa Ejeta—trained at Purdue University in the United States—spearheaded the successful effort to develop a new hybrid sorghum strain which is pest- and drought-resistant. This new strain has doubled the yield derived from local strains under normal weather conditions. These varieties contributed to Sudan’s surplus this year. Improved maize varieties, combined with improved agricultural policies, contributed to grain surpluses in Kenya, Zimbabwe and Malawi.
137.	The United States is committed to supporting the development of agricultural technologies suited to Africa. We plan to give some $1 billion for agricultural research over the next 15 years. With our support, international agricultural research centres and a new umbrella organization, the Program for African Agricultural Research, are also leading an international effort to bring an agricultural explosion to the continent.
138.	As is demonstrated by the example of Gebisa Ejeta, the resolution of Africa’s economic crisis lies in the liberation of its peoples from policies that have stifled
innovation and led the nations of the continent into their present difficulties.
139.	In the years since independence African and donor nations alike have learned a great deal about our respective roles in promoting development. Africans have learned that responsibility for their economic well-being rests squarely with themselves. The United States and other donor countries have had to learn another hard truth: that well-intentioned programmes can produce dependency rather than self-sufficiency, economic stagnation rather than self-sustaining growth. And we have all learned another sobering truth: flawed governmental policies can hurt economies just as surely as the natural calamities that have afflicted Africa. No amount of foreign assistance and no measure of good intentions can alleviate the hardship caused by a Government bent on misguided policies.
140.	But we know, too, that if inappropriate policies have created many of Africa’s problems, appropriate new policies will help to ameliorate them. This special session confirms our partnership in the search for workable approaches to long-term development on the continent. As our work unfolds in the coming days we can take heart not only from our converging views, but also from the fact that some global economic trends are now turning in Africa’s favour.
141.	The economic recovery of the industrialized nations over the past few years is giving much-needed expansion to markets for exports from the developing world. Africa, located close to the major markets of Europe, is well positioned to profit from that growth. Meanwhile, the decline in world oil prices—the equivalent of a tax cut for most of the world—should stimulate economic activity throughout much of the continent. Most African nations should also benefit from the drop in interest rates and the readjustment of other currencies against the United States dollar—the currency in which most African debts are denominated.
142.	African leaders and donor nations alike face many obstacles in our work to brighten the continent’s future. But we are engaged in that struggle together. Today, as leaders throughout the continent re-examine the foundations of economic growth and seek new promise for Africa, we must all ensure that our efforts will fulfil the needs of coming generations. The peoples of Africa, and their many friends throughout the world, await with hope our actions at this historic session. May our efforts be worthy of their aspirations.
143.	Mr. HORN (Hungary) (interpretation from Russian): The Hungarian People’s Republic fully shares the concern of international public opinion at the extremely grave economic situation of millions of people in Africa. The elimination of the crisis in that continent calls for effective international action, as well as the mobilization of internal energies and resources.
144.	Since the interdependence of countries and continents is a characteristic of the world of today, no problem on any continent can be addressed in isolation from the question of the well-being of other regions and of all mankind. Therefore the increasing economic and social problems of Africa threaten not only the fate of African peoples but also the balanced development of the entire world. Consequently, the expression of our sensitivity to and concern about one another’s problems is indispensable in this respect as well.
145.	The critical economic situation of Africa manifests itself in many forms. The magnitude of the economic difficulties is reflected in the very fact that 26 African
nations are among the least developed countries of the world.
146.	The unfavourable phenomena are often aggravated by natural disasters, particularly drought. The efforts of the United Nations to help cope with drought and alleviate hunger in Africa are praiseworthy. In addition to their immediate positive effect, those efforts also testify to the ability of the international community to provide considerable assistance for those in need, if the necessary political will exists. The role played by the United Nations in alleviating hunger in Africa is evidence of its ability to take effective action in pursuit of its noble objectives, provided that Member States decide to act jointly. We hope that this special session will reaffirm this ability of the world Organization.
147,	The analysis and programme of action based on the material prepared by the OAU and submitted to this session reveal that the economic problems of the continent are specific, but they also have a general character and go beyond the boundaries of Africa. Therefore, in view of the complex nature of the difficulties, concepts recommended for adoption should take into account both the local conditions and the world economic and political environment.
148.	Of the external factors responsible for the economic crisis in the African continent, mention should first be made of the tense international political situation and its most negative element—the continual growth of the arms race. The successive rounds of the arms race entail grave political and economic consequences. In such an atmosphere less attention can be devoted to the establishment of a new, more just and democratic international economic order, while the constant growth in military expenditures reduces the funds available for assistance to countries faced with economic difficulties in a period when the specifics of the crisis in the developing world require the mobilization of more funds. Here it should be noted that because of the strained international political situation the chances of solving local conflicts are lessening, which above all adversely affects a number of developing countries.
149.	Equally unfavourable to the development of the African continent are the considerable changes that have taken place in the world economic environment over the past 10 to 15 years. The most important of these is the emergence of new trends in international industrial development, which have introduced changes in supply-demand conditions and in the importance of certain factors of economic growth throughout the world. As a result of the increase in the price of the products of skilled intellectual work and the reduction in the outlay for specific raw materials and energy, there is now a lasting surplus of goods exported by the majority of developing countries. The need to adjust to new requirements in the world economy calls for significant efforts by even the highly industrialized countries, while confronting the less developed nations with problems particularly difficult to solve. This process has further aggravated problems that have existed for many years, such as the malfunctions of the international monetary and trading system, the escalation of protectionist and discriminatory measures, the application of trade sanctions, the crisis in raw material markets, the growing debt burdens of developing countries and so on.
150.	For historical reasons, and in consequence of its colonial past, Africa is an economically underdeveloped continent. After the attainment of independence the States of the region found themselves within the framework of an international order which was unfavourable
to their social and economic development. At the same time, it should not be forgotten that social progress in the young African States was also impeded by a number of negative internal factors even after the attainment of independence. The socialist countries have supported the social and economic development of these States in order to offset the negative effects of the international environment.
151.	We highly commend the objective approach in the document prepared by the OAU for this special session.5 The chapter dealing with the emergence of the crisis in Africa clearly reveals, inter alia, the internal causes of economic difficulties, thus offering lessons not only to Africa but to all of us. .
152.	I should like to make a special point of two factors specific to the African continent. First, differences occasionally lead to armed conflicts which add to economic difficulties and result in the senseless destruction of human and material resources. Secondly, the acts of aggression by the racist South African regime not only pose constant military threats to neighbouring countries, but also give rise to economic problems deriving from such threats and acts of aggression.
153.	The factors I have mentioned show that the task of alleviating the emergency situation and paving the way for development is an extraordinarily difficult and complex task. The Hungarian People’s Republic is of the opinion that the programmes to be formulated at this session must take account of all the major elements and aspects of the problem now before us.
154.	We are convinced that one of the pre-conditions for remedying the emergency situation in Africa is in the elimination of local conflicts and, in a wider context, the curbing of the arms race. The principle of disarmament for development should be given greater emphasis. Radical cuts in military expenditures could provide the most effective means of tackling on a wider scale the economic and social tasks of all countries, including developing countries.
155.	We also believe that the restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis is indispensable. Joint efforts, appropriate financial resources and vigorous liberalization of world trade are needed to enable countries faced with imbalances to embark, on the road to sustained growth.
156.	The strengthening of international economic security can likewise be ranked among the tasks of top priority. Predictable and reliable behaviour by partners in the world economy is essential if countries with national economies that are vulnerable in terms of economic adaptability are to turn to. the path of sound development without encountering serious problems.
157.	Generalizations should be avoided in determining what specific action must be taken to alleviate the economic crisis in Africa. In general, the situations of the various countries of the region show rather different patterns, and this holds also for those in emergency situations. To devise some sort of general development model would therefore be to go about it in the wrong way. It is necessary to outline development proposals which make allowances for the national characteristics of the countries concerned. The proposals formulated by the OAU reflect a duly differentiated approach and provide an appropriate groundwork for the preparation of a programme of action for the medium- and long-term development of the African economy. Better and more effective use of internal resources with a view to ensuring flexible adjustment to shifts in the world economy is a
fundamental requirement that must be taken into account in formulating economic policy proposals consistent with national characteristics.
158.	In this context we consider important the reduction of the differences in territorial and ethnic development within the separate States of the region. This is, in a sense, conditional on efforts gradually to change the mentality of the local population and increase their sense of responsibility for their own progress.
159.	At the same time, we wish to stress the need to keep in mind the primary role of economic strategies designed to stimulate export production and orientation to the world market. Inordinate striving to create an internally oriented national economy may serve to lessen its imbalances to some extent in the short run; nevertheless in the long run it will hamper attempts to catch up with developed regions.
160.	The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic is committed to maintaining and strengthening relations of equality, dialogue and mutually advantageous economic co-operation between States with different social systems. We are in solidarity with peoples fighting for the consolidation of national independence and for social advancement. Guided by this spirit, we are ready to develop and expand wide-ranging commercial, scientific, technical, cultural and educational relations with African countries. Hungary takes an active part, within the limits of its resources, in the joint efforts to solve the economic problems of African countries and speed up their development.
161.	I conclude by emphasizing that Africa is a continent rich in unused reserves, a region which is capable of sustained and balanced growth, thus ensuring the welfare and prosperity of its peoples. To achieve this goal, not only the common efforts of the international community are required, but also necessary are regional cooperation and self-reliance. The history of the world economy is full of spectacular about-turns and proves that, given the necessary harmony between internal efforts and external circumstances, a notable improvement in the economic situation of the most diverse countries can be achieved.
162.	Mr. LOESCHNAK (Austria) (interpretation from French): Austria follows with great interest and concern the critical economic situation in Africa. The recent emergency has aroused compassion in Austria and strengthened the solidarity of its population with the peoples of Africa.
163.	Through the endeavours of the international community the worst consequences of the famine were limited. Austria contributed according to its ability to the most important multilateral humanitarian action in the history of the United Nations.
164.	All these measures contributed to reducing the most serious dangers, but they have been able to solve neither the problem of food security nor the basic economic problems. The OAU has stated with great realism and courage the need for basic structural reform, for reexamination of strategies and for setting new priorities. This need is confirmed in the documents before the special session, which analyse the causes of the negative development in the past decade.
165.	My country has therefore wholeheartedly supported the convening of this special session, which is meant to provide new political perspectives for the economic, ecological and infrastructural development of Africa and ensure a sustained process of development.
166.	Decisions on necessary policy reforms and their implementation are, however, the responsibility of the African States themselves. Africa has assumed its responsibility in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.' That Priority Programme identifies the problems in a realistic way, stipulates the objectives for future economic development and indicates approaches towards their solution. We welcome the fact that agricultural development and improvement of rural society have been recognized as top priority. That sector still accounts for the majority of Africa’s population.
167.	The problems of Africa will not be completely solved in conference rooms. Despite common features, problems and needs vary from country to country. A common effort will be needed to co-ordinate actions on the local, national and regional levels and harmonize them with economic, political and social objectives.
168.	Among the many objectives and measures the following seem of particular relevance.
169.	First, the development of agriculture must be based on a realistic, remunerative price policy for agricultural products and other productivity incentives for farmers. Moreover, co-operative mechanisms and self-help measures have to be encouraged in the framework of rural development. The role of African women in agriculture must not be underestimated. The revival of agriculture will contribute especially to improving the living standards of the poorest strata of the population.
170.	Secondly, within the framework of policy reforms the improvement of the economic environment seems to us indispensable. A realistic monetary policy is the basis for fruitful regional and international co-operation. Good management of enterprises and in public administration is also essential. An economic climate which favours saving and capital formation and stimulates national investments will in turn also attract foreign investment. Thus trade imbalances will be alleviated and employment and infrastructure created.
171.	Thirdly, additional efforts in foreign trade and better use of the advantages of the Generalized System of Preferences would be beneficial for African economies. Realistic exchange rates are essential in this context; they encourage the establishment of new industries, thus contributing to the creation of employment opportunities. A further problem to be tackled is the strong dependence on the export of raw materials.
172.	Fourthly, economic reforms which today appear to be so important should not cause us to forget the equal necessity to create a just political and social environment which includes human rights and basic freedoms. Living conditions respecting human dignity will also help prevent new flows of refugees and displaced persons.
173.	The necessary reforms and structural changes demand great efforts on the part of the African countries themselves. The fact that a number of them have already initiated this process in difficult political and social-circumstances and that all of them have the political will to undertake these efforts merits our appreciation and encouragement.
174.	The international community has to respond to the African challenge and support the process of reform in a spirit of solidarity. The industrialized nations for their part are called upon to contribute to the creation of a global economic environment which supports the African countries’ efforts. In this connection, the following points should be stressed. Strengthening of non-inflationary growth in the industrialized countries will benefit the African economies through an increased import demand
and could lead to higher levels of assistance. Structural adjustment in the industrialized countries will improve the opportunities of the African economies. The new multilateral trade round in GATT should take into account the interests of developing countries and further facilitate their access to markets in the industrialized countries. Nevertheless, African countries will also need additional flows of resources in the future.
175.	We are aware that the problem of indebtedness is a heavy burden for Africa. Although the decline of the dollar, of interest rates and of oil prices alleviates to a certain extent the situation of the majority of developing countries, the problem remains serious. The policy reforms and structural adjustments the African countries are planning with the aim of sustained growth are of equal importance in solving the debt problem. The present situation necessitates common efforts in the form of close co-operation between debtor countries, creditor countries, banks and international financial institutions in order to solve in a spirit of understanding the debt problems according to each country’s particular needs, on a case-by-case approach.
176.	Austria has already demonstrated its willingness to co-operate and to be forthcoming within its means, and it will continue to do so. Up to now we have been able to arrange debt reschedulings for 12 African countries, to the extent of 5.6 billion Austrian schillings, some of them for periods up to the year 2000.
177.	Austria is well aware that the achievement of growth-oriented reforms requires additional financial flows over and above debt rescheduling. We therefore welcome recent international efforts undertaken in this respect by the World Bank and IMF and the replenishment of IDA. Austria is contributing 223 million schillings to the Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa of the World Bank, which is far beyond our normal IDA share. In the negotiations on the eighth replenishment of IDA, Austria advocates replenishment at a level of at least $12 billion. ' 178. Africa is already the priority area for Austria’s development co-operation. Sixty-nine per cent of Austria’s bilateral official assistance is destined for Africa. Austria’s contributions to multilateral institutions, the activities of which to a large extent benefit Africa, were substantially increased during the past years—from 558 million schillings in 1983 to 1,553 million schillings in 1985.
179.	Austria will co-operate willingly within the framework of the programme of action, as the focus on agricultural and rural development closely matches Austria’s interest in integrated rural programmes. Austria has already undertaken such programmes in four African countries, namely, Cape Verde, Rwanda, Burundi and Zambia. I would also mention that Austria is envisaging, a substantial increase in bilateral development assistance for countries in sub-Saharan Africa. In the current year we are allocating an additional 100 million schillings for the least developed countries of that region. It is, moreover, our intention to finance mainly projects in the least developed countries of Africa within the framework of a co-financing agreement concluded with the World Bank. The Austrian contribution to this co-financing agreement amounts to 1 billion schillings.
180.	In conclusion, I should like to underline once more the importance that Austria attaches to this special session. We shall need a strong sense of responsibility in facing this immense challenge. We have the chance to fix together the priorities for a medium- and long-term development process in Africa in co-operation with African Governments, which shoulder their responsibility for the
necessary measures and reforms, and the international community, which must be aware of its responsibility for supporting Africa’s efforts.
181.	Mr. HALEFOGLU (Turkey): It is a great pleasure for me to address the General Assembly, which is for the first time devoting a special session to the economic and development needs of one region of the world. We hope that the outcome of this session will satisfy the expectations of those who are concerned about the welfare and future of the African nations and will produce a new impetus to the development process in that continent. The deliberations here should constitute a good example of international solidarity at a time when the spirit of multilateral co-operation needs strengthening.
182.	I would like to take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation to the African Governments for their invaluable efforts within the framework of the OAU, as well as to ECA for its excellent work in the preparation of comprehensive reports that bring to our attention the magnitude of the problems in Africa. My delegation also extends its appreciation to the Secretary-General, as well as to the United Nations bodies and the entire Secretariat for their sustained efforts in the preparation of this special session.
Mr. Al-Kawari (Qatar), Vice-President, took the Chair. 183. The present situation in Africa is most distressing and alarming. The deep-rooted and diverse economic problems that Africa faces today demand urgent measures and immediate action. A fundamental difficulty is the lack of adequate infrastructure in the continent. Moreover, income levels in Africa are strikingly low. The rate of population growth, on the other hand, has been above the rate of increase in per capita income, thus further aggravating the already dramatic situation. It is alarming to note from the reports that in the great majority of African countries, one half to three fourths of the population subsist in absolute poverty and that per capita food production in the 1980s has declined in comparison with the 1960s.
184.	Closely linked with these difficulties are the problems of foreign debt, deterioration in the terms of trade and the decline in the prices of commodities. These require the special attention of the international community. For many African countries, external debt constitutes a new problem, never experienced before. The roots of this problem stem from certain developments in the 1970s. The international commodity boom, increased access to sources of lending after the 1972-73 oil shock and the expansion of public sector expenditures can be emphasized as among the major factors that contributed to the outbreak of this problem in the 1970s. The problem was further aggravated in the 1980s by new external developments, such as high real interest rates, disruption in both private and public financial flows, low commodity prices and a drought, over which the Africans have no control.
185.	In these circumstances, there is no doubt that African countries are not in a position today to solve this problem oh their own. Despite the differences among the countries and the levels and composition of debt, it is absolutely above their servicing capacity. In this respect there is an imperative need for the international community to give special treatment in solving this problem, which must also be seen in the broader context of stabilizing Africa’s foreign aid requirements.
186.	Foreign trade is another area in which the African countries are experiencing serious difficulties. The value of exports in the vast majority of African countries fell by more than 40 per cent from 1981 to 1983, a decline which has led to drastic cuts in import expenditures.
Today we see a growing gap between the imports required by African countries to sustain their development process and their export earnings to pay for them. African countries generally suffer from a slow growth of demand for their exports and from declining terms of trade.
187.	Since the beginning of the 1980s, increasing protectionist practices in the industrialized countries have become a new impediment to African exports. Turkey, too, as a developing country, is negatively affected by growing protectionism. For our part, we find this an important obstacle to the successful implementation of structural adjustment policies. We see no justification for such practices, particularly at such a critical juncture, when many developing countries are making strenuous efforts at structural adjustment to increase their foreign trade capacity. We are therefore ready to support initiatives which might improve the present environment for African exports.
188.	In addition to protectionist practices, I consider it useful to focus briefly on commodity prices, because the foreign exchange earnings of the great majority of African countries depend on the export of a few raw materials and commodities. The price index of primary products is now at its lowest level. The losses of non-oil commodity exporting countries on the whole, owing to substantial declines in prices this year, are calculated to be between $40 billion and $60 billion. It is obvious that the effects of these depressed prices on the income of many African countries have been widespread. As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, the prospects for exports by the low-income African countries, which consist mostly of non-oil commodities, are not favourable. We believe that this situation, which has created an uncertain and difficult economic future for many Africans, should be addressed effectively by the international community.
189.	The search for viable development policies in many African countries has been going on for the last three decades. The experiences in this area illustrate how difficult it is for those countries to implement successful economic policies when their basic infrastructures are inadequate. Today we see that there is a growing change in African thinking on development issues, as an increasing number of African countries are in the process of implementing new policies in order to adjust their economies to the changing conditions. Taking into account our own experiences in the area of adjustment policies, we welcome this new economic policy thrust in Africa. We believe that growth-oriented structural adjustment policies hold promise for many African countries of a healthy course for their economies, provided that they are effectively supported by major donor countries and international financial institutions.
190.	For us Africa is not a distant continent; it is just across the Mediterranean. Turkey is situated at the crossroads of Europe, Asia and Africa. Anatolia has been under the influence of the tremendous cultural and social interactions of these three major continents, and it has provided a vital link between them. We naturally have traditional and historical relationships with various African countries. We also enjoy the privilege of having special relations with the Muslim people of Africa.
191.	On this occasion I am deeply pleased to express here the great sympathy felt by the Turkish people and Government for Africa. As a developing country, Turkey is doing its utmost, within its limited resources, to contribute to the programmes related to Africa. To that end, my Government announced last year that it would donate $10 million to the countries of the Sahel. Somalia has
become the first country to receive food aid under this assistance programme, and we are in touch with the authorities of the other countries concerned in order to channel this modest aid effectively. ■
192.	In this connection, I should like to elaborate further on the efforts being made within the framework of the Organization of the Islamic Conference [O/C], That Organization’s Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial Co-operation, whose Chairman is the President of Turkey, has the economic situation in Africa as a permanent item on its agenda. During the second session of the-Standing Committee, held at Istanbul from 14 to 16 March 1986, the Economic Ministers of the member countries of QIC agreed to focus their efforts on aid packages which would have more lasting effects on the economic situation in Africa, rather than on food assistance alone, which has only a temporary alleviating effect. In keeping with that suggestion, Turkey decided to shift the emphasis of its aid programme to Africa from food aid to technical assistance.
193.	Extension of technical assistance to countries in need, and in this context to Africa, is of particular concern to my Government. Turkey is making every effort to promote that kind of co-operation. In fact, I wish to refer to a technical co-operation project which my Government signed with FAO during the eighteenth FAO Near East Regional Conference, held at Istanbul from 17 to 21 March 1986. This project envisages technical assistànce in the fields of forestry and livestock.
194.	We have been carrying out technical assistance programmes with UNIDO for about a decade now, organizing in-plant group training courses and study tours in different industrial sectors for the trainees of other developing countries. So far, the primary beneficiaries of these programmes have been'African countries.
195.	- For the realization of the. self-reliant and selfsustained development of Africa, growth-oriented structural adjustment policies are.necessary. The success of these policies depends, above all, on a favourable external economic environment, which is beyond the Africans’ control. To that end, Turkey is prepared to give full support to the concerted international actions which will be adopted at this special session.
196.	Mr. TALEB IBRAHIMI (Algeria) (interpretation from French): First, I wish to congratulate the President on his election to preside over this special session of the General Assembly. The high standards and integrity that have won him the esteem of all, as well as his wealth of experience, undoubtedly represent major guarantees that our work will be well conducted.
197.	President Diouf of the Republic of Senegal, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, at the 1st meeting gave the Assembly a clear account of the decisions taken by the African heads of State or Government to lay the foundations for the economic recovery of the continent, and, at the same time, he spelled out the nature and types'of support expected from the international community. Thus, he set out the framework and the objectives of the present'special session. Speaking after President Diouf, Algeria endorses that message for renewed international co-operation vis-à-vis Africa.
198.	The present session is being held at a time when Africa is at a decisive turning point in its history because of the hard choices imposed on it by the very serious economic difficulties confronting it. The causes of that situation have been thoroughly analysed in terms of the colonial remnants maintained by an inequitable international economic system that affects both the coherence
and the effectiveness of development policies. Climatic and ecological factors such as drought and desertification have acted as aggravating factors whose tragic effects arise primarily from the fragility and vulnerability of the African economies.
199.	Hence, an analysis of the economic crisis in Africa necessarily leads us to the incontrovertible conclusion that the relaunching of development necessarily involves both internal and external structural changes. That is the uncompromising diagnosis'made by Africa, which has therefore decided to redefine its conduct and priorities in the light of the essential goal, which is to create the necessary conditions and means to satisy its own needs, primarily through its own resources.
200.	That Africa has also turned to the United Nations is an indication of its deep conviction that tackling these requirements presupposes, at the same time, a renewal of international co-operation. In fact, this special session can be seen as a prolongation of what Africa has started in the way of mobilizing its efforts at all levels—national, subregional, continental and international—to implement Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1
201.	The . determination of the African countries fully to shoulder their responsibilities in the process of building their national economies must have the concomitant support of the international community, for in an interdependent world the problems of the African continent cannot be grasped in isolation from the disorders and upheavals which are a feature.of the world economic situation and to which Africa is particularly vulnerable. Also, the magnitude of the tasks of recovery and development and the burden of historical, structural and ecological handicaps to be overcome are such, in the context of the limited means of the continent, as to' constitute a challenge not only to Africa itself but also to the entire international community. ;
202.	This means that the steps to be taken and the measures to be drawn, up and the commitments to be made at the conclusion of our work must have two dimensions. First, an effort must be made to correct the external factors which make for disequilibrium, which, if it were to continue, would jeopardize Africa’s development efforts. Secondly, a direct contribution must be made to the investment efforts implied in the implementation "of the Priority Programme in order to make the social cost of its implementation tolerable.
203.	Nevertheless, it is essential that whatever support is given by the international community be in harmony with national plans and priorities as outlined in the Priority Programme as a frame of reference. Similarly, it is essential that account be taken of the specific situation which prevails in the front-line States in the light of the aggression and the efforts to bring about political and economic destabilization by the apartheid régime in South Africa. .
204.	That is the substance of Africa’s proposals, of which Algeria has been instructed to present more particularly the aspects linked with the development of agricultural support sectors.
205.	The Priority Programme assigns a dynamic role to agricultural development and the promotion of the rural environment, since it is evident that man must be relocated at the very centre of development in the dual capacity of means and end. Self-sufficiency is essential to meet this requirement. The fact that this priority has been given to the development of the agricultural sector implies an integrated approach to development. The concomitant
development of the support sectors, which initially provide the inputs and subsequently help to process and upgrade the output of agriculture, dictate the changes that must be made to increase agricultural productivity.
206.	This means that there can be no quantitive development without qualitative development. The development of support sectors such as the industries which provide capital goods and agricultural implements, the industries which provide fertilizers, plastics and pesticides, and the industries which process agricultural products are all in effect equally involved in a process of intra-sectoral and inter-sectoral integration, which has a multiplying effect both on agriculture and on the economy as a whole, while at the same time assuring balanced trade between towns and villages.
207.	Furthermore, experience has given ample proof that lasting and self-sustaining development results from the joint development of agriculture and industry to bring about the industrialization of agriculture. It must be emphasized in this context that control of the vagaries of nature so that it is, above all, at the service of man is inconceivable without the availability of the means of production and the ability to make use of them.
208.	Agro-industrial integration is likewise dependent on the development of transport and communications infrastructures. The considerable backwardness in these areas and particularly the constraints suffered by the African island or land-locked countries have an eroding effect on the development of internal and intra-African trade.
209.	Recognition of the importance of these support sectors in the development of agriculture prompted the launching a few years ago of United Nations decades devoted, respectively, to industrial development and transport and communications in Africa. Adequate international support in the implementation of the targets set for those two Decades would have undoubtedly helped to facilitate development efforts in Africa.
210.	In the light of all these considerations, we must all admit that there are grounds for re-examining the international co-operation policy in order to make it a genuine instrument of development. Africa, by boldly embarking on a thorough re-evaluation of its approach to development, is inviting all its partners to carry out an in-depth re-examination of the nature and bases of their relations with the African continent in particular and the third world in general.
211.	This, then, is the appeal of Africa, to which it expects a response from the international community. Our continent is convinced that peace and security can have no sound and lasting foundation until all men throughout the world enjoy the specific conditions which make it possible for them to enjoy their right to development.
212.	The PRESIDENT {interpretation from Arabic)’. In accordance with resolution 477 (V), of 1 November 1950, and the decision taken by the Assembly at the 1st meeting of the current session [decision A/S-13/21], I call on the observer of the League of Arab States, Mr. Adnan Omran.
213.	Mr. OMRAN (League of Arab States) {interpretation from Arabic): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to extend to you and through you to the General Assembly the great appreciation and gratitude of the secretariat of the League of Arab States for granting us this opportunity to participate in the general debate at the thirteenth special session, on the critical economic situation in Africa. This question arouses great concern in the League and the Arab States in view of the cultural and historical ties
embodied in the common destiny, indeed the single destiny, of the Arab and African peoples.
214.	The concern of the League of Arab States and its member States regarding this important question is also based on the principles of solidarity and co-operation among our States and is felt in three contexts.
215.	The first context is that of international co-operation in general, the collective responsibility for the protection of the international economic order and for making every effort to eliminate the distortions and violations which have caused imbalances in international relations and the ensuing disruption of the development process in the developing countries in particular. To this must be added the accumulated foreign debt, which has played a fundamental role in aggravating the crisis and bringing it to its critical stage. Therefore the international community has a great responsibility to remedy the situation. The States of the African continent, which is considered to be the greatest source of strategic, industrial and food raw materials, are suffering from a decline in the production of these raw materials not because of the increasing cost, of production and the weakness of the infrastructures, but because of the fall in the prices of these products on the international market as a result of unfair terms of trade on the one hand and the fluctuation in the currency market on the other. This calls for urgent treatment of the domestic causes by supporting African capacity to counter the decline in production and its means and arriving at an equitable formula that would enable these States to make the best use of their products and resources on the international market.
216.	The second context is that of co-operation among the developing States in accordance with the principle of collective self-reliance. In view of the inertia, if not outright failure, of the North-South dialogue and the frequently negative conditions which have brought that dialogue to deadlock, the developing countries have had to seek, within the limits of their abilities and possibilities, to overcome some of their problems through co-operation between third world countries. The Arab States played a major role in laying the foundations for this SouthSouth co-operation through loans, grants and joint projects and investments. Despite the difficult circumstances currently experienced by the oil-exporting Arab States and the fluctuations and instability of the oil market, our States have not abandoned their commitment to provide development aid to the developing countries, in particular African States.
217.	The third context is that of African-Arab co-operation, which is considered a pioneering experience. What binds the Arab States and the African States, in addition to proximity of civilization and geography and the bonds of history and culture, is their common fate in the face of numerous challenges. This co-operation is a true embodiment of the principle of collective self-reliance in attaining development. The documents issued by the first African-Arab summit conference, held in 1977, are considered a comprehensive common programme of action and a well-founded plan for integrated co-operation. The Arab and African groups have sought to chart a practical course for the achievement of these objectives and have succeeded in laying the proper groundwork for continuous development co-operation.
218.	In this regard, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, which is a specialized bank, has a role to play in providing financial aid to African States and also in co-ordinating the programmes of the various Arab development organizations and funds for supporting the process of African economic development, as well as
those of other funds and banks concerned with development. The priorities in the provision of Arab aid have always taken account and still take account of the characteristics of the stage of African development and the national development plans in the various States of the continent. Thus, the greater part of the aid has been focused on productive sectors and infrastructures, especially in the field of agriculture and such related vital sectors as irrigation projects and the building of dams and roads.
219.	It is important to emphasize here that Arab aid to African countries, in accordance with the principles of African-Arab co-operation, has never been subject to conditions or restrictions. Rather, it is spontaneous co-operation stemming from belief in the common responsibility for the development of our societies and consolidation of the principles of independence, freedom and dignity. It is different from the kind of aid provided or promised by some States whose philosophy and view of co-operation we have listened to today, and in whose concepts we discern the fact that aid is accompanied by conditions that infringe the sovereignty of those States and even constitute reprehensible interference in their internal affairs. This is especially true when that aid is coupled with the social and economic system such States wish to impose, directly or indirectly.
220.	The emergency measures taken by the international community for the relief operations in Africa have proved their success as a pioneering collective endeavour. This special session, which builds upon that earlier approach, is a great leap towards acceptance of the common responsibility of the international community for the future of mankind. In order to enhance these efforts and achieve complete success we should benefit from the documents and reports adopted by the fifteenth extraordinary session of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, held on 30 and 31 March 1986.
221.	The question of the provision of aid to Africa is among the most important questions for our Arab States collectively, through the joint structures established to make a reality of this co-operation. In this regard the Arab League Council, at its eighty-fifth regular session, adopted resolution 4550, of 27 March 1986, which emphasizes, inter alia, the following.
“First, priority must be accorded to productive development co-operation, joint Arab-African projects must take precedence over other programmes eligible for funding, and the creation of conditions favourable to investments in the African States must be speeded up, assigning a fundamental role to Arab and African private sectors. In this context, the secretariat of the Arab League, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, the Union of the Chambers of Commerce and Industry and Agriculture in the Arab States,
the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development, the Arab Organization for Industrial Development and the Arab Organization for Investment Guarantees have been assigned the task of formulating an integrated proposal to be submitted to the Arab League Council at its September 1986 session for consideration and adoption, as a subject of special importance.
“Secondly, it is necessary for joint and national Arab financial institutions to give priority, in funding economic development projects in Africa, to projects for combating drought and desertification and to quickreturn projects whose implementation has an effect on social and economic life in those African States.
“Thirdly, Arab organizations must be urged to include in their budgets provision for technical cooperation so as to give the necessary aid, each in its sphere of competence.”
222.	In conclusion, and in the light of the support by the Arab States for their sister African States, which has exceeded $9 billion over the past decade, the Arab League and its specialized organizations have affirmed their readiness, endorsed by the Standing Committee on Arab-African Co-operation at its eighth session, at Damascus in January 1986, to co-operate fully with international and regional organizations—especially the OAU, to which organization, and to its Secretary-General, we extend our warm appreciation for the great efforts in the service of African causes and of Arab-African co-operation—to contribute to the success of whatever plans, programmes and resolutions are adopted. .
223.	Finally, I reiterate on behalf of the League of Arab States the hope that the work of this special session will be crowned with success so as to effect a fundamental change in the reality of social and economic development for our sister African nations. '
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
Notes
1	A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl.l (XXI), annex.
2	System of stabilization of export earnings established by the first Lome Convention.
3	System for stabilizing export earnings in the mining sector.
4	Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Paris, ¡-14 September ¡981 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
5	Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC.229/2).
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
4th PLENARY MEETING
Wednesday, 28 May 1986, at 3.20 p.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIÉS (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term andlong-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)
1.	Mr. LARADJANI (Islamic Republic of Iran): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your presiding over one of the most important and humanitarian sessions of the General Assembly in the history of the United Nations. This is the first time such a meeting has been convened in order to focus on the needs of a single continent. However, the session also demonstrates the severity of the present crisis and its threats to the future development of the African continent and the world as a whole. While appreciating the Secretary-General’s initiatives to resolve the African crisis, my delegation congratulates the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on his call for the holding of this special session in order to find a framework for resolving this crisis.
2.	The critical economic situation in Africa has not only jeopardized the development process of the continent but also threatened the life of millions of its inhabitants. In many African countries, the economic situation is literally a matter of life and death—indeed even more so in the sub-Saharan region. More than half of the African people subsist in absolute poverty. In some countries, over half of all rural children die by the age of five. In others, the entire population suffers from malaria, diarrhea and other chronic diseases. I do not intend to take up the time of the Assembly by citing well-known though very painful statistics on the overwhelming problems of Africa such as famine, drought, population growth, low average life expectancy, deforestation, desertification, high rates of child mortality, serious health hazards, displacement of people from their homes and high levels of malnutrition. The sad fact is that we shall be witnessing a continued increase in such statistics unless the necessary measures are taken by Africans with the full support of the international community. This session has provided an exceptionally acute opportunity for this international body to take an historic, constructive and humanitarian role in assisting large numbers of the human family residing in Africa. Let us hope that we shall not miss this chance for full co-operation, otherwise we may not be able to escape the irreparable consequences.
3.	It is noteworthy that the international community was warned years ago of the incipient economic situation in Africa through various studies done under the auspices of the United Nations and related bodies since 1975.
Effective African and international action 10 years ago could have averted the disasters of the 1980s.
4.	During the past three years Africa has gone through the most severe drought ever experienced by the people of that continent. That drought and the resulting famine and hunger have wreaked havoc on the rural economies of many African countries. Now, millions of people in those countries have pinned their hopes on our session, and they are waiting to see how we shall achieve solidarity as members of one united family.
5.	As it has been rightly mentioned in paragraph 14 of Africa’s submission to the special session,1 “The African economic crisis is due principally to insufficient structural transformation and economic diversification that are required to move the continent away from inherited colonial economic structures”.
6.	The African economy does not depend on industry and industrial products—a situation which in itself constitutes a very important shortcoming. The agricultural sector mostly depends on rainfall for irrigation. Therefore, the drought has resulted in serious destruction to the agricultural economies of many African countries. Another factor contributing to poor agricultural performance has been poor management of human resources carried out by some African Governments.
7.	My delegation fully supports the proposal for action put forward in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.2 We believe that the number one priority for Africa is the rehabilitation of agriculture, taking into account all indigenous conditions. There is a need for a sustainable agriculture that must be economically viable, ecologically sound, just, humane and culturally appropriate. Special emphasis should be given to supporting the domestic production sector with the aim of attaining food self-sufficiency in Africa. Wé also believe that the ultimate solution to the food crisis will not be achieved through receiving external hand-outs. Africa is capable of feeding itself. The people of Africa, the poor peasants, are the key to the solution of the food crisis. They have to get down to work on their land.
8.	The effects of South Africa’s systematic destabilization campaign against the States of southern Africa are also one of the disastrous factors in the African crisis. As long as the racist régime of South Africa is being supported by Western imperialism, as long as it maintains its illegal occupation of Angola, as long as UNITA3 has the comprehensive military and training support of the Pretoria régime, a great amount of human and material resources of the victimized countries of the region will inevitably be spent on defence against the racist régime. That serves as a channel for the flow of capital from those poor African countries to industrialized societies, a current which must be stopped by all means. One of the most striking examples of unreserved imperialist support for South Africa was witnessed recently when South African military forces invaded the neighbouring countries of Botswana, Zimbabwe and Zambia, and the United States vetoed the Security Council’s draft resolution condemning South Africa’s aggression. Unfortunately, United
States foreign policy against the oppressed Africans is not confined merely to South Africa. Other parts of Africa, even in the far north, such as Libya, are not immune from those destructive and aggressive policies.
9.	The Islamic Republic of Iran firmly believes that the abundant wealth and resources of the African continent should be spent on the material and spiritual well-being of the deprived and oppressed people of Africa, who have suffered so long at the hands of the colonial Powers.
10.	Another factor devastating the African economies has been the savage blows from the world economy. A survey undertaken by UNICEF on the impact of the world recession on children revealed that a multiple mechanism was at work transmitting the impact of the recession in the industrial countries to the developing countries and within the developing countries, from urban to rural areas and to different income groups and classes. At each stage, the linkage mostly served to multiply the impact rather than to diminish it as one moved further along the chain from the rich to the poor.
11.	Little attention is paid by agencies such as IMF to the conditions of many of the lesser and least developed countries. IMF has actually secured the economic interests of rich countries—a purpose for which it was originally established.
12.	The present international monetary and financial system, which has been imposed upon the third world, including African countries, is bankrupt and should be redressed towards the elimination of inequities. The crucial role of interdependence and potential mutual interest between the North and South should be fully taken into account. To challenge the current dominance of monetarism and militarism, the international community should promote a strategy for both development and disarmament in order to make more resources available for development.
13.	Most of the African countries are faced with serious balance-of-payments problems which indicate the severely unfavourable situation facing them in their conduct of trade and payments. We hope that next month’s Finance Ministers’ meeting of the African Monetary Fund at Libreville will reach tangible results so that co-operation among African countries might be increased and a solution found for the balance-of-payments problems of those countries.
14.	African countries are in a debt trap. The total interest to be paid annually during the period 1986 to 1990 by the African countries amounts to about $9.2 billion. It is evident that the interest constitutes more than 38 per cent of the total debt of African countries. Thus, under present economic conditions, there seems to be a continuous amassing of debt due to the accumulation of interest. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery includes a special suggestion to relieve the debt burden. While my delegation strongly supports those proposals, we believe that a more basic solution could be sought in light of the Islamic banking system, which advocates interest-free loans.
15.	The fall in commodity prices is another major cause of the economic crisis in Africa. The many financially weak producing countries, mostly low-income, have limited staying-power in the international market. In the present international financial system there is no organization to provide financing to low-income countries to enable them to improve their market staying-power. We strongly support the establishment of a common fund to help producers adjust their production and deliveries and consequently avoid disastrous sales. Such a fund would enable low-income countries, many African countries
among them, to improve their bargaining position in relation to buyers in industrialized countries.
16.	Constructive efforts for international development by some donor countries, especially the United States, have deteriorated significantly in recent years; Most of the third-world proposals made in the last 10 years for a new international economic order have been rejected constantly without any justifiable reason. Net disbursements of official development assistance to developing countries and multinational agencies declined between 1960 and 1983, from 0.53 per cent to 0.24 per cent of the United States gross national product [GAT]. The seventh replenishment of IDA, a special African fund and other initiatives have been sabotaged. In general, the United States aim has been the erosion of multilateralism. It has withdrawn from UNESCO; it has stood alone in WHO against efforts to improve the use of instant milk for needy children; and it has caused a financial crisis for the United Nations by reducing its financial contribution to its budget. In the mean time, United States policy in international finance, trade, economic assistance and particularly foreign affairs is being pursued bilaterally, bypassing the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Washington has been maliciously exploiting famine and economic crisis in Africa for its imperialistic purposes by bringing pressure to bear on some vulnerable African countries to vote with it in international bodies.
17.	My delegation, while deploring the political exploitation of aid, would like to reiterate the need for the attainment of the official development assistance target of 0.7 per cent of GNP, including the established target for the least-developed countries. We also believe that the decline in IDA resources should be reversed and that reversal reflected in its eighth replenishment.
18.	Whether they want to admit it or not, the industrialized countries have a great deal of responsibility for the present critical situation, which is a direct or indirect result of their plundering actions and policies. Now they should pay their fair share for the sake of their common interest. The industrialized countries benefited by approximately $320 billion from the fall in oil prices in 1986 alone. The total foreign resources needed for implementation of the Priority Programme amount to about $45 billion, or $9 billion each year, We believe that it is only fair that these lucky profiteers make a humble donation towards the implementation of that Programme instead of showing such great hesitation in this regard.
19.	My Government’s support for the oppressed nations of Africa is a matter of principle. After the Islamic revolution our foreign policy took a completely different course. Relations with the Pretoria régime were severed and the flow of oil to it was stopped. We did not miss any chance to develop relations with African countries. Of the 17 embassies we added to our diplomatic missions after the revolution, 12 are in Africa. In spite of the heavy burden of the imposed war, we have tried to make our modest symbolic contribution to support the cause of our African fellow-sufferers in drought-stricken countries or in those countries afflicted with serious emergency situations.
20.	In our Friday congregational prayers, in which millions participate, our people feel happy to share the little they have with their African fellows by contributing modest donations to a voluntary fund that has been established without Government initiative.
21.	In the General Assembly, too, we have always tried to act in keeping with our commitment to support the cause of our African fellow sufferers. We sincerely hope that this special session will succeed in taking a major
constructive step in giving effect to the proposals put forward in the Priority Programme.
22.	Mr. KOENIG (German Democratic Republic):* There is every justification for this special session of the General Assembly focusing attention on the African continent. Indeed, the critical situation of many African countries gives rise to serious concern. Africa is facing a permanent process of destruction of its social, economic and political structures to an extent unparalleled elsewhere in the world. What is at stake here is the very survival of millions of people. Hence, the German Democratic Republic supports the adoption by this special session of a comprehensive programme designed to tackle these problems effectively. , .
23.	The search for valid answers to Africa’s questions and the initiation of. appropriate action to remedy the situation not only are matters of general concern but are particularly crucial for that continent.
24.	Africa is a continent in ascent. For decades its peoples have fought for national and economic independence. They have decisively changed the international political scene. The liberated African States play a major, active role in international politics. Their commitment to the cause of peace, disarmament and development is widely acknowledged. Almost one third of the' States Members of the United Nations are in the African continent. .
25.	However, Africa is still a continent in which the problems are colossal and are even becoming worse.. The bitter legacy of the colonial past has still not been overcome. The peoples there are still exposed to the designs of those that wish to perpetuate old dependencies in a disguised form or, as the United States aggression against Libya shows, to disrupt the independent development of African States by military force.
26.	In spite of the utmost endeavours of the African nations to ensure the consolidation and harmonious development of their economies, thè situation has not improved; rather, it has become more complex. At the recent Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held from 16 to 19 April at New Delhi, the foreign ministers stated that today the situation of the developing countries is worse than it was 10 years ago. That is true in every respect of Africa.
27.	In our view, efficient assistance is required, first of all, to make the dream of an economically independent' Africa a reality. Owing to the slow pace of their economic development the African countries are falling ever further, behind. Africa, with about one tenth of the world’s population, accounts for only 1 per cent of world industrial output. Despite certain progress, agriculturè in most of those countries is incapable of producing enough food for the population. Almost all African States accrue large food import bills. Gigantic natural disasters have further exacerbated the critical situation. Backwardness is coupled with dire consequences, the most appalling of which is hunger.
28.	Against that background, it is only logical for the African States to establish a link between the exacerbation of their critical economic situation and inequality in ' international economic relations. The members of the Organization of African Unity [CM U] have stressed, with justice, that it is primarily high interest rates, currency fluctuations, unfavourable terms of trade, protectionism,
*Mr. Koenig spoke in German,.The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation.
and net capital outflows that have compounded the disastrous consequences for economic development in Africa that I have described. It is indeed startling to note that, according to the calculations of Western experts, for every $1 invested in Africa, the big corporations pocket $3.50.
29.	As a matter of principle we support the more-than-legitimate position of the African peoples and States that demand financial and material Compensation from the former colonial overlords and those pursuing neo-colo-nialist goals. This responsibility remains, no matter how resourceful are the attempts to justify colonialism on the basis of hindsight. It is indeed worrying that sovereign States are put under pressure by demands for restriction of their public.sectors, privatization of State enterprises and access for private capital inflows in ,an attempt to make them change drastically their independent course of development.. ■ . .
30.	Is it not preposterous to blame the public sectors and centralized economic planning schemes for the critical situation in Africa? In fact, the public sector has proved to be an essential instrument. A planned economy facilitates the concentration of economic potential for the solution of priority issues. In that context, co-operatives have been vitally important in mobilizing people and ensuring more equitable distribution of what has been produced. ■ ■ .
31.	It would not be possible to discuss seriously how to mitigate the critical economic situation in Africa without ostracizing the policy of apartheid. For many African countries the racist régime of Pretoria is a formidable obstacle in the way of normal development. That régime is destabilizing the entire continent, generating as it does political tensions arid causing immense economic damage. It is specifically the front-line States that are directly exposed to terrorism sponsored by the apartheid State.
32.	The latest repugnant acts of open aggression perpetrated by the Pretoria régime against Angola, Zimbabwe, Zambia rind Botswana furnish yet further proof of that. The racists’ provocative acts must at last be checked by resolute United Nations, measures in line with Chapter VII of the Charter. The African States will not be really free and able to follow their course of independent development so long as apartheid Continues to threaten the entire continent.
33.	The continued existence and fomentation of potentially explosive situations, and regional conflicts has similarly serious consequences. Everybody knows who is to blame for this. These hotbeds of conflict are siphoning off enormous material and financial resources from economic and social development and frustrating efforts to solve the most pressing issues. . .
34.	The arms race consumes 15 to 30 per cent of the national budgets of Africa, In the light of this, the formula “disarmament for development”, coined by the socialist countries, is gaining ever-more weight. Neither economic measures nor relief actions will bring about a radical and sustained improvement for African countries if no success is achieved in halting the arms race. At present the world spends every day, within eight to nine hours, $1 billion.for the purpose of armaments. That is equivalent to 10 per cent of the yearly assistance requested for the special programme for Africa. The cessation of the arms race and the reduction of expenditure on arms would constitute the most promising and effective approach by releasing urgently needed resources. The wide range of proposals and initiatives of the socialist States on arms limitation and disarmament are aimed precisely in that direction.
35.	The Lomé Declaration of August 19854 has already shed light on the close interrelationship of the objectives of security, disarmament and development and has shown the way to the solution of economic and social problems on the African continent.
36.	A basic pre-condition of ensuring the economic rehabilitation of Africa in the long run is the existence of healthy international economic relations. The German Democratic Republic supports the developing countries in their struggle for a new international economic order, emphasizing that the principles set out in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)] must at last be applied. It is essential for the development of the African countries that their economic security be ensured. The achievement of this goal is served by the Soviet Union’s proposal for the creation of a comprehensive system of international security, including international economic security. State-to-State exchanges in general must be free of arbitrary acts, unlawful embargoes, boycotts, and trade, credit and technology blockades, and economic relations must not be used as a means of exerting political pressure.
37.	The German Democratic Republic shores up its principled support for the African States with concrete assistance. Over the years we have developed co-operation of many kinds with the continent. This co-operation is free from exploitation, discrimination and overt or covert interference in internal affairs. Its purpose is to assist our African partners in the all-round and balanced development of their economic potential. .
38.	Between 1983 and 1985 alone, the German Democratic Republic provided material and financial assistance to States and national liberation movements in the region to the value of 1.5 billion marks. Its primary purpose was to assist in efforts to set up national industries, enhance efficiency in agriculture, establish efficient public and cooperative sectors and train cadres. Forty-one African countries were recipients of such aid. During the period in question, some 9,450 nationals of those countries received in the German Democratic Republic basic or advanced training in various industrial trades and in the fields of public education, health care and the planning and management of economic processes at the national level, while over 2,200 such nationals graduated in the German Democratic Republic from institutes of higher learning or technical schools after having completed courses in mechanical engineering, agricultural sciences, transport, civil engineering, economics, teaching or medicine. In the same period 960 experts from the German Democratic Republic were on assignment in Africa. The German Democratic Republic youth organization’s friendship brigades have played an important part in the training of workers.
39.	Substantial funds were made available for emergency assistance to ease the adverse consequences of natural disasters. In particular, large relief supplies of foodstuffs, medication and other urgently needed goods were shipped to drought-stricken Ethiopia. Other supplies went to Angola, Mozambique, Zambia and Tanzania.
40.	For the German Democratic Republic, the supply of complete industrial plants and the implementation of important projects in developing countries is an essential element of co-operation. It remains committed to its well-established principle that on completion factories or plants become the property of the receiving country. Any idea of transferring profits is alien to the German Democratic Republic’s policy precepts. On the contrary, my country is guided solely by the principle of mutual benefit.
It does not engage in a brain drain from African countries. It does not share in the high profits extracted from those countries by transnational corporations. It does not possess factories or natural resources in developing countries. This will continue to be our approach in the future. Our assistance is designed to help politically and economically in strengthening national economies in Africa to make them independent of foreign capital, in accordance with the wishes and interests of the African countries themselves.
41.	Given its experience and potential as a modern industrialized State with a highly developed agricultural sector, the German Democratic Republic is able to render effective assistance in implementing Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 particularly in the spheres of agriculture and food, industry and vocational training. Over the past few years more than 50 per cent of exports of agricultural machinery made in the German Democratic Republic has gone to African countries. Such deliveries will continue to expand. The German Democratic Republic will set up agricultural complexes in African countries and will give assistance in the reconstruction and modernization of industrial plants. There are good opportunities for industrial co-operation and assembly production, as well as for consulting and engineering services. ‘
42.	In the future also, the German Democratic Republic will support and promote vocational and advanced training schemes. It is a matter of principle for my country to offer rather than deny the transfer of know-how; to help train, manpower from these countries rather than practise brain drain. Thus, the German Democratic Republic provides annually 6,500 places for vocational and advanced training of African nationals and 250 scholarships at institutes of higher learning and technical schools, at a cost of 50 million marks. In addition, 150 specialists from the German Democratic Republic are assigned to work in African countries.
43.	The issues and problems under consideration do not concern Africa'alone; they present a great challenge to virtually all States, as well as to the United Nations. All of us know very well what the Organization can achieve when its Members join forces in pursuit of a lofty goal. Hence we appreciate the endeavours and the personal commitment of the Secretary-General in connection with this process. There is no doubt that the mobilization of new and existing reserves to reverse the negative development trends in Africa will remain on the agenda. In this context, the co-ordination of relief measures within the United Nations system is an important task. However, an integrated programme designed to solve the problems of the continent is now more urgently needed than ever before. The crisis afflicting many African countries cannot be overcome by shots in the arm over the long haul. Resolute action is required to eliminate the root causes, which originated either in the colonial past or in neocolonialism.
44.	In their document for the special session, the African States rightly point out that the Priority Programme cannot be implemented without a fundamental change in the international economic situation and the elimination of the aggravating external constraints on their economies. It remains a priority task also to arrest net outflows of financial resources and the brain drain from that continent.
45.	Of special importance is urgent action to speed up and support the recovery and rehabilitation of the agricultural and industrial sectors in order to boost food production. We particularly support African demands for integrated strategies towards social and economic
development, industrialization, rehabilitation of infrastructures and upgrading of educational and vocational training systems as well as for improvement of health services. It is obvious that in this regard—as has already been pointed out—the State has a major role to play. 46. There is no doubt that in view of the urgent need to solve the entire complex of issues Africa is facing, great emphasis must be placed on joint endeavours by all African countries in the quest for economic development and social progress. These endeavours are complemented by the assistance of the international community. Such assistance must, as a matter of principle, be based on respect for the sovereignty of the African States and for their choice of the way towards national development, just as it must be devoid of any attempts to interfere in internal affairs. The German Democratic Republic is prepared on that basis to participate in the drawing up of effective measures at this special session on the critical economic situation in Africa.
47.	But all efforts for economic development and social progress in Africa presuppose one thing: that there is peace, and nothing but peace, not only on that continent but in the world at large.
48.	Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): The special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa has convened at this time in response to many calls, the first of which came from the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity in July 1985. The convening of this session reflects a global recognition of the gravity of the economic situation in the African continent, highlights the pivotal role played by the United Nations in such significant issues and reaffirms that international peace and political security are closely associated with the economic security and stability of each people and each member of our international community. The convening of the first session of the General Assembly devoted to the needs and future of one of the regions of the world is yet another achievement that the United Nations can add to its list of achievements. This is all the more true because this special session follows the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the Organization. Moreover, the session is even more in the limelight because the Group of African States comes to it in full agreement on a five-year plan for economic reform. 49. To the world, this session should also serve to illustrate the international community’s continued desire to promote the goals of collective work and the principles of the United Nations, one of the principal pivots of which is the promotion of international collective endeavour, at a time of a regrettable increasing tilt towards unilateral or bilateral approaches to international problems that have obvious global dimensions and effects. We believe that it is imperative to resort to collective international efforts when our goal is to create political and economic security and stability for the world, which is very interdependent and in which malaise in one region quickly spills over to the others.
50.	We must acknowledge the significance of the popular participation in various continents in the world effort to alleviate the suffering of the inhabitants of a continent that has such importance in our world today. We wish to place on record our full appreciation of all these popular initiatives, which seek not only to provide financial resources for the current world campaign, but also to make world public opinion even more aware of the need for solidarity and interdependence among the nations of the world and of the need for participation in development and progress. I take this opportunity to state that
the people of Kuwait have played a prominent and honourable role in aiding and.providing relief to the friendly countries of the African continent, both through official and through popular channels.
51.	In order to address Africa’s economic problem, one has to tackle a wide spectrum of intertwined domestic and external issues resulting from the conditions of the continent caused by widely recognized geographic, historical, climatic and environmental factors. In addition to the problem of natural disasters, which require immediate measures, we face the problems of indebtedness, reduction in official assistance from developed countries, adverse global financial and trade conditions and a trend towards protectionism.
52.	Over and above those factors, we find that an adverse political reality continues to hang over some African areas, thus further complicating, their problems, compounding their financial burdens and distracting them from concentrating on economic development processes. The most obvious example is the policies of the racist Pretoria régime aimed at destabilizing the security and peace of the front-line States and seizing and usurping Namibia’s economic resources for the benefit of a white minority.
53,	Despite its enormous potential and resources, Africa remains the least developed continent of the world. Income rates have been declining while growth rates have been either stagnating or decreasing. Levels of food production do not match those of population growth; indeed we have even witnessed a decrease in food production in many African countries.
54.	Furthermore, we cannot overlook the African continent’s incapacitating lack of infrastructure and advanced technological abilities that are essential factors for the taking of even the first steps towards sound economic development. Hence, in addition to providing relief to victims of natural disasters, the international community has to support the medium- and long-term development efforts of the African Governments, if we wish to put an end to the stage of misfortune followed by stop-gap relief measures and to embark on a course of lasting solutions and genuine development. That is why Kuwait has given a high priority to infrastructure projects in allocating development aid to African States.
55.	Undoubtedly, the international community and the African States themselves have made great headway in identifying the continent’s economic problems and their causes and in developing a long list of solutions and remedial methods. We now have formulas and plans that can produce considerable momentum towards the continent’s achieving its economic development goals, but the results will always remain contingent upon the will of the parties concerned.
56.	We have not come here today to claim that this special session can bring about a genuine solution to Africa’s economic problem. However, we have come with the hope that the session will be a point of departure for effective, collective international effort. We believe that we need collective measures conducive to tangible results, as called for by General Assembly resolution 40/40. So let us agree on such actions and let us set out to implement at least the most important of them. We should let Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 be our model in this task. The Programme reflects strong will and complete awareness and clearly defines the goals and priorities. Therefore, we should give adequate attention to the document which represents the opinions of the continent itself about its problems and the general strategy it depicts for the solution.
57.	In this plan, the African Governments have highlighted the agricultural sector as a primary target area, with the goal of increasing productivity in general and food production in particular, in the conviction that agriculture is the cornerstone of any economic reform. The paper has proclaimed self-sufficiency, self-reliance and structural transformation of national priorities as principal objectives. It also includes strengthening incentive policies, reviewing investment policies, streamlining economic management, encouraging and mobilizing the use of local resources and ensuring the widest possible scale of popular participation in developmental efforts and in combating poverty, hunger, disease and illiteracy.
58.	We cannot address the African economic situation without pointing to the debt problem and to the imperative need to arrive at lasting and just'solutions acceptable to all parties through a prudent political dialogue taking into account the harsh conditions, substantial development needs and political stability of the African nations— a dialogue in which the creditor developed countries and the multilateral financial institutions would have to participate.
59.	Moreover, the question of basic commodity prices represents one of the major elements in the economic problem. Economic analysts have cautioned that the fall of those prices has imperiled economic development in the third world and can engender political and economic dangers, and there is obviously a growing Western recognition of the dimensions of this problem and of the conditions that the industrialized nations are required to create in order to redress the situation. These same economic analysts have asserted that the increasingly interdependent world economy necessitates a review of the fundamentals of States’ national economic policies. This is unquestionably a message meant for nations with economic structures capable of global action.
60.	Reports from the world Organization—which with its bodies and agencies has been playing a leading role in prompting, organizing and co-ordinating international endeavours aimed at assisting Africa—indicate that the drought-related crisis of Africa persists and that generous emergency aid to the people of the affected areas must continue. If the international humanitarian shake-up last year, which still continues, has managed to mitigate the crisis, the subsequent subsidence of that flood of donations and media coverage might give the impression that the crisis is over. This is utterly contrary to reality.
61.	As for development in Africa, the Secretary-General has observed, in one of his statements, that the net result of the ambitious national development plans in the continent and the foreign-aid programmes benefiting it is disappointing to both the African Governments and their partners in development. If we wish to address the crisis effectively, there must be a reorientation of policies and attitudes and a return to consultation and co-ordination instead of unilateralism, which is detrimental both to those who practise it and to those who do not in an era of increasing interdependence among the States of the world. Despite the obvious global awareness, as demonstrated by this session, the world has nevertheless failed so far to draw up and carry out an effective strategy to deal directly with the substance of the problem, a strategy for which the industrial countries will have to provide full backing and the necessary resources.
62.	For those reasons, Kuwait, as a leader among the developing nations providing assistance, has persevered in exerting utmost efforts to provide what its resources will permit, in conformity with its policies of contributing to the alleviation of the economic problem and the enhancement of the arduous developmental process in the
friendly African countries. Notwithstanding a drop of about 40 per cent in its oil revenues, Kuwait continues to adopt the same policies. Kuwait will never abandon this commitment within the maximum limits of its. means.
63.	Kuwait has been fulfilling this obligation through various national and multilateral institutions, notably the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, with an official capital of $6 billion, whose latest annual reports indicate that about one third of its highly concessionary developmental loans were provided to African countries. Between 1975 and the end of the 1984-1985 fiscal year, the Fund extended 79 relief loans to 29 African countries non-members of the League of Arab States. This represented 20 per cent of the Fund’s aggregate allocations. Because of Kuwait’s recognition of the size of the African economic problem, the Fund has decided to exempt African States with low levels of development from some of the already moderate regulations governing the provision of its development loans. Furthermore, the Fund’s conditions for those countries are governed by various special concessional considerations resulting from the continent’s situation and its need for basic development planning. Grants too are an element in these loans, representing between 17 and 85 per cent of the value of the loans. In addition to these loans, Kuwait’s financial institutions provide various forms of technical assistance and undertake full supervision of the grants provided by the State, including, in particular, project evaluation, management and follow-up activities.
64.	Kuwait also provides assistance to Africa through the African Development Bank, the Islamic Development bank, the International Development Fund of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and the African Development Fund and through agencies within the United Nations system, such as IFAD, WFP, IDA and UNDP. In addition there is the Joint Kuwaiti Relief Committee, which represents both the public and the private sectors in Kuwait and whose establishment in 1984 was in direct response to the situation in Africa. It was set up to mobilize the efforts of national institutions and the energies, of young Kuwaiti volunteers in relief operations. Those young volunteers travelled in Africa to supervise the granting and channelling of that assistance. The Committee was given great momentum when popular fervour and the operational and field participation of youth reached favourable levels.
65.	In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm, to the friendly African countries and to the international community at large, that Kuwait will continue to honour its commitments and to fulfil its obligations concerning the development and relief of Africa not only because of our firm national policy but also because of our conviction that this world cannot hope for security, peace and stability if Africa remains in this critical economic situation.
66.	Mr. PICHUZHKIN (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian)'. This special session of the General Assembly testifies to the international community’s deeply felt awareness of the crisis in the economic and social development of African countries and of the pernicious consequences of any further deterioration. We are profoundly convinced that the economic problems of Africa are inseparable from the overall situation in that continent and from the general world political and economic climate.
67.	This session, is taking place in a complex and tense international situation. The arms race whipped up by United States militarist circles continues at an ever increasing pace, and space strike weapons are being developed. Under these circumstances the peace initiatives of the
Soviet Union and other socialist countries aimed at preventing the world from sliding to the brink of nuclear disaster are particularly significant. These include the proposal for an all-embracing system of international security put forward at the XXVIIth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the programme for the complete elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction by the end of this millenium, the further extension of the moratorium on nuclear tests and many other initiatives. Those initiatives serve the interests of all peoples and arouse hope that the political atmosphere will change for the better. They create the conditions necessary for extensive social and economic transformations.
68.	The spiralling arms race, particularly in nuclear weapons, is diverting vast resources from social and economic development. African countries too have been drawn into the arms race imposed by imperialism. Their military budgets are growing fast. Over 20 years of independent development—from 1961 to 1980—African States increased their military spending more than twenty-fold. Ending the arms race, reducing military expenditures and implementing the principle of disarmament for development constitute the most realistic and effective source of the funds so greatly needed to meet the economic and social needs of all countries, including those of Africa. We support Africa’s position on this issue, as set forth in the Lomé Declaration4 and Programme of Action.5 69. Against the background of modern scientific and technological achievement, it is inconceivable that millions in Africa should continue to suffer from hunger, malnutrition and related illnesses and lack of housing. The long drought and other natural disasters have no doubt aggravated the difficult economic situation in Africa, but the real causes go back to the time of colonialism, when the Western metropolitan States distorted the economic and social structure of the continent and brought it into conflict with the fundamental development interests in African countries. The situation in Africa today is a consequence of the continuing neo-colonialist policies of the imperialist Powers.
70.	The difficulties faced by African countries are common to the entire developing world, but those difficulties are now manifesting themselves most vividly in that continent. As has been stated by Mikhail Gorbachev, General-Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the 1980s are characterized by the growth of crisis trends in the economies of African States.
71.	In its document submitted to the General Assembly at this session,1 the OAU stresses the adverse influence on the African economy of external factors resulting mainly from the subordinate status of African countries in the present system of international economic relations. Protectionism, the unprecedented growth of interest rates, the artificial lowering of commodity prices, the brain drain from developing countries and attempts to destabilize the progressive Governments of some countries can all, quite rightly, be called a kind of terrorism on the part of imperialism: economic terrorism.
72.	Especially alarming is the problem of the external debt of African countries, which continues to grow and consumes almost a third of the continent’s export earnings. That means that even in a favourable economic environment the prospects for the economic recovery of these countries remain unsatisfactory. Our delegation supports the African countries’ call for a conference on the continent’s external debt for a just solution of this issue.
73.	The critical economic situation in Africa is largely the result of the predatory activities of transnational corporations in that continent, which cause significant damage to the national interests of African countries. They obstruct development, making it one-sided and oriented to the West. The task of eliminating the negative consequences of the activities of transnational corporations makes it imperative to accelerate work to finalize the code of conduct, which is being delayed because of the Western States.
74.	The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR considers that the damage done to Africa as a result of neo-colonialist policies must be fully compensated for by those who are really responsible, namely the industrialized, developed capitalist countries. However, we cannot fail to point out the activities of certain circles in the West that reject any responsibility for the current crisis in Africa and are even trying to shift the blame onto the Governments of African countries for all sorts of mistakes in their economic policy aimed at strengthening the basis of planning and the public sector. Attempts are being made under various pretexts to interfere in the economic policies of young independent States with the aim of compelling them, against their will and the interests of the African peoples, to relinquish the progressive course of development and to submit to the uncontrolled “free play” of market forces, thus rendering their future dependent on the arbitrary actions of foreign capital.
75.	We consider it essential to the long-term solution of the problems facing African countries to ensure fundamental progressive socio-economic transformations, democratization of world economic relations, stabilization of the general economic, monetary and financial situation and implementation of United Nations decisions aimed at restructuring world economic relations on an equitable and democratic basis, especially the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)] and the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)].
76.	Ensuring the economic security of African countries is of particular importance for overcoming the crisis and advancing development. It cannot be obtained without respect for national independence and sovereignty, equal rights, mutual benefits, non-discrimination in trade and respect for the inalienable right of every people to choose its own economic system for the development of its country. Our delegation supports the convening of a world congress on the problems of economic security to discuss the whole range of factors impeding the normal development of economic relations among all the nations of the world, including the African States.
77.	The racist régime of South Africa poses a constant threat to the political and economic security of African countries. With the connivance and very often the direct support of imperialist circles, primarily the United States, the Pretoria régime is trying to dominate southern Africa, pursuing a policy of aggression and State terrorism against independent African States. In spite of many decisions of the United Nations, it is impeding Namibia’s accession to independence.
78.	The act of State terrorism against Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe on 19 May this year again confirmed the aggressive nature of South Africa’s policy. The policy of the white minority Government there aimed at desta--bilizing the situation in the region has a detrimental effect on the already fragile economy of African countries. The damage sustained by the economy of countries of southern Africa as a result of Pretoria’s aggressive policy
exceeds many times over the volume of international assistance provided to those countries. The Ukrainian delegation supports the legitimate demand of African States that the racist Government of South Africa pay full compensation for the damage done. At the same time we wish to stress once again the need for all members of the international community to take effective measures to put an end to the expansionist policy of South Africa and, in particular, to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This applies above all to the United States, Israel and other Western countries and to their transnational corporations, which, despite many appeals from the General Assembly, are expanding their political, economic, military and nuclear co-operation with the racists of South Africa. We also consider it inadmissible that, contrary to many resolutions, international monetary and financial organizations, primarily IMF and the World Bank, are co-operating with the Pretoria régime. 79. Consistently supporting the struggle of African countries to overcome their unequal position in the world capitalist system, the Ukrainian SSR renders them substantial assistance in creating and strengthening the basis of their national economies. Within the framework of foreign economic relations of the Soviet Union, our Republic, in so far as it can and in forms that correspond to our social system, develops with African countries relations based on the principles of complete respect for national sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit.
80.	Industrial goods of the Soviet Ukraine are exported to 30 African countries. Hundreds of specialists from the Republic take part in building various industrial and agricultural projects in Africa. The Ukrainian SSR renders substantial assistance in training skilled national cadres. With our assistance, educational centres are being established in Guinea, Mali and Algeria. In co-operation with the United Nations, international courses and seminars have been organized using the facilities of major scientific establishments and enterprises in the Republic. The Ukraine has hosted seminars on such major problems as modern drilling methods, the exploitation of mineral deposits, the planning and forecasting of water-resources development and some other issues. The Ukrainian SSR will continue to do everything it can to assist African countries in resolving their urgent socio-economic problems.
81.	On the eve of the opening of the special session of the General Assembly, the international community celebrated Africa Liberation Day. Almost all of Africa is politically independent now. Many countries have chosen the road of progressive transformation and are guided by progressive social concepts. Although many difficulties still face Africa we are confident they will be overcome.
82.	The Ukrainian delegation supports the proposal made by a number of delegations that this special session elaborate an effective and complex programme to solve the economic problems of Africa. We are prepared to make our contribution towards the attainment of that objective.
83.	Mr. de ABREU SODRE (Brazil):* I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on having been elected to preside over this special session of the General Assembly. Your recognized diplomatic skills and your capabilities as a leader, which were amply demonstrated during the Assembly’s fortieth session, ensure that our work will once again be successful.
*Mr. de Abreu Sodre spoke in Portuguese. The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation.
84.	I cannot over-emphasize the importance the Brazilian Government attributes to international efforts for the recovery of the African economies. The solidarity which Brazil has come here to put into concrete reality is not to be confused with rhetorical gestures. Within its possibilities as a developing country Brazil will seek to cooperate actively with African economic recovery. It is painful to us that Africa, at the end of the twentieth century, still suffers from dramatic poverty. The perpetuation of the factors of its critical economic and the political vulnerability should be a motive for concern and action.
85.	We are not moved solely by our feelings, however noble and warm they are. Relations between Brazil and the sister nations of Africa in the past few decades have emerged from the shadows and have acquired the greatest priority. In addition, we are now animated by enlightened common interests. Besides the evident ethnic, historical, linguistic and cultural affinities that link us so closely to the African continent, we must dwell on the fact that powerful factors clearly exist that bring Brazil closer and closer to the African nations. Today, freed from the distortions of perception imposed by colonial pacts, it can be clearly seen that our territories lie in absolute proximity. Distances from Africa, in many cases, are shorter than those that exist between places within Brazil itself, a fact that still comes as a surprise to some.
86.	Scientifically, there is evidence of obvious similarities and identities of the bio-geographical determinants of our territories and resources. Thus, new forms for cooperation are emerging in the South-South sense, based not only on criteria of complementarity but also on the awareness of the specificity of our common problems. 87. In confirmation of that rediscovery of proximities, complements and identities, the dynamism of two-way commercial trade between Brazil and Africa stands out. In the past few years that trade has had an average rate of growth larger than Brazil’s trade with any other continent. Brazil trades with Africa on levels equivalent to those with its Latin American neighbours. There is a growing, ever-firmer feeling that countries bordering on the South Atlantic ineluctably belong to the same region, one to be preserved as a zone of peace and co-operation, free from exogenous impositions, tensions and threats.
88.	Following up on the initiative of the President of Brazil, Mr. José Sarney, at the 4th meeting of the fortieth sesson of the General Assembly, I should like to inform Member States that I am addressing a letter to the Secretary-General6 to request the inclusion in the agenda of the forty-first session of an item entitled “Zone of peace and co-operation in the South Atlantic”.
89.	All those factors point to the obvious realities, potentialities and prospects for a co-operation of reciprocal interest to Brazil and Africa.
90.	The situation that affects Africa is of unquestionable gravity. Some of the most acute manifestations of the tragic calamity which in the past few years has caused incalculable human loss have been overcome, thanks to international emergency aid and recent favourable developments in climatic conditions.
91.	It is legitimate to say that hunger still threatens millions of human beings and that the process of economic deterioration in the sub-Saharan region of Africa has not been reversed. Twenty-five years after independence, the fragility of the African economy keeps the countries of the continent vulnerable to the oscillations of external factors and to adverse natural phenomena. One dramatic fact sums up the situation: Africa has the lowest indices of food self-sufficiency in the world, a
euphemism for a harsh reality, namely, hunger. The roots of that fragility are, beyond a doubt, to be found in the colonial system that favoured dependency and failed to stimulate self-sustained development on the national or regional level. To a great degree, this explains the profound distortions in the processes of modernization undertaken by the African countries and why those countries were prevented from benefiting in an adequate way from the periods of greater expansion in the international economy.
92.	In any diagnosis of the African situation, external factors acquire special relevance. It is up to the international community, therefore, to assume the portion of the responsibility that is rightfully incumbent upon it in the task of African economic recovery.
93.	The decline in international trade between 1980 and 1983 had a severe impact on the African economies, as it did on those of other regions dependent upon exports of primary goods where prices underwent severe erosion. During that period, the terms of trade of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa sharply deteriorated. The African foreign debt rose substantially, increasing sevenfold between 1974 and 1985, until today it amounts to $175 billion. Servicing that debt increased the burden on the balance of payments because of high rates of interest and fluctuations in the rates of exchange.
94.	These factors generated a serious reduction in the import capacity of the African countries, gravely affecting the agricultural sector, with disastrous effects on the production of foodstuffs, as well as on manufacturing and infrastructure, which were rendered incapable of affecting the investments that are essential for the maintenance and replacement of capital. The already weakened social sectors were equally affected, particularly in health and education.
95.	This vicious circle, which holds true for almost all developing countries, has particularly grave repercussions in Africa. Breaking it requires an integrated, overall approach to the question of trade, money and finance on the part of the international community, as well as a substantial change in the framework within which international economic relations operate.
96.	In the case of Africa, the importance of ensuring an adequate recovery of the prices of the commodities that make up the main source of income is notorious. In this connection, it must be borne in mind that the practice of agricultural subsidies adopted by some developed countries has a negative effect on international prices and on the market for these products. This problem was recently highlighted by the President of the World Bank, who said:
“Internal prices set well above world prices, especially in Europe, but also here in the United States, encourage domestic production and depress domestic consumption. The resulting surpluses, flooding the world market at depressed prices, do particular damage to those developing countries trying to raise their output of agricultural products in which they often have an absolute advantage.”
The same high official stressed that the steep rate of decline in the growth of developing countries’ exports to industrialized countries strongly suggests that protectionist measures, particularly in manufacturing and agriculture, are among the causes of the decline and increase concern about the growing use of non-tariff barriers by industrialized countries.
97.	The documents submitted for examination at this special session attest to the political will and the desire
for co-ordinated action demonstrated by the countries of Africa to resolve their economic crisis.
98.	The international community is thus faced with a challenge: to bury the past approach based on mere assistance and to inaugurate a new process of real cooperation that will make the African economy less vulnerable to external shocks. In this undertaking, the priority measures for internal economic policies are undoubtedly important proposals. With reason, great emphasis is placed on the development and modernization of the agricultural sector and its infrastructure of transportation, storage and commercialization. The increase in the production of foodstuffs and the effort to provide food security occupy a prominent place. Also being contemplated are actions to bring about administrative modernization and greater efficiency in training human resources and implementing economic policies. It therefore behoves the General Assembly at this session to assume the task of effectively supporting the effort of the African countries by eliminating the external obstacles that have beset the development of the region. In truth, it is necessary to adopt a whole range of measures that are being called for by all developing countries as indispensable to the resumption of their economic growth on a stable basis.
99.	To this end, it is important for the international community, and particularly for the developed countries, to arrive, as quickly as possible, at an agreement on the following main objectives. First, policies that favour expansion of the world economy and trade must be adopted, and protectionist measures, especially those of a non-tariff nature, which hamper the access of products of developing countries to the markets of the industrialized countries, should be eliminated. Secondly, agricultural and commercial policies that are unjustly unfavourable to the expansion of exports from developing countries must be corrected. Thirdly, measures and policies must be adopted to make it possible to guarantee remunerative and stable prices for commodities, through the implementation of the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities and the GATT provision on special treatment for tropical products. Fourthly, the amounts of concessional financial resources earmarked for the African countries should be increased, without prejudice to the volume of concessional aid for the other developing countries. Fifthly, there must be formulas that permit relief from the developing countries’ burden of foreign debt servicing and make it possible for that debt to be paid off without adopting measures of internal readjustment prejudicial to economic development. The problem of indebtedness, although it has qualitatively diverse characteristics in Africa, is common to developing countries and affects Latin America very seriously. Brazil, together with the other countries that make up the Cartagena Consensus,7 insists upon the need for political treatment of the debt problem and reaffirms its conviction that the debt cannot continue to be paid at the cost of recession, unemployment and hunger.
100.	The conviction that it is the developed countries that are chiefly responsible for creating favourable international conditions for the economic recovery of the African countries does not lead us to assume a passive attitude. On the contrary, the solidarity of the developing countries should also be demonstrated by the strengthening of co-operation and trade between them. SouthSouth forms of co-operation are increasingly emphasized in economic relations, and Brazil attaches particular importance to them. The establishment of a global system of trade preferences among the developing countries, which was approved at the Ministerial Meeting of the
Negotiating Committee on the Global System of Trade Preferences, held at Brasilia on 22 and 23 May 1986, where African countries participated in a significant way, appears to us, in this context, to be a striking step forward.
101.	The similarities of climate, geography and social and economic levels of development frequently found among developing countries call for new technological solutions more appropriate to the environmental conditions and availability of resources in those countries than to those in the industrialized countries of the North. By diversifying means of co-operation and commerce, dependence and vulnerability are lessened. It is thus important that the programme for the economic recovery of Africa put adequate stress on measures to strengthen this aspect of South-South co-operation and provide for the necessary financial support.
102.	Aware as it is of the importance of co-operation among the developing countries, Brazil has been carrying out a promising programme of technical co-operation with Africa. At the regional and subregional levels, we would cite Brazil’s willingness to collaborate with ECA in formulating and implementing the pilot transportation plan for the continent as well as the establishment of new ties with the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCCJ in various sectors.
103.	At the bilateral level, the potential of the programmes being developed between Brazil and more than 15 African countries is also becoming increasingly promising. The goal of these programmes is to promote mutually advantageous efforts and the improvement of the institutional and managerial capacity of our partners, an essential factor in overcoming the obstacles inherent in underdevelopment.
104.	The Brazilian Government has sought to concentrate the limited resources available to it on financing integrated or support projects earmarked especially for the areas of human resources and professional training, agriculture, agro-industry, mineral resources, alternate sources of energy, transport and telecommunications— priorities which we emphasize here. In order to expand those programmes, the Brazilian Government recently signed a memorandum of understanding with UNDP to increase activities concerning technical co-operation among developing countries for the fourth programming cycle of UNDP. The memorandum envisages the concession of additional funds, and the resulting activities will get under way with a training programme for Cape Verde in the field of medicine and health. A joint mission of Brazilian and African experts will be in Africa shortly to identify and discuss other specific projects in this context.
105.	The countries of the African continent propose to undertake prodigious efforts to achieve structural reforms at the national and regional levels. Those noteworthy plans will be of no avail, however, if a comprehensive and appropriate response in the medium term is not forthcoming from the international community in the way of profound changes in the world economic and financial system, in addition to measures to be taken immediately. There is only one description for the alternative: the inhumane perpetuation of backwardness and hunger.
106.	I should like to recall here the words of the President of my country, addressed to the fortieth session of the General Assembly last September. He said:
“The world cannot enjoy peace so long as there is a single hungry mouth anywhere on the face of the earth, a single child dying for lack of milk, a single human being suffering for lack of bread. The coming century
will be the century of socialized food. The image of the mater dolorosa in the African desert is humiliating to us. Foodstuffs cannot continue to be merely speculative commodities on the exchange markets. Science and technology are here, announcing a new era of abundance through genetic engineering. Man, who has been able to break through the barriers of Earth and take off for the distant stars, cannot be incapable of eradicating hunger. What is required is á universal will to do so. That is a decision which must be taken without vetoes.” [See 4th meeting, para. 84.]
That is a challenge, a challenge that acquires particular relevance in the case of the African continent, whose critical economic situation we feel deeply.
107.	We cannot merely contemplate passively the climate of insecurity that prevails in the continent because of the crisis existing in southern Africa. Even less can we fail to acknowledge that the perpetuation of that crisis not only jeopardizes the economic future of the region, but also entails, objectively speaking, intolerable and needless bloodshed. In a recent address on the occasion of his visit to Cape Verde, the President of Brazil synthesized the position of the Brazilian Government on the subject as follows:
“I am certain that the complex problem of southern Africa can never be resolved in the context of EastWest tensions or from any strategic perception of the major Powers.
“The solution for the crisis in that region must start with the eradication of apartheid and progress to the following stage of implanting a solid structure of peaceful interaction among the countries of the region which will enable all of them to devote themselves to the struggle to implement their national development projects.”
108.	The continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the repeated acts of aggression and destabilization to which the countries of southern Africa have been subjected constitute a serious impediment to the economic development and recovery of that region. I should like to stress that in Cape Verde the President of my country asserted his firm conviction that:
“The cessation not only of the acts of aggression committed by the Republic of South Africa against Angola, but also of all assistance to the irregular forces destabilizing that country is indispensable and of the greatest urgency.”
In the same context, the Brazilian Government views with great concern the situation in which Mozambique finds itself.
109.	I could not address the Assembly today without failing to place on record the vehement repudiation and clear condemnation by the Government of my country of the recent attacks against other sovereign States of the region by South African forces. We extend our solidarity to the Governments and the peoples of Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, deeply regretting the loss of life and material damages sustained as a result of yet another unjustifiable aggression.
110.	The international community was able to demonstrate by its efficient mobilization of funds for emergency aid to Africa the positive results which can be achieved when political determination and international understanding exist. The same dedication and the same efforts should now be applied to promoting ways and means for long-term structural development which will make it possible, without any sense of patronage, to shield the African peoples from the frightening spectre of the
calamities they have suffered in recent years with their sad sequel of death and destruction.
111.	Mr. KIMCHE (Israel): I should first like to congratulate the OAU on its very thorough analysis of the critical economic situation in Africa and its wide-ranging proposals submitted to the special session of the General Assembly on behalf of its member Governments in the form of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990? The causes of the crisis were identified and courageously listed and clear strategy was outlined, together with estimates of the African resources available, as well as international resource flows and economic changes required. It is also gratifying to note the unequivocal commitment to the rehabilitation and upgrading of the agricultural sector as the means not only of rural development but also as an “engine of growth” capable of attaining the necessary structural transformation of economies, improved personal income and human resources development.
112.	The State of Israel has used a similar strategy to develop its agricultural self-sufficiency and its diversified technological economy. We therefore wish to add proposals based on our own development experience and observations resulting from our own modest technical assistance and co-operation efforts in Africa over the past 28 years. At the outset, I wish to emphasize that the State of Israel is willing and able to place its considerable expertise and capabilities in this area at the disposal of interested African Governments and the international donor and development agencies in the ensuing multilateral and bilateral programmes arising out of this very important session of the General Assembly. I may add that this expertise of Israel is indeed considerable, both from the point of view of what we have achieved in our own country and in our technical assistance activities in developing countries.
113.	It is clear that the immediate and most pressing symptom of the economic crisis is the problem of negative balance of payments, debt service burdens and adverse terms of trade resulting from Africa’s dependence on primary commodities, inherited economic structure and external shocks. Clearly, international action towards increasing resource flows, reducing the debt burden and seeking a less adverse international trade framework will be necessary. '.
114.	In this respect, Israel has presented à number of well-documented proposals to various United Nations forums in the past dealing with increased capital flows to developing countries. This includes the Horowitz proposal for mass interest subsidizations, the Sanbar proposal for creating an export credit guarantee facility and the Gafney proposal for expanded co-financing.
115.	Israel supports the various domestic agricultural price policy incentive reforms as well as the economic structural adjustment and public enterprise reorganization programmes being undertaken by the African Governments with the assistance of the World Bank and other agencies. However, it is clear that the implementation of thé various policy reforms, structural transformation and absorption capacity is severely constrained by availability of not only financial, but also human resources.
116.	It is necessary to expand vocational training in the rural areas on a massive scale. It is also necessary to equip the available professionals, supervisors, managers and administrators, in both public and private sectors, with the added skills and know-how required for the structural transformation and reforms. In this respect, Israel has developed several modalities of short courses in agriculture, community development, co-operative and labour
organization management and community health services. In over 28 years of co-operation with 110 countries, Israel has welcomed over 27,000 trainees in specialized institutions for this purpose, instructed over 25,000 trainees in their respective countries and sent over 9,000 experts abroad in these fields. Israel is willing to work with African countries and the international community in assisting to relieve one of the most critical constraints to African economic development: that of know-how transfer. The emphasis in this programme should be on the conduct of courses in thé respective African countries and “training of trainers abroad” to ensure a motivating exposure to effective methods, procedures and innovations.
117.	The principal thrust of the transitional economy strategy propounded by Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery is the creation of a new bias in favour of the peripheral sector of the population, mainly in rural areas. This economic policy is based primarily on domestic consumption with primary commodity exports regarded as a means of paying for essential imports only. Economic structure transformation is, therefore, based on the multiplier effects generated primarily by agricultural diversification and intensification.
118.	The planning of a rural intervention programme; and resource allocation to implement the transitionai economy concept that I have outlined should be patterned on Israel’s “Rehovot Approach”, that is, Israel’s rural development strategy adapted to developing countries. This strategy calls for policies and programmes to enable productivity increases and utilize human potential by strengthening production incentives through upgrading the institutional structure of rural production, as well as economic and group action institutions.
119.	lam sure that representatives have all heard of the kibbutz, a communal village—and I presume it to be one of the purest forms of social communism in the world today—of the moshav, which is a co-operative village, or of Nakhal, which diverts youth doing military service to pioneering activities in the field of agriculture, especially in areas which have to be brought under the plough for the first time, such as the Negev areas in the south of our country, for example. We have succeeded in the kibbutz and the moshav in such methods. We have succeeded in developing improved community organizational forms which, together with support systems and knowledge transfer, are the basis of achieving development goals.
120.	We believe that the know-how for achievement of improvements in food and cash crop output exists in most of Africa. The problem is to ensure that this knowledge is transmitted to farmers; that the appropriate incentive environment exists to encourage its application; that farmers will co-operate willingly as output increases and production, as well as marketing, become more complex. Naturally, the local application of national programmes must meet the needs of the predominant farm types in each agro-ecological region of a country and be tailored to the local level of institutional development.
121.	Israel is well known for its achievements in ensuring agricultural productivity under semi-arid conditions. It should be remembered that over half of Israel’s area receives less than 180 millimetres of rainfall annually, and therefore we have had to make great efforts to develop agriculture with very little water—conditions which are comparable to large areas in Africa. Our history goes back over 2,000 years to utilization of flash floods and moisture conservation by rudimentary methods and communal construction of the related works. Our modern
drought management systems vary from farm-level technology to conjunctive use of surface and ground water, regional water transfer, irrigation with brackish water, conservation of flash floods and a national cloud-seeding programme of international repute. We are prepared to place our know-how at the disposal of Africa in developing suitable technologies for the reduction of drought vulnerability in improved traditional agriculture.
122.	Typical areas of applied research and implementation would be the following: genetic improvement of crops for increased yield and/or drought resistance; cultivation techniques to improve moisture conservation as a result of simple water harvesting methods; improved management of livestock herds for increased productivity and drought survival; improved organization and management for smallholder irrigation projects; identification and evaluation of ground-water resources; and improvement of land carrying capacity by wide-scale cloud-seeding operations in regions having a potential for this technique. Israel’s research institutions are prepared to collaborate with researchers in Africa and to provide major input to applied research in the areas I have enumerated, as well as to cooperate in innovative research and development.
123.	Israel wishes to share the fruits of its experience with the peoples of Africa. We are not a large country, nor do we have large budgets at our disposal. We do, however, have a great deal of experience in rural development and agriculture under difficult conditions. Also, as a people with an unparalleled history of being victims of racial persecution, we maintain a large reservoir of goodwill and sympathy for the peoples of Africa, and we are also totally opposed to racialist policies, such as that of apartheid. We are indeed earnestly seeking ways in which we can transfer the relevant aspects of our experience and know-how to Africa.
124.	My delegation has presented to this special session a document entitled “Economic Development and the Transformation of African Agriculture: An Israeli View” [A/S-13/7]. In it, suggested strategies for rural development are analysed and possible Israeli contributions to critical areas of applied research and farmer support are enumerated. Four phases of agricultural development are identified, interventions to assist.transition between phases —from traditional to improved traditional agriculture, from there further to diversified agriculture and, finally, to market-oriented and specialized agriculture—are analysed, and subjects in which Israeli expertise may be relevant are indicated. They would be in three key areas: one is the applied research within development programmes for improved agricultural technology for drought-prone and semi-arid African countries; the second would be using Israel’s international training infrastructure and experience for human resource development, including adapted extension services; and the third would be institution-building at the community and entrepreneur levels, including an approach whereby the public and private sectors join forces to accelerate development. In this respect a proposal is made to include the Institutes for Applied and Desert Research of Ben-Gurion University of the Negev and the Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Zone Development of the Hebrew University for scientific cooperation with the network of African agricultural research institutes.
125.	In this regard, I should like to inform all delegations of a special symposium hosted by my delegation discussing the Israeli experience in agriculture and aridzone research. The symposium will be held tomorrow, 29 May, from 2.30 to 6.30 p.m., in the Dag Hammarskjold
Auditorium. Experts from Israel’s Ministry of Agriculture and Ben-Gurion University will be discussing pertinent topics related to my country’s experience in agriculture with particular emphasis on arid-zone research, and, of course, all representatives are invited. .
126.	The international community has been witness to the terrible tragedy affecting so many people in the Sahel region resulting from drought and conflict. This destitution has affected mainly rural populations, and that is where a new effort must be made to alleviate human suffering. Never before have the people of Israel been so conscious of the need to face a challenge of accelerated development in Africa. This awareness is all the stronger since in the early years of our national revival we had to grapple with the problems of severely degraded lands in a hostile agricultural environment. This was our startingpoint in building an economy—first to feed the nation, then gradually to improve its income-generating opportunities and foreign-currency earnings.
Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
127.	We adopted the Eleventh Commandment formulated so eloquently by the renowned conservationist, the late Walter Lowdermilk, in Jerusalem in 1939. We implemented it so as better to overcome desertification, land degradation and human desolation so typical of some regions of Africa today. I quote:
“Thou shalt inherit the Holy Earth as a faithful steward, conserving its resources and productivity from generation to generation. Thou shalt safeguard thy field from soil erosion, thy living waters from drying up, thy forests from desolation, and protect thy hills from overgrazing by the herds, that thy descendants may have abundance forever.”
128.	We are prepared to enter into immediate discussions with African countries and international organizations with regard to the problems of agriculture and economic development and ways in which Israel may provide the maximum contribution that its capacity may allow.
129.	Mr. SHEARER (Jamaica): Those of us who have followed with keen interest the modern history of Africa cannot but have been painfully aware of the enormous challenges facing the continent, even as we recognized Africa’s promise and immense potential. But this knowledge notwithstanding, my countrymen—and, indeed, the entire international community—were unprepared for the enormous toll in lives, the widespread loss of livelihood and the immensity of the tragedy in human suffering that occurred during the recent emergency situation in Africa. The drought that ravaged a large part of the continent focused international attention in a concerted way on the deep economic and ecological problems that faced Africa. Our gratitude goes to Governments, private organizations and especially individuals for their effective and continuing response to that crisis. As we know, the United Nations itself has played a valuable role in mobilizing and co-ordinating external assistance, particularly through the establishment and excellent work of the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa.
130.	But all these efforts were designed to relieve the emergency. The larger challenge remains before Africa and the international community. It has become unmistakably clear that a confluence of ecological and underlying structural problems has brought the economy of Africa to a critical turning-point. Against the background of the toll in lives exacted by the recent emergency situation and the frightening implications of any repetition, it is not, in our view, an exaggeration to speak of a
historical crossroads for Africa. The action we take here at this special session can help to determine the quality of life that future generations of Africans will enjoy and will help to shape the role that Africa plays in the global economy of the future. It is, therefore, with a feeling of dedication to a great cause that Jamaica participates in this effort by the international community to rise to the larger challenge of Africa’s development.
131.	The economic and social problems affecting Africa are common to many developing countries. Some are structural in nature and others have their roots in external circumstances. These problems stem mainly from the narrow range of primary commodities available for export, fluctuating world market prices for these commodities, a low level of production in the areas of manufactured goods and capital equipment, low productivity in agriculture, rapid population growth, a low level of scientific and technological development and a weak human resource base, particularly in managerial skills. ■
132.	It is axiomatic that each country bears primary responsibility for its own development, and it is evident that Governments in Africa recognize and accept this primary responsibility for Africa’s economic future. It is evident that they also recognize that special measures of an immediate and comprehensive nature have to be implemented if permanent solutions to the manifold problems are to be found. These approaches are reflected not only in the projects that make up Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 but also in the economic policy reforms which individual countries consider will facilitate the successful implementation of the Priority Programme.
133.	Policy reform is a sovereign decision of individual countries. The acknowledgement by individual countries of the need for policy reform and the acceptance by all that it is the right of individual countries to determine the nature and pace of policy reform together constitute the essential basis for international development cooperation. On that basis, international co-operation is strengthened and will yield successful results.
134.	The record shows that African Governments have long been conscious of the importance of development planning nationally, subregionally and regionally. In the last 25 years, many regional and subregional organizations have been established, integration schemes have been initiated, and bilateral and subregional technical and economic co-operation strengthened. Several plans or action programmes have been agreed for different sectors. There was the adoption of the comprehensive Lagos Plan of Action,8 a particularly significant milestone. We recall the Industrial Development Decade for Africa; the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa; the Regional Plan of Action to Combat the Impacts of Drought in Africa, adopted by the ECA Conference of Ministers in May 1984; and the Harare Declaration on the food crisis in Africa, adopted at the Thirteenth FAO Regional Conference for Africa, among others.
135.	The record also shows that bilateral and multilateral donors have recognized specific features of the African-situation and have reacted to those features through special measures consistent with the classification of many African countries as “least developed” or through aid and co-operation arrangements working through IDA, through UNDP, through the Lome Conventions and through other instruments.
136.	We must be candid, however, and say that the results achieved have not always been commensurate with the plans set forth and the efforts made, nor have the
resources provided by the international community been anywhere near commensurate with what is required.
137.	Jamaica hopes that a new chapter can be written— a new era ushered in—with Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery. The Programme is courageous. It is practical. We think it is affordable. African leaders have put together a package which is a judicious mix of State-sector and private-enterprise co-operation. The plan recognizes that genuine efforts must be made to improve the management of the African economies and to rationalize public investment policies. It points out that the positive role of the private sector is also to be encouraged through well-defined and consistent policies. The plan shows flexibility, and at the same time does not compromise the right of each country to follow its chosen development path.
138.	A study of the 17 countries most affected by the drought and famine of 1984-1985 in Africa shows that, per capita, in 1983 these countries accounted for only $107 of world imports and exports. A look at 15 Latin American and Caribbean States shows that those countries accounted for three and one-half times more world imports and exports—that is, $374 per capita. The crude inference is that by simply raising the standard of those African countries to the 1983 level of trade flow of the Latin American countries, world trade could increase by at least some $49 billion, plus a further amount resulting from multiplier effects. Taking into account the interdependence of the world economy, this increase in world trade not only would benefit millions of persons in Africa, but would also, through deliveries of machinery, equipment and services, benefit the developed countries and many other countries that produce those goods and services.
139.	But no plan, however well intentioned, however well thought out, will succeed without support. Equally, no plan can succeed unless it is started.
140.	The Priority Programme calls for overall funding of $128.1 billion between this year and 1990. Of this amount, the African countries have undertaken to provide $82.5 billion from their own resources. The additional amount needed from external sources is $45.6 billion. My delegation joins in calling upon the international community to support this effort fully and to make its commitments in a form which will leave no doubt as to its resolve to ensure a proper and effective implementation of the Programme. We are encouraged by the strong support already expressed at this session by so many Governments and the specific commitment of additional resources by some countries to the Priority Programme. 141. Other developing countries can also assist. In this regard we call on our sister developing countries to extend their programmes of South-South co-operation consistent with the needs of the African countries. We also call on non-governmental organizations, foundations and private individuals to be responsive to requests for assistance, especially to fill gaps in the range of skills that are needed.
142.	But there is another aspect of international cooperation which must be emphasized. If the tremendous national efforts which are being expended on the Priority Programme are not to be frustrated, there will need to be important changes in the international environment.
143.	First of all, the attainment of higher levels of economic activity in African countries and the assurance that Africa is able to generate the level of resources needed to meet investment targets set in the Priority Programme will require at a minimum more remunerative and more stable commodity prices, removal of protectionist measures by the industrialized countries, increased
flows of direct investment and easier access for manufactures and semi-manufactures to important markets.
144.	Equally important’ as (he measures I have just mentioned is the need to’ take steps’to deal with the pressing problem of Africa’s external debt. It is noted that while the Priority Programme calls for external resources of $9.1 billion per annum, Africa’s annual debtservicing obligations will be in the range of between $14.6 and $24.5 billion. My delegation fully agrées that urgent measures must be taken by the international community to alleviate Africa’s debt-service burden and thus enable these countries to utilize scarce resources, as far as possible, for economic recovery and development.
145.	Then, a peaceful and stable international political environment is also important to the success of development efforts. In Africa-we continue to’face the longstanding issue of racism and white-minority domination in South Africa. Namibia continues to be illegally occupied by the South African régime, and that country’s national resources are being exploited without consideration for the economic development and well-being of the indigenous population. Significant and scarce resources are being deployed by front-line States in order to secure their borders against racist aggression.
146.	The relentless campaign of military aggression and economic sabotage waged by the Pretoria régime against its neighbours forces a number of African States to spend large additional sums on armaments for their security. Resolution of the South African and Namibian issues and the consequent easing of tensions would allow for alternative use of those resources for development purposes in those countries. ' ' • ' '
147.	The international community has an obligation to ensure that a solution is forthcoming as soon as possible. We can no longer tolerate a situation in which scarce human and financial resources are diverted from development purposes. By its backward, racist policies South Africa not only holds human beings in bondage but also seriously damages the prospects for economic development in southern Africa. That régime’s recent terrorist attacks against Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe starkly reveal once again that the countries of southern Africa have no choice but to spend disproportionate sums in their effort to.secure their borders and even their cities from aggression. Jamaica joins in condemning in the strongest terms the brazen, savage banditry of the callous racists in Pretoria. . .
148.	In this special session the task is now to develop a final document which not only is action-oriented but provides a firm basis on which Africa can proceed to address its manifold structural problems, confident in the knowledge that the required levels of external supplementary financing will be forthcoming.
149.	A mammoth task lies ahead. Africa has committed itself to meeting the challenge. The international community can do no less. Let us lay the basis at this special session for a new and more fruitful period of co-operation with Africa which will create opportunities for improving the well-being of its peoples, strengthen the contribution of African countries to the health of the international economy and ensure that the recent tragedy of widespread drought and famine is never allowed to recur, though it will remain in our memories as a challenge to the will and the capabilities of all mankind. '
150.	Mr. MURIN (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from Russian): First, of all, I wish to express our pleasure at the election of the President of this special session of the General Assembly devoted to the critical economic situation in Africa. We welcome the convening of this
session and are ready to work in order to contribute to the achievement of just and effective results.
151.	In our opinion, this session is one of the most important international political events this year. It reflects many of the acute problems and contradictions that are causing such anxiety in today’s world. The misfortune which has stricken tire entire continent of Africa cannot, in our interdependent world, fail to have an impact on. the whole range of international relations. '
152.	' The Czechoslovak delegation intends to strive at this session, together with other socialist countries, African countries and all other countries pursuing a realistic policy, for the preparation of an effective, comprehensive programme to overcome the.critical economic and social situation in Africa. Our determination to engage in such co-operation is based on the conclusions of the XVIIth Congress of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, which emphasized:
“We regard the peoples that have liberated themselves as our friends and partners in the struggle in the cause of peace and progress, and together with them we shall continue to work to eliminate the dangerous hotbeds of tension and bring about a restructuring’of international economic relations on a just, and democratic basis.” ' "
153.	The causes of the situation which has arisen in Africa are complex and multifaceted. They have been in the process of formation for several centuries, comprising both the harsh colonial past of the African countries and the neo-colonial present that is being imposed upon them now. Only the thorough analysis of these causes will make it possible to determine and agree upon reliable solutions.
154.	There is no doubt that first among the fundamental reasons for the situation in the African continent is its colonial past. The long colonial enslavement and exploitation of Africa by imperialist States led to a distortion of the social and economic structures of the African peoples and to an exceedingly disadvantageous and unnatural position for Africa in the overall structure of the inter-, national division of labour, so that its economic dependence and poverty have reached ever higher levels. One of the major problems that African countries have to . resolve, with the assistance of the international community, is that of overcoming this situation. If we talk today about Africa’s colonial past, it is because we wish to emphasize not only the historical responsibility of imperialism for creating the critical situation which has come about there, but also, and primarily, the fact that neocolonialism, that offspring of colonialism, is today both an impediment and the principal threat to the independent social and economic development of Africa and to the solution of its problems.
155.	We advocate precisely such a diagnosis and approach. We are fully aware of the gravity of the economic and social problems of the African countries. Our Government and the Czechoslovak people fully support the efforts of Africans to rid themselves of the grievous inheritance of the colonial era. However, we are against short-term solutions with strings attached, which could make the critical economic and social situation of African countries even worse and impede their independent development. .
156.	Today, Africa is a huge crucible bubbling with conflict and with internal and external contradictions. The fact that this special session is taking place in an even more tense and explosive international atmosphere is a clear reflection of the recent worrisome events affecting a number of African countries. The attack on Libya, an independent African State, is more than an outrage upon
human morality and international law; together with economic blackmail and the use of military force on the African continent, it manifests a qualitatively new form of State terrorism and the policy of armed neo-colonial-ism. That is the substance of the well-known doctrine of “neo-globalism”..
157,	The barbarous armed attack in the United States mould perpetrated last week by South Africa against three independent African States has been resolutely rejected and vigorously condemned by the Czechoslovak people and Government. That attack is further proof of South Africa’s aggressive policy, which has elevated apartheid and terrorism to the level of State policy, marking a dangerous new step towards heightened tension in southern Africa.
158.	Let us examine the policy pursued by imperialism since the collapse of the old colonial system with a view to unprecedented increases in the arms race. The goal is to use force of arms to halt further progressive change in the world and to achieve decisive supremacy over socialist and developing countries. Nor is it a secret that the military programmes of developed capitalist States are increasingly financed through the net outflow of resources from the developing countries, especially through transnational corporations. In Africa, that outflow has surpassed $9 billion. That is one of the main motivating forces of contemporary neo-colonialism.
159; That is why we stress that there can be no search for a solution to the pressing economic and social problems of African and other developing countries without due regard for the struggle to avert the threat of war, to eliminate nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, to avoid the militarization of outer space and to reduce military expenditures substantially. In our view, the solution of the problems of Africa should be a step towards the establishment of an integrated system of international economic security, as has been advocated by the socialist countries. Such a solution could not fail to take account of the fact that the problems faced by African countries are by no means confined to their continent.
160.	We would recall that the essence of colonialism— which caused the poverty and economic backwardness of the overwhelming majority of developing countries— manifested itself in the same way everywhere: colonial military and political coercion imposing distortions of the international division of labour in order gradually to draw individual countries and whole continents into total dependence on the former metropolitan Powers. Today’s neo-colonialism essentially manifests itself in a similarly uniform way, by using the old structures of the division of labour created during the colonial period to undermine the political independence of liberated countries, turning them into appendages for raw materials and sources for financing their militaristic policies. To that end, use is made of capitalism’s entire arsenal of economic, political and even military means of coercion, especially the whole policy of granting credit, the perpetuation of debt, and the power and machinery of the mammoth transnational corporations which have deeply penetrated the economies of the developing countries.
161.	The danger of so-called pragmatism is that attempts will be made to solve Africa’s deeply rooted economic and social problems in a way that primarily favours the interests of foreign capital. Attempts to convince the Africans of a readiness to give them “needed assistance” contingent upon such things as “fundamental reforms” or the “free interplay of market forces” and so on make us wonder whether all this is not being done merely to raise the level of production in African countries to an
extent and in a manner that best meets the needs of the transnational corporations, thus tightening the noose of merciless exploitation and political diktat around those countries. Is not the aim of this to influence African countries to abandon, in exchange for illusory assistance, the results of their long struggle for political independence and national sovereignty over their own resources?
162.	We resolutely oppose this special session’s being used for the international legalization of neo-colonialist practices towards either Africa or developing countries as a whole. We feel it would be a great mistake to permit the burgeoning machinery of the transnational monopolies to get completely beyond control. We are not prepared to agree that economic assistance should be conditional upon far-reaching political demands or upon the restriction of State sovereignty. We reject attempts to instil in developing countries fatalistic ideas about the impossibility of solving their economic and social problems without outside interference.
163.	In our view, what is needed to overcome the critical economic situation in Africa is, above all, efforts by the African countries themselves to strengthen their sovereignty over their natural resources and all their economic activities. They should limit the negative impact of the activities of foreign capital—primarily the transnational corporations—and hit the net outflow of financial resources from Africa. They should increase the role of the State sector, expand economic planning and make management of sectors of the national economy more effective, bearing in mind the need to eliminate the onesidedness and monocultural orientation of the development process in most African countries and to bring about further progressive social and economic change, including democratic agrarian reform. A special role should be played by the foreign trade of the African countries. We believe this should promote the strengthening of their national economies in order to eliminate all protectionist and discriminatory obstacles to the access of the products of African countries to world markets.
164.	Czechoslovakia, like the other socialist countries, is convinced that these issues are inseparable from the task of strengthening international peace and security, curbing the arms race, bringing about a radical restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis and creating international economic security. They are equally inseparable from the task of fully eradicating those vestiges of the colonial era such as racism and the apartheid régime of South Africa.
165.	On the basis of these positions of principle we shall determine our approach to the question of the final documents of this special session in order that they not become for the African peoples a Trojan Horse.
166.	We intend also to continue actively to develop mutually advantageous economic, trade, scientific and technological co-operation with African countries on a multilateral and bilateral basis. Everyone is aware of the contribution the States members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance have made to the economic development of the African States, as well as the prospects for such co-operation in the years 1986 to 1990. To the extent of our capacity we shall provide the countries of the African continent with assistance free of charge. The volume of our assistance to Africa last year amounted to 1.2 billion Czechoslovak koruny. Our preferential scheme applies to 48 African countries, including 24 of the least developed.
167.	Our programmes of bilateral co-operation with African countries are based on equitable and democratic
principles. They are intended in particular to build productive capacity in new spheres of industry, to overcome the consequences of natural disasters and also to train African specialists. For example, last year in Africa with our assistance four major industrial facilities started operations, and seven such facilities are under construction. More than 1,500 African students are being trained in Czechoslovakia.
168.	Our programmes of economic assistance to African countries, including the provision of credits, are protected against sharp fluctuations in the market and are guaranteed by the stability of the socialist economic system.
169.	We believe that multilateral economic assistance to the African countries, inter alia through the United Nations system, should be built on a just and democratic basis commensurate with these considerations. Measures elaborated to provide the African countries with genuine assistance in overcoming their critical situation must be balanced and must assure comprehensive long-term development. It is in that spirit that we intend to act at this special session.
170.	Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): One of the greatest challenges to the United Nations in the 1980s is the economic and social crisis currently afflicting the African continent. As a direct result of this crisis, for many African countries development is now a goal deferred. The emphasis at present is on simple survival. It is a crisis that springs from a mix of factors both internal and external to the continent and one which, because of the diversity of the African continent, is more readily apparent in some parts than in others.
171.	Speaking at this stage of the debate there is no need for my delegation to enter into the details of that crisis; that has been so well done by the current OAU Chairman, Mr. Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal |/si meeting]. What is more, our familiarity with its elements has already been enriched by extensive debates both in the Economic and Social Council and in this Assembly in the last two years.
172.	I would merely say, in general terms, that the African continent is afflicted in varying degrees with acute problems of poverty, hunger and economic and social dislocation often exacerbated by political and economic developments elsewhere in the world. While the expectations of its peoples are high, economic dependence or instability shackles many of them to an economic system which can fulfil neither these expectations nor the requirements of an independent world of free nations.
173.	The holding of this special session dedicated to the problems facing Africa is at once a result and a manifestation of the heightened world-wide sensitivity to that situation in Africa. Depending on its outcome, which my delegation hopes and expects will be a positive one for Africa, the Assembly will have demonstrated once again the vitality of the principle of international organization and the constructive role that the United Nations, when effectively utilized, can play in our world.
174.	Guyana’s participation, therefore, is not routine. While this participation is motivated in the first place by our solidarity with the peoples of Africa, we believe that in so doing we share the responsibility to ensure a secure economic future for Africa, which is essential for global well-being. We are also drawing critical attention, once again, to an international environment which is having crippling effects on the situation of developing countries in general.
175.	Our participation is also a contribution to strengthening the Organization’s role. The United Nations has
already played a valuable and indispensable role in forging and giving practical expression to the bonds of international solidarity, bringing life and hope to the more than 30 million people of Africa afflicted by the most devastating drought in recent history. This session provides an opportunity for us all, through the strengthening of the bonds of partnership with Africa in the critical period now before it, to advance further the spirit of global community for which the Organization is so well suited to be the working structure.
176.	Now that the excesses of drought and famine have been alleviated, there is a need to address, with the same urgency, the fundamental and longer-term problems of structural transformation and the initiation of a process of self-sustained growth and development in Africa. In this regard my delegation would like to pay a richly deserved tribute to the States of Africa, which, pursuing the initiative begun in 1980 in the Lagos Plan of Action,8 devoted most of the twenty-first session of the OAU Assembly in Addis Ababa last July to an in-depth examination of the crisis facing Africa and adopted Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 which is indeed only the latest in a series of initiatives by Africa for coming to grips with the problems facing that continent. In that Programme Africa takes a hard and frank look at itself, at its strengths no less than its weaknesses, and resolves that the task of economic recovery must begin inside Africa. It is an action-oriented document which lays the groundwork for lasting structural change. That Programme constitutes an assertion by Africa of its readiness and its determination to bear the major portions of the task of economic recovery.
177.	The Priority Programme correctly assigns priority consideration to agriculture. Inadequate food production has easily been the most serious dimension of the current crisis facing Africa. Of course, that priority attention to agriculture must necessarily include building up agricultural and industrial infrastructure and a skilled labour force. In keeping with that thrust, the expansion of education, health, electricity, transport and related facilities to meet the needs of rural populations is essential, and the commitment of African States in this regard to the Priority Programme is unequivocal.
178.	But, if the Priority Programme is a reassertion of African sovereignty and independence, it is also a summons to intensified and more meaningful international co-operation. It is difficult, indeed, to overstate the tremendous challenge posed to international co-operation by the severity of the African situation. At this critical stage, such co-operation must not falter. Ways must be found to strengthen international support for Africa’s recovery and development efforts.
179.	Neither domestic reform nor external support can, alone, guarantee a secure future for Africa. Hence there is a need for a sharing of responsibility. Those industrialized States which have recently increased their assistance to Africa in response to the present crisis, whether through rescheduling of loans, the adoption of a system of grant aid or in some other way, are to be complimented. There is need for more flexibility and innovativeness in international co-operation with Africa in accordance with the urgent demands of the current situation. There is a need to match Africa’s determination and the example of those African States which have already begun to implement major structural reforms with the assurance of increased resources on a predictable basis and of technical support. In the interdependent world in which we live, such cooperation is not an imperative of the future security of Africa alone; it could also be an imperative of that
of the developed countries in general. Since increased resources naturally mean greater problems of co-ordination not only among donors but also among recipients, there is need to give special consideration to this aspeét. 180. But even in conditions of improved international co-operation it goes without saying that an immediate improvement in the harsh external economic environment is necessary if the downward spiral in many African countries is to be reversed. Among other considerations, there is need for greater access to the markets of developed countries by African products. The sale of Africa’s raw-material exports needs to be protected against violent fluctuations in commodity prices, the imperatives of diversification notwithstanding. My delegation hopes that the new IMF Structural Adjustment Facility will operate in such a manner as to make conditionality more flexible and more responsive to the needs of African States. There is also a.need for an improvement in the levels of flows of official development assistance to those States. My delegation also sincerely hopes that the eighth replenishment of IDA will be at such a level as to allow African States in general, as, indeed, other developing countries, to derive suitable benefits.
181.	There are also other aspects of the international environment, as the Priority Programme correctly states —such as the rising tide of protectionism, exorbitant interest rates, the crushing burden of debt and debtservicing obligations—which together aggravate the crisis in Africa. This special session must take political decisions which will provide real relief to African States in these and other areas.
182.	The Priority Programme, therefore, also represents a framework for a new relationship of co-operation between Africa and the international community designed to usher in an era of economic recovery on that continent and to set its countries on a course of self-sustained development. My delegation sincerely hopes that the opportunity provided by this session will be utilized for a full-blooded commitment by all, in particular the developed countries, to shoulder their share of the responsibility to ensure a secure future for Africa. That commitment would be most appropriately expressed in a suitable programme of action, with appropriate follow-up machinery at both the national and the international levels.
183.	For Guyana’s part, we are pleased to provide, to the extent that our resources allow, technical training facilities in our specialized institutions for a number of students from African States. Guyana also has an active partnership with African members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group [ACP] of the Lomé Convention. The Group, consisting of 66 African, Caribbean and Pacific States, was formed after the signature of the first ACP/EEC Convention at Lomé and the Georgetown Agreement in 1975. Since the first Lomé Convention, and through two successive Conventions entered into with the European Community, in 1979 and 1984, the ACP Group has formulated trade, economic and cultural co-operation with the now 12-member European Community.
184.	In the light of all the foregoing, this special session needs to be marked by and to lead to decisions on concrete action by the international community, in particular the developed countries. No other response would be worthy of this Assembly. Let us not lose sight of the grave crisis in Africa to which we are called to respond, or of the seriousness and urgency with which we are summoned to make that response. The solutions are not necessarily simple ones, nor will results be produced overnight. But let us determine that at this session we will make a new beginning in a new relationship of co-operation with
Africa. Let us all determine that we shall act resolutely in this regard and that we shall not fail.
185.	Mr. ETEKI MBOUMOUA (Cameroon) (interpretation from French): I wish first to congratulate the President on his unanimous election to guide the work of this special session, which has the difficult task of adopting concrete proposals to contribute to Africa’s economic recovery and the revitalization of the authentic development process of our continent. That expression of confidence bears eloquent witness to the pleasing, responsible and competent way in which he has presided over the work of the fortieth session.
186.	The President of Senegal, Mr. Diouf, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, was the spokesman for Africa in his moving, comprehensive and inspired statement during this debate on the critical economic situation in Africa [1st meeting]. Nevertheless, the OAU believed that in addition to hearing that general statement the General Assembly should have its attention drawn to certain particularly sensitive sectors in Africa’s determined quest for development. Hence, speaking on behalf of the African States, and in particular of the States of central Africa, I have the delicate task of addressing more specifically the human resources problem. 187. Of all the subjects emphasized in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 and in the document submitted by our continent to this special session, that of human resources is clearly one of the fundamental matters in any consideration of Africa’s economic and social development. Indeed, the management of human resources is the driving force of any economic development action. It determines a country’s ability to begin development efforts and to formulate, carry out and evaluate development projects. In other words, while being the object of development, the human being is also its essential agent. On the quality of human resources depends the development of the other available resources and the transformation of poor countries into prosperous ones.
188.	The African Governments fully recognize the role of the human factor in the development process. They also reaffirm that human resources, like other vital resources, should be carefully planned within the framework of national objectives and priorities. To that end, the African countries have made commendable efforts since their independence to develop their human resources, and important progress has been made. Comprehensive policies for planning, developing and using human resources have been adopted with the aim of integrating those resources into the national development policies and plans. Particular attention has been given to the great dependence of the African countries on foreign expertise, which is a drain on currency and a not inconsiderable component of foreign aid and assistance.
189.	The interest shown in the development of human resources has gone beyond national borders; it has been studied thoroughly and concerted action has been taken at the regional level. Our heads of State or Government stressed in the Lagos Plan of Action8 the importance of a skilled labour force as a decisive factor in economic and social development, particularly in connection with increasing revenues and creating jobs.
190.	In Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery the heads of State reaffirmed their conviction in that respect, in paragraph 31, stating that:
“The attainment of the objectives of the LPA [Lagos Plan of Action] and FAL [Final Act of Lagos] depends, in the final analysis, on the development of the wide range of human resources required for the formulation,
implementation and monitoring of programmes covering the entire spectrum and sectoral activities in the economic development process.”
191.	It must be recognized, however, that serious problems remain and that we must think of ways and means of promoting self-directed and self-sustained development.
192.	In fact, on our continent, education and training policies, planning systems, institutions, methods and services have not made it possible to strengthen as effectively as we would wish the necessary infrastructure for human resources to make their optimum contribution to the development process. In a number of cases a significant percentage of the population still does not enjoy the benefits of education. In general terms, the content of education programmes is far from meeting the increased demands of speedier growth and development. The efforts to give priority to technical education, to co-ordinate formal and informal education and to reorient the latter in order the better to meet development needs have not produced the desired results. Africa therefore has a shortage of skilled manpower and technical personnel, a high rate of unemployment, even among those who have followed a course of education, and an under-utilization of the skilled labour force at the middle and higher levels. 193. It is clear that we cannot speak of human resources in development without emphasizing certain specific aspects, such as population, education and training, women and development, health and participation. The continent’s population is now growing at an average rate of 3 per cent a year and should reach 880 million by the year 2000 and nearly 2 billion by 2025. Nevertheless, it should be pointed out that there are considerable differences between population growth rates in different parts of the continent. Those differences should be recognized.
194.	Clearly, such rapid population growth has socioeconomic implications that need to be taken into account. In fact, the African countries have recognized that they will all have to give particular attention, in accordance with the Kilimanjaro Programme of Action for African Population and Self-Reliant Development,9 to a demographic policy that takes into account, inter alia, high fertility rates, morbidity and mortality rates, rapid urbanization, migration from the rural areas to the cities and from one rural area to another, the problems of children and young people and the need to protect the environment. All of those factors will have to be considered in an integrated way in order to ensure compatibility between demographic trends, the human factor and a desirable pace of growth and development.
195.	Therefore, a population policy should not be seen solely in terms of the limitation of births, but, rather, in terms of the management of the different components of a population needing to be fed and maintained in good health, making up a viable economic market and competing fully at the international level. Hence the programme “Health for All by the Year 2000”, proclaimed by WHO, should receive increased support from the international community for urgent implementation in Africa. The same applies to programmes for self-sufficiency in food, drinking water and housing—all factors that can give the African continent a better chance of more viable development.
196.	With regard to education and training, a worthwhile return from our education system requires a reassessment of programmes in order to adapt them to African sociocultural realities and the needs of the labour market. It is deplorable that our programmes are not sufficiently geared to the specific employment needs of the rural and urban sectors. Moreover, training, health and nutrition
programmes are not seen within a comprehensive framework of the development of human resources.
197.	In a context which requires the creation of a large number of jobs, we need the preparation of programmes that are action-oriented and that can foster initiative and the spirit of enterprise. Our educational systems must promote the training of skilled middle-level cadres that are properly equipped to face the technological changes of our modern day, since they are greatly lacking in our economies.
198.	As has been stressed in a UNDP study, the link between technology and employment cannot be underestimated. Since it defines the development of human resources as the use of the total potential for economic and social progress, the creation of jobs and the effective utilization of skilled manpower are necessarily important elements.
199.	Many agencies of the United Nations system have studied the relation between technology and employment. We should stress the interdependence of technological problems, the latest technology and employment problems. That multifaceted interdependence is seen in education and training which enables manpower to adapt to changes in technology and to new methods of production; in the creation of an adaptable technology in an institutional infrastructure which makes possible the identification of the potential offered by new technologies —micro-electronics and genetic engineering and research, for example; in the adaptation of technology obtained abroad; in the link between research laboratories, industry and agriculture; in the co-ordination of research and development; and in the creation of job possibilities to absorb competent local personnel and thus combat the brain drain. Along the same lines, we certainly support the contribution made by the President of the Preparatory Committee for this session, who has stressed the need better to organize research and to plan programmes that take an endogenous approach to specifically African problems.
200.	It cannot be stressed enough that African women play an important role in the development of our continent, but it is important to point out that “women in development” is not a subject that can be reduced to a simple question of man versus woman. Quite the contrary, the primary place that women occupy in our economies is one of the key factors in our development strategy. In order to transform this recognition into concrete action, it is necessary for our Governments, the international community and development agencies to adopt policies in all sectors that make it possible to strengthen that role and to increase the participation of African women in the decision-making process.
201.	Lastly, I should like to raise the important issue of popular participation. It is increasingly clear that no action in the interest of the masses can be successful without their concrete and active participation. It is therefore essential to involve the people fully at the different stages of the development process by establishing conditions conducive to the development of creativity and the spirit of enterprise in the private sector as well as the public sector and likely to lay foundations for economic and social justice, foundations which are the leavening agent for the commitment and enthusiasm of the people and, at the same time, the goal of our development strategies.
202.	Aware of this need, Africa has pledged to take the necessary corrective measures. The Programme for Economic Recovery and the document we have submitted to this session define the objectives, guidelines and priorities
of Africa in this field. For the short and medium term, it is a matter of reorienting education and training policies and programmes, improving methods and techniques, strengthening the institutional infrastructures and minimizing the brain drain. In the long term, it will be necessary to rationalize the institutional infrastructures and to formulate and harmonize post-university manpower policies.
203.	No one would question that the development of human resources should be considered not only as a tool for economic growth or as a prerequisite for that growth, but also as the very objective of development. To develop human resources is to make the best use of human potential for economic and social progress. The concern for considering the human dimension of development as a goal as well as a means cannot be disassociated from the concern for creating employment and meeting essential needs. It has been said that however rich and fertile the soil may be, a continent is first and foremost rich through its children. Of all Africa’s assets, the one that has been developed least for the time being, or developed in the least rational way, is no doubt the human factor.
204.	The task is not an easy one. As the concept of developing human resources is worked out, the trend has been to translate the experience of the industrialized countries without always appreciating, as we should, the diversity of cultures, traditions, values and ecosystems. That is why our continent should be supported in its efforts to strengthen its endogenous capacity with respect to planning and the development of human resources.
205.	It is important for the donor countries and the international organizations to evaluate their programmes and activities in connection with the management of human resources in Africa so that they can better respond to the aspirations described in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery. It is important that measures be taken to co-ordinate and harmonize the management of regional and subregional activities for human resources; that the United Nations prepare specific programmes for planning the development and use of human resources; that donors allocate adequate resources for the implementation of these programmes; that due attention be given to the human resources factor in each sectoral project and that necessary measures be taken to ensure the availability and use of those resources; and, finally, at the national or regional level, that scientific and technical research centres be developed to promote the integration of research in the African development process, the progressive Africanization of research teams and Africa’s access to the most recent technology and know-how.
206.	In considering solutions to Africa’s current serious development problems, we must not lose sight of the fact that contemporary society has entered into the postindustrial era, which is characterized by the omnipresence of sophisticated technology, in particular the increasingly common use of computer science, which has now entered into all spheres of life. This must be taken into account by Africans because the appropriate use of this sophisticated technology can help Africa to overcome its development lag.
207.	As was so well stated by President Houphouët-Boigny of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, when in March 1985 he opened the conference of the intergovernmental office for computer science on the subject “Computer Technology and Sovereignty”, today the path towards economic development may take technological short-cuts within the reach of all, thanks to computer technology. He added that computer technology gives our countries
the historic possibility of meeting all the challenges of underdevelopment—technological underdevelopment, mental blocks, lack of competitiveness and so forth.
208.	In connection with management, the use of the computer makes for greater effectiveness and represents considerable progress. Furthermore, some activities can be improved through image transmission by satellite, such as work in cartography, the management of natural resources such as forests and underground water, the exploration of mineral resources, the control of erosion and desertification and so on. And at last experts seem to be giving particular attention to the application of biotechnology in resolving some of the important problems in agriculture. They can predict such things as the fixing of atmospheric nitrogen by plants, thus improving the fertility of the soil while decreasing the use of imported fertilizers. They can also stimulate the growth of trees by improving their nitrogen and phosphorous nutrients, which facilitates the reforestation of soil that is not very fertile or conducive to agriculture. Thanks to such progress, in the future it will be possible to improve significantly, by the use of biotechnology, the health of both humans and animals. The African countries should therefore be able to exploit all those possibilities.
209.	The Declaration of Yamoussoukro which was adopted at the conclusion of the conference of the intergovernmental office for computer sciences, to which I have just referred, indicates that one of the main keys to the solution of Africa’s development problem is the rational management of information in all its forms. That Declaration also stresses that the primary contribution of computer science is in the transformation of mental structures which it brings about and stimulates, thus promoting innovation and creativity, and challenging the status quo. These are the objectives, which must include also the rational development of Africa’s human resources.
210.	Because in the immediate past it has benefited from an outpouring of solidarity by the international community, because it is familiar with that community’s generous readiness for international co-operation, and because what is at stake is the fate and the destiny of man, Africa knows that it can rely today on this Assembly to give body and substance to the message of solidarity transmitted to it by Africa.
211.	Mr. BIRMINGHAM (Ireland): There is a clear and pressing need for immediate and longer-term action by the international community to help overcome the critical economic situation in Africa. The General Assembly recognized the urgency of this need when it decided by consensus last December to convene this special session. The international community now has the opportunity to concentrate on the long-term challenges facing Africa and to guard against the recurrence of the tragic famine which has so recently engaged the sympathy and the attention of the entire world.
212.	We recognize that vague declarations of good intentions are not enough; this special session must see the adoption of action-oriented and concrete measures. It is our hope that a new understanding will be reached whereby the African countries,, with the full support of the international community, can look forward to a period of sustained growth aimed at ensuring that the structural problems highlighted in recent years by drought and famine can be overcome. I see this session as not only a test of the political will of the international community to share actively in the tasks of reconstruction and rehabilitation in Africa, but also an important test of our willingness to make the world system work and of our
determination to solve substantive world problems by common action.
213.	This special session is a unique event, not least in that it was convened to address the particular problems of a single continent. The African countries themselves have prepared an analysis and programme for action. This formed the starting point of the preparatory process for the special session. Africa has accepted responsibility for its own development. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the OAU in 1985, is a valuable survey and framework programme for future action. Many African Governments have made courageous efforts to modify their economic and social policies and to reform their administrative systems. They have sought to counter the severe problems caused by drought, desertification, unbalanced population growth and environmental degradation. They have been concerned to stress agricultural development and food self-sufficiency in order to ensure sustainable economic growth and social development. In these circumstances it is not unreasonable for Africa to request the international community to find ways to accept its responsibilities and to share in the African countries* efforts to ensure the best conditions for their advancement with new or expanded supporting measures.
214.	In my view, progress in Africa depends upon advancement in a number of interlinked areas.
21-5. Internally, political stabilization is necessary. There must be social and economic justice for all sectors of society in order that all can participate in and benefit from the development process. Economic growth must be based on the real potential of each individual country. High priority must be given to agriculture and rural development, to communications and to the maximization of human resources. Regional co-operation among African States should be pursued.
216.	Externally, there must be a greater sensitivity on the part of the industrialized countries to the needs of the developing world, especially in regard to debt and to trade. .
217.	The international community, working within existing institutions, must make every effort to help African nations resolve their liquidity crisis. While adhering to the case-by-case approach to the debt problems of individual countries in Africa, the international community should recognize the efforts of the African nations which have adopted growth-oriented policies that allow for sustained development. Ireland fully supports the principle advocated by the Development Committee of the World Bank, that no country should be the net recipient of funds from African countries which are endeavouring to implement adjustment programmes. We applaud the decision of a number of donor countries to remit all least developed countries’ official development assistance debts and to provide moratoriums for repayments by low-income African countries where suitable policy conditions can be agreed. Also, Ireland supports a generous level of replenishment of IDA, at least $12 billion, which would allow it to carry out its programme in the coming years at least at current levels. In addition, Ireland supports the proposed general capital increase of the World Bank.
218.	Again, the international community must adopt a flexible and sensitive approach to the problems of least developed countries in the forthcoming round of multilateral trade negotiations. The African countries cannot achieve their development objectives if they are denied the opportunity to increase their export earnings substantially. Official development assistance flows must be
maintained and increased in the medium term. African Governments need those flows to help execute the necessary economic and social programmes required for development. They also need, as the World Bank has pointed out, firm and unambiguous commitments by the international community in order to be able to plan over a period of years with a reasonable certainty of stability of official development assistance flows.
219.	A significant trend in the evolution of relations between North and South in recent years has been a shift of emphasis from the efforts of Governments and international organizations to the efforts of private individuals and voluntary organizations. In recent years this trend is best exemplified by the achievements of Bob Geldof, a fellow countryman of mine, in particular by his inspiration and organization of Band Aid, Live Aid and Sports Aid, which to. date have collected hundreds of millions of dollars for humanitarian relief and development projects in Africa. As was noted here yesterday by the Nigerian Foreign .Minister [2nd meeting], Bob Geldofs success brings home to us the lesson that development co-operation is so important that it should not be left to Governments alone. Historically, too, in my country, as in many others, private individuals and organizations were engaged in development work long before Governments were involved. Voluntary organizations have a number of advantages: their organizational structures are flexible, decisions are made swiftly; their practical experience and knowledge are invaluable resources; and what they lack in management structures and resources they make up for in efficiency, dedication and enthusiasm. Moreover, voluntary organizations, through their direct appeal to the general population, act as a powerful influence on public opinion: they stimulate interest in development work, often to a highly sophisticated and discriminating standard, and spur our citizens to make a concrete expression of their concern and solidarity. . .
220.	Long before my country achieved its independence —indeed, while most of Africa was still ruled by the then colonial Powers—Irish men and women travelled from their homeland to work as missionaries in Africa, many giving a lifetime of service and dedication to African people. Their vocation was primarily religious and charitable. Before Governments became involved in what we now call development co-operation, these Irish missionaries built schools and hospitals and helped the social development of the peoples among whom they lived. The starting point of their thinking was the importance of the dignity of each individual human being and the need for all to share in the benefits of social and economic progress.
221.	The work carried out by voluntary organizations, missionaries and private individuals is seen by my Government as a necessary and valuable complement to official development co-operation. We in Ireland are especially mindful of this side of our heritage in our relations with developing countries. '
222.	The Irish Development Co-operation Programme is necessarily small, but it is growing at a relatively satisfactory rate. Between 1974 and 1984, it grew from a few million pounds annually to almost 34 million pounds. Between 1984 and 1987, it is expected to expand by almost 47 per cent, to 50 million pounds. ■ :
223.	Ireland remains committed to achieving the United-Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product [GAP]. We have been increasing our assistance by 0.15 per cent of GNP annually, and it is expected to reach 0.275 per cent of GNP next year. It is significant that over 10 years we have managed to move from 15 per cent
of the Development Assistance Committee’s [DAC] average rate of official development assistance as a percentage of GNP to just over 70 per cent of that rate while our relative wealth in terms of income per capita is still under half the average DAC income per capita.
224.	Our official Development Co-operation Programme, and especially our bilateral effort, has been and is intended to remain largely oriented towards subSaharan Africa. We estimate that more than 80 per cent of our bilateral aid goes to sub-Saharan Africa, while 60 per cent of our total bilateral programme goes in project aid to the four priority countries, namely, Lesotho, Sudan, Tanzania and Zambia. .
225.	The sectoral breakdown of Irish co-operation assistance to the priority countries reflects general African priorities, as listed in Africa’s Priority Programme and in regional programmes like that of SADCC, as well as Ireland’s areas of particular expertise. In 1985, these priorities were: rural development, agriculture, education and training, industry, infrastructure and health—in that order. Yesterday [1st meeting} the Netherlands Minister for Development Co-operation drew our attention to the assistance provided by the multilateral institutions to African Governments in developing their administrative capacities. Given Ireland’s commitment to helping African Governments in this vitally important area, I hope that we will be able to share in strengthening the multilateral effort to this effect.
226.	There is, I think, one last feature of Irish development co-operation which I should mention, and that is that all Irish project and programme funding is on grant terms; Ireland is not, therefore, owed any debt linked to official development assistance by any African country and is not a recipient of any reverse-flow payments.
227.	I would hope that at the conclusion of this session there will be a clearer understanding between the African countries and the international community on the priorities of development in Africa. At this stage of rehabilitation, reconstruction and growth, there should be greater sensitivity to Africa’s needs. This special session should bring agreement from the developed countries on concrete operational measures and an improvement in the quality of aid, its concentration in priority sectors and the strengthening of aid co-ordination. I believe that the outcome of this session will be beneficial, not only to the countries of Africa but to all the countries of the world. Countries cannot live in isolation. We all depend on one another. Interdependence is a fact.
228.	Mr. STANISLAUS (Grenada): I welcome this opportunity to speak for the first time from this rostrum on a subject that is near and dear to the hearts of the Government and the people of Grenada, as indeed it should be to all assembled for the special session of the General Assembly called to consider the critical economic situation in Africa. Before doing so, please allow me to join in the congratulatory remarks so eloquently made by representatives in connection with Mr. de Pinies’ dignified and able presence as President of this session.
229.	My country is not in a position to give much material help to alleviate Africa’s critical economic situation, for reasons that should be apparent to representatives. Nevertheless, since historically and ancestrally Grenada, and indeed Caribbean countries generally, have a kinship and an emotional attachment to Mother Africa, I feel compelled to crave the indulgence of the Assembly to participate in this historic debate only in a manner commensurate with the little help my country can give in material terms.
230.	Contemporary African conditions have been well researched, documented and expressed by ECA. Additionally, the OAU in its economic statement—the Lagos Plan of Action8—and more recently in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government in July 1985, has made a superb contribution to this session through the well-informed and industrious Preparatory Committee of the Whole, which worked assiduously to submit its report [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l]. This document is a timely reconsideration of previous assumptions, prescriptions, projections and strategy with respect to the African situation. It is a blueprint for action which should be adopted by consensus.
231.	“There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune; Omitted, all the voyage of their life ■ Is bound in shallows and in miseries.”
So wrote Shakespeare in Julius Caesar. If this special, historic, unprecedented session stirs up and sustains the rising tide on the side of Africa, it is not too optimistic to predict that Africa, with its abundant natural resources, its most central location of all the continents, its immense size and abundant virgin soil, can, with the passage of time, become the bread-basket of the world. The cry of Africa must not be allowed to go unheeded by members of the international community, especially by those industrialized metropolitan countries with which Africa is pleading to put back into the good earth a little of what has been taken out.
232.	The race against time with regard to the African condition should dictate to the Assembly that the necessary studies and analyses have been meticulously made by eminent African leaders, scholars and pragmatists at all levels on the continent, and the time has come for action-oriented and concerted measures. To study and analyse the African problem further is to engage in a paralysis of analysis. With the type of self-reliance and self-confidence exuding from the continent, what we are hearing from Africa is simply this: give us some of the tools and we will finish the job, remembering that the future and fortune of Africa are inextricably intertwined and interwoven in the global economic structure.
233.	I shall conclude this short statement by expressing, on behalf of my Government, the hope that the ugly, heavy hand of racism, that systematized, institutionalized and barbaric practice in South Africa known as apartheid, will soon lose its grip on the States bordering on South Africa, which will then be able to share the blessing of social and economic growth and development which this special session is proclaiming for Africa. In the words of an ancient and eminent philosopher: Horam expecta veniet—Await the hour, it will come.
234.	Mr. NYAMDOO (Mongolia) (interpretation from Russian)-. For the first time in the history of the United Nations, the General Assembly is meeting in special session to consider the economic situation in Africa, which is a source of mounting concern to the world community. The Mongolian delegation, which fully shares this concern, wishes to voice its own thoughts on the far-reaching problems now under discussion.
235.	As emphasized in documents of the United Nations and of the OAU, for a long time many countries of the continent have been suffering from economic stagnation and poverty, which have been further aggravated by drought. The per capita gross national product of many African countries has been declining in the recent past, and their economies as a whole have been buffeted by
an extremely grave crisis. At present millions of Africans are still starving.
236.	It is well known that the critical situation of the economy of the continent is due primarily to the dire consequences of past colonial enslavement of the African peoples by the imperialist Powers, which over the centuries implanted in that continent their own way of doing things. It is no secret that it was precisely the imperialist and colonialist Powers that for many years mercilessly exploited the human resources and natural wealth of the African countries, thereby dooming their economies to a one-sided role in the service of the metropolitan Powers. It is also generally acknowledged that the prolonged existence of that situation has had the most grievous consequences for the economy of the continent and is now having a negative impact on the living standards of the African peoples themselves.
237.	Since the African peoples won their independence and sovereignty, the forces of imperialism have continued their exploitation of Africa in a new form—neo-colonial-ism. It is worth noting that it is precisely the neo-colonial-ist policy pursued in Africa by the United States and other Western Powers and their transnational corporations which has aggravated even further the already difficult economic situation which the countries of that continent inherited from the colonial past. High interest rates, protectionism, the artificial lowering of commodity prices and other such measures, the unlawful trade and economic embargo against African countries imposed by imperialism—as in the case of Libya this year—all constitute a specific manifestation of the neo-colonialist policy of the United States and other Western Powers, which is having an extremely negative impact on the economy of Africa as a whole.
Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
238.	The world public has been particularly disturbed by the indebtedness of the developing countries, including the African countries, which has reached the astronomical total of $1,000 billion. It is readily evident that it is precisely the African countries that have the highest level of indebtedness in per capita terms. One third of the annual export revenues of those countries goes merely to pay the interest on their debts, and the annual outflow of resources from Africa to the Western Powers amounts to many billions of dollars annually.
239.	It is therefore quite evident that the grievous consequences of Africa’s colonial past, as well as the continued exploitation of Africa by imperialism, are primarily responsible for the serious crisis through which the African countries are now passing. My delegation considers that the principal responsibility for the current critical economic situation in Africa should be borne precisely by those Western Powers and their transnational corporations which have for many years been plundering the human and natural resources of the continent.
240.	But that is not all. The acts of aggression and interference which have been repeatedly undertaken by the forces of imperialism and racism have not only destabilized the economy of many countries in Africa, they also constitute a direct threat to the peace and security of the region. This fact is well illustrated by the United States act of aggression against Libya this year, South Africa’s recent aggression against three African countries —Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe—and its aggressive actions against Angola and other front-line States, which must cease if Africa’s far-reaching problems, including its economic problems, are to be resolved. The Mongolian delegation once again resolutely condemns these acts of
aggression perpetrated by the forces of imperialism, colonialism and racism against sovereign African countries and peoples.
241.	When one considers the problems on the agenda of this special session, one cannot fail to notice the very direct link between development and disarmament. The arms race, which has been stepped up by the imperialists, thereby posing a grave threat to international peace and security, diverts vast resources from being used to assist developing countries and peoples, in particular those of Africa. That is why my delegation attaches special significance to the implementation of effective measures to halt the arms race and to bring about disarmament, measures that would create the necessary conditions for the elimination of the threat of war and the solution of many acute problems of our age, including economic problems. In this connection the Mongolian People’s Republic wholeheartedly and fully supports the recent proposal of the Soviet Union for the elimination of all nuclear arsenals by the year 2000. We consider it to be an exceedingly important initiative aimed at doing away with the threat of nuclear war and normalizing international relations as a whole, including international economic relations.
242.	The normalization of international economic relations and the comprehensive solution of world economic problems, including the economic problems of Africa, would also, in our opinion, be greatly promoted by the convening of a world congress on problems of economic security, as proposed recently by the Soviet Union. Such an international forum could serve as an important mechanism to strengthen confidence in international economic relations and to exchange experience among its different participants so as to eliminate various types of difficulties in the course of development and to strengthen economic security.
243.	The Mongolian delegation also wishes to support Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 which was endorsed last year at the twenty-first session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity.
244.	On the basis of the experience of my own country’s socio-economic development, my delegation, like many previous delegations, feels that the most effective way to overcome the economic difficulties in many African countries involves thorough socio-economic transformations, industrialization, the introduction into the economy of planned methods, the training of qualified national personnel and the implementation of other progressive measures, as well as the establishment of strict control over the activities of foreign monopolies. As the experience of my own country’s development shows, the comprehensive strengthening and development of the public sectors of the economy has a special importance and must play a key role in the mobilization of resources for development, in the elimination of backwardness and poverty and in the establishment of a strong and independent economy. By relying on the public sectors, the developing countries, including those in Africa, can put their natural resources to effective use for the purposes of development, accelerating industrialization and the solution of many other socio-economic problems.
245.	The implementation of agrarian reforms, the comprehensive encouragement of the co-operative movement and the broad introduction on that basis of modern technology into agriculture would constitute extremely important measures that would help to resolve the food problem successfully. The realization of these and other
measures would, in the opinion of my delegation, undoubtedly be conducive to a rational solution of the far-reaching problems of the economies of the African countries.
246.	In conclusion, we should like to express our hope that this special session will impart a new dynamism to the African countries and peoples in their efforts to overcome their economic crisis and in their fight against neo-colonialist exploitation and that it will thereby make an important contribution to the establishment of the new international economic order proclaimed in various United Nations documents, including the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)] and the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)].
247,	Mr. CHIDZERO (Zimbabwe): It is a great honour for Zimbabwe to have been mandated to speak at this special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, in support and amplification of the statement made by President Diouf of Senegal in his capacity as current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [7s/ meeting],
248.	Let me at the outset say that we are confident that, under the wise counsel of the President of this special session, it will be a historic success. We should also like to place on record our gratitude to the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the special session and, through him, to the Committee’s other officers, whose untiring efforts and sacrifices in the past few months have been invaluable investments in the cause of concerted action and international co-operation.
249.	It is not our intention to recite once again the already well-known economic and social facts about the critical situation in Africa. Rather, we shall attempt to highlight and throw into broad relief those aspects of the international economic environment which obstruct or facilitate the process of growth and adjustment or which would be conducive to comprehensive world economic recovery and sustained growth.
250.	The starting point is the recognition by the African countries themselves of the true nature of their own economic crisis, which is the product of a complex of factors, part natural, part geographical, part historical, part domestic and part international in dimension. Explicit or implicit in that recognition is the acknowledgement of the central and critical role which African Governments themselves can play in changing the course of their own economies, in reorienting their domestic economic policies in order to ensure growth and transformation.
251.	But beyond that the African countries, like other developing countries, have also clearly recognized the wider limitations within which they operate and which derive from the fact that Africa is an integral part of the international economic, trade and monetary system. There are systemic factors which impinge or impact on their domestic policies and on the specific measures they take in pursuit of the objectives of social and economic development.
252.	That, we believe, is the double message which comes out clearly from the OAU Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa10 and, in a programmatic manner, from Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 and which is presented in Africa’s submission to this special session of the General Assembly.1
253.	Africa’s economic woes and continued crises can be traced back, broadly speaking, to the following three sets or categories of factors.
254.	First, there are the natural phenomena and hazards, over which Africa and indeed the world at large have little control. We refer to frequent or periodic droughts, desertification and, in given cases, even floods, on the other side of the spectrum of natural events or hazards. There are in general the inhospitable climatic conditions which are so typical of most of Africa and which make human endeavour and economic development that much more difficult and costly.
255.	Secondly, there are the national or domestic policies which may impede, hasten or facilitate economic development. These include a wide range of issues covering such matters as pricing, fiscal deficits, budgetary allocations relative to priorities of development, and general policies regarding income distribution and the mobilization of domestic resources for development purposes. The relative weights which are given to the various sectors of activity—education, health, agriculture, industry, mining, transport and so on—have a direct bearing on the efficient allocation and utilization of resources and the tempo with which structural changes are effected within the economy.
256.	Thirdly, there are international factors over which Africa, indeed the developing world generally, has virtually no control. These have to do with prevailing international monetary policies, particularly those pursued by some industrialized countries in respect of such matters as exchange rates, interest rates and the financing of fiscal deficits. They relate also to inflationary or deflationary policies and their consequential impact on economic activities in the developed countries, which in turn impinge, in one way or another, on economic activities in developing countries. The international environment also encompasses trade practices, in particular protectionist measures, as they affect exports of developing countries; financing measures especially in respect of liquidity; and the stance taken by a number of industrialized countries vis-à-vis the transfer of resources to developing countries, whether on a bilateral basis or through multilateral channels.
257.	The African submission to this special session clearly demonstrates the integral relationship between what Africans can do and what the international community can do or not do and thus support or undermine African efforts. It is clear, for instance, that most African countries are very vulnerable, as they depend largely for their foreign-exchange earnings, and therefore for their capital development, on the export of one or at most a few commodities whose world prices fluctuate so markedly from year to year, with generally very adverse commodity terms of trade. It is estimated that between 1980 and 1983 prices of commodities of export interest to developing countries collapsed by as much as 30 per cent, with a total loss in export earnings of $13.5 billion— equivalent to 2 per cent of the total output of that period. Protectionist measures in many industrialized countries and the general proliferation of discriminatory practices in disregard of principles and practices of GATT exacerbate the situation and retard the process of industrial transformation in developing countries. The acceleration of protectionist measures, compounded by deflationary policies in developed countries, could not but damage the future prospects of sustained growth and development.
258.	It is therefore absolutely essential that in industrialized countries structural adjustments take place which would promote similar or parallel changes in developing
countries and thus spur production and growth and facilitate trade among the two groups of countries. It should be underlined that price-stabilization arrangements, with periodic price adjustments, would enhance the capacity of African countries to achieve remunerative returns for their exports and thus alleviate their balance-of-payments problems as well as enhance their capacity to import capital goods and ensure that their development plans are not thrown into disarray or abandoned altogether.
259.	It should be pointed out that there is a growing number of countries in Africa which have effected adjustment measures, and some have achieved trade surpluses —but at the expense of contraction in essential imports rather than as a result of expansion in exports. Significantly, between 1980 and 1983, for austerity reasons and adjustment requirements, 37 African countries reduced real government expenditures per capita, but this led to deterioration in social services and had implications also for productivity and manpower development.
260.	With regard to the monetary practices of industrialized countries, we believe it is vital, if the objectives of adjustment with growth and sustained growth are to be achieved, that exchange rates in industrialized countries be maintained at levels that are not punitive to the developing world. For while over-valued currencies or high exchange rates in industrialized countries may benefit exporting developing countries in so far as their returns in terms of accruing amounts of national currencies are concerned, the loss is greater inasmuch as their imports are made the more expensive. These imports are essential as they constitute a greater bulk of inputs into the industrialization efforts of many African countries. Conversely, while lower exchange rates may benefit the import side, they depress export earnings, again in terms of domestic or local currencies in the developing countries. It follows then that extreme fluctuations render planning or any forward commitment of financial measures uncertain and indeed make adjustment virtually impossible, hence the need for some measure of stability in order to facilitate planning and efficient utilization of resources.
261.	In a similar vein, liquidity must be ensured, if need be through the creation of new special drawing rights. It is to be hoped that industrial countries will examine this whole issue constructively and provide international trade with the requisite liquidity.
262.	Turning to the flow of development resources, we think it is essential that sustained efforts be made to ensure that adequate resources, on a grant basis or on concessional terms, are available on a long-term arrangement if the critical situation in Africa is to be adequately and realistically dealt with. In this regard, it is essential that such facilities as the World Bank Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa, the IMF Structural Adjustment Facility and IDA are adequately funded or replenished on a sustained basis. Similar action is called for on a bilateral basis. The situation that obtains today, in which there is now a marginal increase in flows of resources to developing countries, in particular Africa, and a reverse flow to industrialized countries as a result primarily of debt service, must be reversed. For the implementation of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery, Africa requires, as we now know, a total of $128.1 billion, of which $45.6 billion is expected to be provided by the international community. Thus, a minimum of additional international aid of $9.1 billion annually is necessary. Clearly, supreme efforts will need to be made, especially since the situation is rendered the more difficult and challenging by the burden of debt service.
263.	On this question of international aid, I must turn for a moment to the problems of certain particularly disadvantaged countries, among which are small island African countries, which deserve special and urgent attention by the international community because of unique factors affecting their development process—factors including very small populations, limited markets and financial resources, heavy dependency on mono-crop and mono-enterprise economies, geographic remoteness and its economic consequences, the extreme nature of economic openness, and inappropriate criteria used in assessing and granting economic and technical assistance to these countries. It is important that the international community recognize the specific problems and needs of this category of countries in drawing up its financial support programmes for Africa.
264.	Similarly, special attention should be given to the problems of land-locked countries. I do not wish to restate the severe problems of these countries, but I must welcome the fact that a number of activities, particularly in the development of corridors and improvements in the infrastructural facilities, are already being undertaken or contemplated in many transit states. We can only urge that this ongoing work be speeded up by making adequate resources available for this purpose.
265.	A little while ago I referred to the African debt problem. This is indeed most crucial, as the following facts show. The dramatic increase in the volume of Africa’s external debt and the heavy debt-servicing burden are a source of profound concern, since they represent a heavy drain on Africa’s meagre foreign exchange earnings. Sub-Saharan Africa’s external debt, including short-term debt and stock of accumulated arrears, grew sevenfold to reach about $175 billion in 1984. In relation to exports and gross domestic product, Africa’s total external indebtedness more than doubled between 1974 and 1984. The gap between debt-servicing capacity and servicing obligations, including arrears, shows a ratio exceeding 100 per cent in many African countries. The average debt service as a percentage of Africa’s export earnings was 19.8 per cent in 1982 but soared to nearly 30 per cent in 1984. For many of the least developed countries the burden is even higher and more onerous. Available estimates place their current average debt-service ratio in excess of 30 per cent, with a number of individual countries experiencing ratios exceeding 100 per cent when short-term debt, IMF repurchases, arrears and associated charges are taken into account. For the majority of sub-Saharan African economies, debt-servicing problems have come close on the heels of successive economic and financial disruptions caused by external economic shocks and compounded by natural calamities and famine.
266.	It is important to draw particular attention to the fact that the burden of debt servicing increased because of the rise in interest rates, the expiration of the grace period, the decline in the net flow of resources from all sources, currency fluctuations and the sudden upsurge in the value of the United States dollar, which is the major currency of denomination.
267.	Apart from the magnitude and rate of growth in the aggregate debt and debt service, there have been sudden and far-reaching changes in the structure of Africa’s debt over the past decade. This is demonstrated by a number of factors which it is not necessary to go into at this stage. But the fact of the matter is that the ratio has shifted from 14 per cent of official development assistance to 36 per cent.
268.	For those of us in southern Africa, the uniqueness of that subregion’s situation is inescapable. We suffer
from economic and military pressures exerted by a powerful neighbour supported by great Powers afield. Those in the southern African region know this only too well. They live it. Impositions by the apartheid régime of South Africa are particularly pernicious and destructive, as exemplified by the recent unprovoked acts of aggression against the peace-loving countries of Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
269.	To combat this problem in the southern part of the continent, SADCC, which is fully recognized by the United Nations, was created to foster subregional cooperation among States and to provide an effective platform to respond to this threat. The South African destabilization policy, on a conservative reckoning, has cost the SADCC member States in excess of $10 billion in the past five years. This amount is greater than all the development assistance received by the region, or more than a third of the region’s total earnings.
270.	The international community has substantial political and economic leverage which can be applied to restrain South Africa from victimizing individual Member States. This calls for even closer political commitment from the international community to increase its funding of this co-operative grouping. The prospect of such a joint action will bring a new element into the situation which the South African Government must contend with, and this will also present a new focal point for concerted international action.
271.	To turn back to the general African situation, it is of critical importance that all the interlocking issues be addressed with a sense of urgency and with determination. Failure to do so would only render the situation even more critical. We take some comfort from recent statements made by industrialized countries. We were encouraged to note from the Declaration issued by the group of seven industrialized countries after their Economic Summit Meeting held at Tokyo from 4 to 6 May 1986“ that they regarded this special session of the General Assembly as being of great importance and that it was their intention to participate in it positively and constructively. The Summit attached great importance to continued co-operation through the World Bank’s Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa and early implementation of the IMF’s newly established Structural Adjustment Facility, and to increased use of IDA. We must deduce and urge that this must necessarily imply readiness on the part of these key countries to increase the resources available to those essential facilities.
272.	Likewise, we note with encouragement and qualified confidence the pointed references to the African situation contained in the communiqué issued after the April 1986 meeting of the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries. We note all this with hope and encouragement and look forward to its effective implementation—which would be in contrast to what has happened to earlier statements or “commitments”, which were followed by a dearth of full or effective action, or, in fact, by very austere programmes verging on the punitive.
273.	We recall, for instance, UNCTAD resolution 165 (S-IX), of 1978,12 on retroactive terms adjustment of the debt of developing countries. While it was implemented by a number of developed countries, action was generally inadequate. Its full implementation would greatly alleviate the debt problems of the poorest countries, in particular the least developed. Similarly, the 1981 United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
adopted the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,13 under which industrialized countries undertook, inter alia, to increase their aid to the least developed countries to 0.15 per cent of their GNP. Here too words have largely been belied by action. History is indeed replete with lost opportunities and cases of unfulfilled promises or insufficient follow-up action. It is earnestly to be hoped, therefore, that the decisions taken at this special session will be characterized by effective follow-up action and therefore by a distinct departure from past practice.
274.	The crisis of development in Africa is not an irreversible process. True, it is a veritable challenge to the international community in general and to Africa itself in particular, but the whole process can be stopped and reversed in the interests of all. Africa has put its case succinctly before the international community in various documents, to which reference has already been made, and in the comprehensive and eloquent statement of President Diouf, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, as well as in his supporting statements.
275.	It bears restatement that, in addition to the understandings that may be reached and the commitments that may be made at this session on support measures, it will be essential for the international economic environment to be made responsive to the cause of development generally and the rectification of the critical economic situation in Africa in particular. In saying this, we believe that this will call for imaginative and agreed action on such issues as are already on the world agenda in different forums: that is, on trade, money and finance, and on the imperative need to achieve a meaningful and sustainable measure or degree of macro-economic co-ordination or harmonization of the policies of industrialized countries in such matters as exchange rate régimes, interest rates and trade practices.
276.	It is also to be hoped that, beyond or congruent with the actions of national Governments, international institutions, in particular financial institutions, will seek to eschew the imposition of models of adjustment or growth but will endeavour to analyze and understand the actual conditions of each country and the potential factors or forces of growth which should be harnessed and supported to ensure change and development. Conditions of aid, or simple conditionality, must not be the primary aim as such; they must be instruments that promote change and must be adapted within certain limits to prevailing or actual conditions, so long as it is clear that national Governments are determined to move forward and to achieve adjustment with growth.
277.	Finally, it cannot be over-emphasized that it would be wholly inadequate to think only in terms of short-term adjustment or short-term flows of resources. Rather, emphasis should be on long-term support measures and adjustment, with a series of short-term measures, as necessary, combining programme lending with project lending: for instance, food aid with agricultural and food production programmes, soft loans with investment programmes, and so on.
278.	We have put our case before the international community, and put it squarely. We ourselves are determined to play our role and to pull ourselves up by our own bootstraps, as it were, in keeping with the imperatives of self-help and collective self-reliance, joining hands as sovereign nations with other developing countries. The positive response and affirmative action we seek in dealing with the African situation must be seen in that context. It is part and parcel of regional co-operation and
targeted action within the totality of wider, or global, cooperation. The nature of the crisis facing the African continent requires that the international community band together to devise workable and practicable solutions to the problem. We believe the need of the hour is for Africa to utilize fully the complementarities existing in the international economic system at the subregional, regional, inter-regional and international levels. In this regard, we note with appreciation the tireless efforts of the Group of 77 and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to enhance South-South co-operation through the implementation of the Caracas Programme of Action14 and the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation of non-aligned countries.15
279.	Africa has special problems and pressing needs which call for special attention and urgent action. But Africa is also an integral part of the international economic system, and there are limits to what we can do and cases in which progress is not possible without a hospitable and equitable international economic environment. Now is the time not for looking inward or for retreat but for renewal and rededication to the cause of internationalism and multilateralism, even through the particulars of the critical African economic situation, for what happens in Africa cannot but profoundly affect the rest of the world.
280.	Mr. TILLETT (Belize): On behalf of the Government and people of Belize, I bring to the Assembly greetings and best wishes for success in the work of this special session. At the same time I wish to affirm Belize’s solidarity with the nations and peoples of Africa.
281.	One cannot speak about the cause of the critical economic situation in Africa, for its causes are legion. And in the Assembly we shall all no doubt latch on to our favourite causes in order to propose and justify our favourite solutions. '
282.	As we continue studying the documents before us, and as we continue examining the possible solutions to this crisis, let us not overlook the obvious. All developing nations that have recently become independent after years of colonialism know how difficult it is to abandon the colonial attitude and economic structure and exercise a greater nationalistic attitude and economy. Colonialism was never intended to promote the national economy but to protect the privileged and to prosper the colonizer. This principle is a death blow to any national economy, but it worked so well for the privileged few that new Governments frequently find it self-serving to maintain colonial principles.
283.	Another school of thought would let the African drought bear the full responsibility for the critical economic situation in Africa. There is no doubt that the drought has contributed greatly to this crisis; its impact cannot be minimized. Yet the highly visible and critical effect of the drought serves more to dramatize the fragile nature of Africa’s socio-economic structure than to serve as a root cause for the critical economic situation in Africa.
284.	The causes, as I said earlier, are legion, and we can find lists of them and proponents for each list. For, although it is essential to know the causes in order better to chart the course for more effective future development, that work has already been done and is available in both documents A/AC.229/2 and A/S-13/4. And that is not the purpose for which we have come together today. Mr. Pisani, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for this special session, stated our purpose well when he said, “What we are seeking is a mutual commitment to a more productive future for Africa”.
285.	The very fact that we have been able to come together for the sole purpose of discussing the critical economic situation in Africa is of great importance to the Belize delegation. In addition to that, it is a tribute to the flexibility of the United Nations. Just last December, at the fortieth session of the General Assembly, we were unable to reach consensus on a proclamation commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Only six months later we have converged here on a much greater issue with one focus: the critical economic situation in Africa. This is a compliment to the United Nations as well as to the people and the Governments of Africa.
286.	The calling of this special session is a clear manifestation of both the hope and the confidence that nations have and hold in the United Nations. The response of the international community to the call of Africa emphasizes the role of the United Nations in the amelioration of the miseries that face mankind throughout the world. As a result, this co-ordinated effort by the international community can only serve to reward the hope of the Africans, strengthen the resolve of the international community and enhance both the efficacy and the image of the United Nations. Never before has the international community had such singleness of purpose with such continental scope.
287.	To state that we have a singleness of purpose is not to disguise that there exist different approaches to this critical economic situation in Africa. It is, however, intended to express that in our diversity during this session we have only one adversary; it is the critical economic situation in Africa.
288.	The Belize delegation has noted the degree of support for Africa that has emerged so far during this session. Greater support would have been more pleasing. We observed with satisfaction the expectancy with which delegations yesterday morning awaited the address of the President of the Republic of Senegal, Mr. Diouf. We sincerely hope that during this session all Member States will be able to subdue the urge to generalize this crisis into an East-West tug-of-war or a developed-versus-developing-States controversy. Furthermore we hope that during this session all Member States will be able to focus on our one common adversary, for we believe that, as the Secretary-General said yesterday in his opening remarks [7st meeting], “Solidarity is the only guarantee of survival”. We applaud all nations contributing to this solidarity, and we are especially pleased with Canada’s contribution to it.
289.	The vitality, resourcefulness and openness with which Africa has faced this challenge must be recognized and applauded by all nations. Never before has an entire continent opened its soul for such public and international scrutiny. That is symbolic of both the severity of the situation and the determination of Africans to reverse this crisis and chart Africa’s course to development and prosperity.
290.	Nations will be well advised not to use this crisis to infringe in any way upon Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United Nations.
291.	As has been stated here already, no one can say that Africa has been idle. Rather, Africa has set the course that will lead to its future economic development. The actions taken by Africa are far-reaching, and they demonstrate the political will necessary to overcome this crisis. Among these are, first, a commitment to resolve the economic and agricultural problems of the continent; secondly, a willingness to scrap failed policies and adopt new pragmatic approaches; and, thirdly, acceptance that
the responsibility for economic and social change rests with the Africans themselves.
292.	At Addis Ababa in March 1986 the African Ministers of Foreign Affairs and the Ministers responsible for Economic Development and Planning made this absolutely clear when they declared, in paragraph 4 of the OAU document submitted to this special session,1 “In full recognition of the potential of our region, we affirm our total commitment to the primary responsibility for the development of our continent”. The Ministers continued in a much more detailed manner in paragraph 9 of that document:
“On our side, we reaffirm our commitment to mobilize all our resources for development purposes and to undertake, individually and collectively, all measures and policy reforms necessary for the recovery of . . . our peoples. It is our collective and individual determination to make all the sacrifices required for bringing about economic rehabilitation, recovery and development. Accordingly, we will, inter alia, take measures to strengthen incentive schemes, review public investment policies, improve economic management, including greater discipline and efficiency in the use of resources, encourage domestic resources mobilization and ensure the broad participation of all our peoples in the veritable fight against poverty, famine and hunger and disease and ignorance”.
That is a sweeping commitment for which we must congratulate the African nations and peoples.
293.	In addition, Africa has analysed its situation and has drawn up a Priority Programme for'Economic Recovery 1986-1990.2 We have already heard much about this Priority Programme. Some of the plan’s main features are, first, to put emphasis on the food-and-agricultural sector to the extent of raising the level of investment in the agricultural sector to between 20 and 25 per cent of total public investment; secondly, to strengthen linkages between agriculture and other sectors; and thirdly, to develop and efficiently utilize Africa’s human resources. 294. It is clear that Africa has demonstrated the necessary political will to meet this challenge. The Belize delegation is in agreement with a statement made by Robert S. McNamara, former President of the World Bank, who said:
“The time has come to formulate a ‘compact’, an Africa Plan . . . comparable to the Marshall Plan . . . What we have here is the opportunity of a decade, if not a generation. If we miss it, history may not provide us with another.”
295.	It was only a few days ago that we witnessed Hands Across America in support of the poor in the United States of America. On that same day—and perhaps more significant for this special session of the General Assembly—we witnessed the lighting of the Sport Aid torch in front of the United Nations, signifying the start of the Race Against Time, a race in support of Africa.
296.	Africa—and, indeed, the whole world—is looking for something both concrete and symbolic from this special session onto which it can hold. The hope of millions of men, women and children is linked to the success of this session. Let us close the session with a resounding consensus of support for Africa, and let us leave the special session on the critical economic situation in Africa committed to this philosophy: No man is an island; no man stands alone. Each man is my brother; each man is my friend.
297.	Mr. FARAJ (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of the Republic of Iraq wishes to express
its pleasure at seeing Mr. de Pinies presiding over the work of the Assembly again and its confidence that his wide experience and eminence in the international arena will help us to meet the challenge of this historic special session on the critical economic situation in Africa.
298.	The fact that the General Assembly has been convened in special session to study the critical economic situation in Africa reflects the international consensus on the extreme importance of confronting the threat hanging over the African continent. This session represents a mighty step forward by the peoples and Governments of the States Members of this international Organization, who have closed ranks to face the socio-economic crisis confronting a part of our world. It is an important stage in the implementation and application of the spirit and aspirations of the Charter of the United Nations in the loftiest sense. General Assembly resolution 40/40, which provides, inter alia, for the convening of a special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, was an important aspect of what the Assembly hoped to achieve at its fortieth session to mark the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, in reinforcing the idea of fruitful and positive international co-operation in the service of the principles of the international Organization and reaffirming its fundamental role in the midst of the great problems and difficulties confronting it.
299.	The laying of the foundations of a world in which peace truly prevails and international security is not gravely threatened depends first and foremost on the eradication of misery and despair in every part of the world. Africa is the only continent in which the standard of living has decreased in the past decade. This decrease will continue if bold and effective measures are not urgently taken.
300.	The famine ravaging Africa today is without question the worst that continent has ever faced. If immediate and effective measures are not taken, the land degradation resulting from the unexpected erosion of soil will reduce the land area available for cultivation by one sixth. The food situation in Africa has been constantly deteriorating over the past two decades. At the same time, population growth has far outstripped the increase in food production. Taking into account the extreme drought that has prevailed since 1967, the future prospects for the agricultural sector are grim, despite the arrival of emergency assistance in various parts of the continent. In more than half the African countries, the per capita share of cereals is less than 140 kilogrammes, which represents the minimum nutrition necessary to maintain health. We are deeply concerned to see that almost 70,000 square kilometres of arable land annually is transformed into desert around the vast Sahara.
301.	In Africa, the process of industrialization is fraught with serious problems. The badly needed structural adjustments have stagnated, and there is an increasing gap between investments and savings. In low-income African countries, savings have fallen from 16 per cent of the gross domestic product in 1970 to 6 per cent in 1981. In African countries the ratio of manufactured goods to total exports has fallen well below the 1970 level. All of this means that the international community must deal with the bottlenecks hindering the industrialization process in Africa.
302.	In the area of foreign trade, African countries are facing grave difficulties. According to FAO publications, African exports decreased by 20 per cent in real terms in the period 1980 to 1983. The deterioration in terms of trade in the low-income African countries has been
more than 12 per cent during the past 15 years. The decline in the prices of raw materials combined with widespread protectionist measures in developed countries has narrowed the foreign-trade prospects of African countries.
303.	The African countries’ external indebtedness is another cause of concern. ECA statistics show that in 1984 their external debts totalled $158 billion, and by the end of 1985 the figure had reached $170 billion. According to information provided by FAO, those debts constitute 40 per cent of the gross domestic product of the African countries, and more than 20 per cent of their export earnings goes to service those debts. A report of the Director-General of FAO to the General Assembly stated that Africa’s position was such that it could not finance its development. The increased debt burden is preventing development in Africa.
304.	In trade relations, African countries face an ominous return to protectionism and a decline in raw material prices. They are still the victims of exchange rate fluctuations, and the decrease in international concessional aid has greatly harmed them. The policy of structural adjustment, aimed at reducing the deficit and public expenditure, has led to a reduction of imports and to severe pressure on budgets. Therefore, it has harmed investment programmes, thus leading to the reduction of internal economic activity and increasing unemployment.
305.	There is no doubt that the crisis confronting Africa is. basically one of development. Nevertheless, climatic conditions, in the form of an unprecedented drought, led to a further worsening of the situation and to difficulty in providing food.
306.	In considering the grave conditions in the African continent we cannot overlook the repeated acts of aggression by the racist régime in South Africa, aimed primarily at the economic facilities and infrastructure of the frontline States, in order to exacerbate the situation, subjugate those countries by force and prevent them from exercising their right to choose their own independent path. The dastardly acts of aggression against the capitals of Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe at the beginning of last week were new affirmation of the racist regime’s determination to persist in its policy until its last breath.
307.	The African countries responded strongly and creatively to those grave challenges. The Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa10 and Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the heads of State and Government of African States at Addis Ababa in July 1985, are the best proof of the bold, practical approach of the African leaders to solving the problems confronting the African continent.
308.	The Programme’s aim is to identify priorities and measures to overcome the current serious economic crisis and to reactivate the development process. Among the most important of those priorities is the development of agriculture and related industries. The full implementation of the Programme requires about $128 billion. The African countries have affirmed their intention of providing approximately $82 billion during the period 19861990, and they want the international community to provide approximately $46 billion.
309.	Thanks to both internal and external efforts and other measures, the African countries managed to reduce their balance-of-payments deficit from $25 billion in 1981 to $11 billion in 1984. That reduction, made in spite of the difficult economic conditions experienced by the African countries, particularly the sub-Saharan countries, is worthy of full support and encouragement.
310.	The whole world is profoundly concerned about the worsening of the African crisis. This necessitates— in addition to a response to the special problems of famine—concerted efforts to lay the foundations for the resumption of economic progress in Africa. Action is more than ever necessary to prevent any further deterioration in the economies of the African countries through the adoption of effective, serious measures to revive the development process and find solutions commensurate with the social, economic and development needs of each country.
311.	The economic crisis in Africa must be dealt with over both the short term and the long term, which are interrelated. In the short term, the international community must continue to be ready to support the still badly needed emergency operations in Africa, particularly in the food and agricultural sectors. In that context, we pay a tribute to the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, which, under the leadership of Mr. Morse, has played a primary role in the co-ordination of the international community’s response. The Office has contributed to monitoring the emergency operations in Africa and to expanding United Nations assistance activities arid increasing their effectiveness. The work of the Office is an excellent example of the vital role played by the United Nations in international affairs. We also pay a tribute to the initiatives of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and governmental and non-governmental organizations in support of the peoples of Africa at this critical juncture.
312.	In the long term it is necessary to identify methods to increase production, restore development, increase productivity, raise standards of living, adjust economic structures and change the international economic situation.
313.	The people and Government of Iraq have always stood by the African countries and supported their aspirations to a dignified life, independence, freedom, progress and development. Iraq has supported the developing countries and their aspirations in deeds as well as in words. It has consistently provided support and assistance to developing countries in general and the African countries in particular. By 1983 Iraq had provided African countries with bilateral assistance totalling approximately $2,153 million, made up of $ 1,580 million in concessional loans and $578 million in grants. Those loans were provided on very soft terms, some being interest-free or with just token interest, and the long repayment period always began only after the passage of an adequate period of grace. .
314.	In addition to that financial assistance, Iraq has provided technical assistance, such as training, fellowships, technical expertise and other forms of assistance, through its syndicates, specialized associations and other leading institutions.
315.	Iraq also had the privilege and honour of presiding over the Islamic Committee for Solidarity with the Peoples of the Sahel when the Twelfth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers elected Mr. Taha Moheddin Marouf, Vice-President of the Republic of Iraq, Chairman of that Committee in 1981.
316.	Iraq reaffirms once again its resolve to continue to stand by the peoples and countries of Africa and to provide every possible support and assistance as soon as current circumstances permit and the war imposed on it is over.
317.	We believe that this special session of the General Assembly devoted to the critical economic situation in Africa must adopt a rigorous, concentrated, effective and
practical approach to meeting the requirements of the African countries. This historic opportunity must serve as the basis for an international consensus on and a clear commitment to support for the development process in Africa and to action to respond to the urgent requirements clearly set forth in the reports before us. It is our profound hope that that commitment will constitute an important step towards the establishment of a new international economic order based on justice, equality, development and progress for all countries of the world, developed and developing, regardless of their different social, economic and political systems.
318.	Mr. WIJEWARDANE (Sri Lanka): My delegation recalls with pleasure the diplomatic skill and ability of Mr. de Pinies, President of the fortieth session of the General Assembly. We are indeed happy that he is presiding also over this special session, and we offer him our congratulations and best wishes.
319.	The Secretary-General has, in his usual very characteristic.manner, highlighted the concern of the international community over the human tragedy that has been enacted on the African continent. My delegation shares with him and through him recognition of the urgent need to take all such steps and measures as will prevent a recurrence of such tragic events not only in Africa but also elsewhere.
320.	At the same time, I wish to convey the thanks of my delegation to Mr. Diouf, President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, whose inspiring address [1st meeting] set the tone for this special session devoted to the critical economic situation in Africa. My delegation echoes his statement that development is the new name of peace.
321.	. We wish also to place on record our appreciation of the' work done by the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee.
322.	, The current African economic crisis is not only a problem of Africa, but one that concerns all Member States as well. We must acknowledge at the outset the genuine sense, of urgency with which the .United Nations system has responded to the situation. We must also recognize that the international community has reacted with great understanding and sympathy in response to resolution 40/40, in which the General Assembly decided to convene this special session. There is no better evidence of the sense of global oneness and common concern than this spontaneous universal response to the crisis in African countries. We are all alive to the unprecedented nature of this session as a first effort by the United Nations to focus on the needs of one continent.
323.	Sri Lanka has consistently supported the cause of the African people in their struggle against apartheid, oppression and colonial domination. I take this opportunity to state unequivocally Sri Lanka’s concern about the African people in their economic and social development. 324. As is very clearly illustrated in the OAU submission to the special session on Africa’s economic and social crisis,1 a combination of external factors and domestic policies, such as inadequate resources, slow growth rate, structural weaknesses, particularly in the agricultural and industrial sectors, protectionism, world economic stagnation, indebtedness, population growth and natural factors such as drought have contributed to the present unfortunate situation. These factors have been growing in magnitude and in dimension over recent years. Inadequate transportation, population growth and migration of people following droughts have aggravated the situation. As the Assembly is aware of the diverse aspects of the present crisis, I shall not attempt to narrate them here.
Comprehensive documents relating to the crisis have been made available to us, including the report of the Preparatory Committee [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l], the OAU submission and other documentation. My delegation is inclined to believe that the international community is fully aware of the seriousness of the present economic crisis on the basis of this documentation and the wide media coverage.
325.	The OAU submission identifies the steps that African Governments and peoples are taking and are determined to take and also indicates the nature of the assistance expected from the international community. It is very pertinent that, as we learn from this document, Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 lays considerable emphasis on the food and agricultural sectors. My delegation applauds the realism with which the OAU has addressed the matter and notes that the level of investment in the agricultural sector recommended by the OAU is between 20 and 25 per cent of total public investments. This is indeed an important policy decision.
326.	Reviewing the immediate past, we note that from 1980 to 1984 food production increased by a mere 1 per cent, while population grew at a rate of 3 per cent. Thus there is clearly urgent need to pay close attention to food production. In this connection, FAO has been implementing its Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme in Africa and providing assistance, including technical and professional skills, to the OAU secretariat in formulating and implementing the special programmes of action in food and agriculture. WFP is also supporting the programmes of action in Africa, including research, extension and rural credit activities, which are of primary concern to African countries, in which the lack of expertise in this respect constitutes a serious constraint on their efforts to improve food crop production.
327.	It would be prudent for the Governments concerned to take steps to regulate population growth so that population does not outstrip economic growth, particularly in areas such as food production. The World Bank, in its report Financing Adjustment with Growth in SubSaharan Africa, 1986-90, has recommended that population growth be regulated as part of the search for solutions to the present economic crisis. We believe that UNFPA will continue its present programmes of action. 328. Although the food and agricultural sectors are playing a vital role in the implementation of the Priority Programme, other sectors of development, such as industry, health services, irrigation, transportation, marketing and pricing, should not be neglected.
329.	Adequate attention must also be placed on the need to give high priority to the development and management of Africa’s human resources. The future of Africa is closely tied to the managerial skills that African Governments will have at hand to manage development programmes. If the Priority Programme is to be implemented effectively within the short period of five years, adequate input of domestic effort will be necessary. We urge United Nations agencies to continue to play their role in the Priority Programme by providing technical assistance, identifying suitable emergency and short- and mediumterm programmes, providing technical data and assisting the start-up funding where necessary.
330.	As is very clearly shown in the draft United Nations Programme of Action [ibid., annex V], the African countries have an obligation to help themselves in the implementation of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery. We applaud the already proclaimed determination of the African countries to find substantial funding
from within their own resources, including mobilization of domestic savings. However, the estimated budget to see through the recovery programme runs at a figure which by any criterion is beyond the scope of national and continental endeavours. The external resource requirement is estimated at 35 per cent of the total cost of the Priority Programme. On this basis, over the period 19861990 several billion dollars have to be found annually from international resources for the successful implementation of the Priority Programme.
331.	In implementing the Programme, special attention will undoubtedly be paid to the financial and technical assistance requirements of countries most affected by drought and desertification. In all those endeavours, the countries concerned have to step up their export development programmes to find a way out of the present crisis.
332.	In examining the current situation, while it is necessary to consider ways and means by wliich the international community can assist in implementing Africa’s Priority Programme, we must also look at the long-term problems and try to find answers to them. The OAU report has attempted just that exercise.
333.	At this juncture, international support should not be limited to providing funds for the implementation of the Priority Programme. It is urgently necessary to provide relief for debt-servicing as well. Without such assistance African countries might at the end of the period be worse off than they are at the beginning. This is the more serious in that it is estimated that the debt-servicing obligation will become more than triple the 1980-1982 figure during 1986-1990, the period of the Priority Programme. Increases in net financial flows bilaterally and through multilateral institutions and from commercial lending will have to play their part in bridging that gap.
334.	Sri Lanka is a small country classified among the least advanced in terms of financial parameters. However, it has the blessing of good earth, which, with timely and seasonal rains, gives Sri Lanka a bountiful harvest. The skills and wisdom of political leadership over 50 years of self-determination and 38 years of independence, fashioned in the cross-fires of nine general elections and eight changes of Government, have resulted in the development and management of human resources. Over the past eight years Sri Lanka has maintained a steady growth rate of over 5 per cent and has progressively lowered population growth to below 2 per cent. It will therefore come as no surprise that Sri Lanka’s quality of life parameters, such as life expectancy, literacy rate and protein intake, are high, while infant mortality is low. Our achievements as regards democratic values embolden us to assure the third world that development to suit the genius of peoples within their own cultures is possible.
335.	We stand ready to share our developmental experiences with and participate in the efforts being made in Africa. Sri Lanka has considerable recent experience, particularly in the field of irrigation, water resources and management of river valley development projects, which we have successfully implemented in the recent past. We have also undertaken and successfully implemented a major land reform policy, and we could share such experience with African countries seeking expertise appropriate to their situations. Our village-awakening programme, based upon concepts of self-help and with a target of 1 million houses, is progressing happily towards the fulfilment of its proclaimed purpose of providing shelter and opportunity to the deprived in the rural countryside.
336.	Despite the financial limitations Sri Lanka is facing, my country has donated $100,000 as our modest contribution to African relief and assistance programmes. In 1984 the farmers of Sri Lanka responded to the needs of our African brothers by making a token but voluntary contribution of rice for drought-affected Africa. In 1985 the Government of Sri Lanka donated a stock of tea for distribution among the famine-stricken people. In addition, for a number of years we have provided a limited number of scholarships and training facilities to students from African countries as our effort to help build the infrastructures in their countries. Our agricultural extension services and rural credit extension schemes have been forged on the anvil of experience, and we are ready to share that experience with African States in need of such assistance.
337.	African leaders meeting at the Addis Ababa summit stated in paragraph 6 of their Declaration:10
“We reaffirm that development of our continent is the primary responsibility of our Governments and people. We are, therefore, determined to take concrete actions and measures individually and collectively for the achievement of the economic development in our continent.”
We are greatly heartened by those sentiments and affirm our willingness, within the limits of our capacity, to extend the hand of friendship to a great continent, its countries and its peoples in their hour of need.
338.	Africa can and must sow the seeds of self-sufficiency. For that purpose let us all, big and small, developed and underdeveloped Member States of this great brotherhood of humankind, assure African women and men that in their hour of crisis we affirm, with the Secretary-General of Worldview International Foundation, a non-governmental organization with headquarters in Sri Lanka, that “Solidarity with Africa is solidarity with our future”.
339.	Mr. LOPEZ (Philippines): The views expressed by previous speakers about the critical situation in Africa are widely shared and there is little that can be added to what has already been said. However, I should like to express my Government’s sentiments reflecting its sympathy and solidarity with the cause of the African peoples. The critical situation in Africa is also being experienced in varying degrees of gravity by other developing countries around the world. Hence we can identify with the problems of Africa, and we are gratified at the international concern manifested by the holding of this special session.
340.	In 1983 Africa was the focus of global attention because of the drought and famine that caused untold suffering to millions of Africans. The response of the international community was touching and impressive. Still, it is ironic to note that it was not until the situation reached a catastrophic level that the world could be spurred into action.
341.	While the immediate problem of Africa may now seem to have subsided somewhat, the overall situation remains critical. The OAU report1 affords an insight into the problem. It is now clear to us that the crisis did not begin with the famine of 1983. For centuries, history has recorded internal and external conditions that can be traced to colonial policies. Many of these conditions are common to the third world countries that now suffer under the burden of interrelated problems created by heavy foreign debt, plunging commodity prices, protectionism and high import costs. There is also the exacerbating factor of political instability, heightened by the menacing policy of apartheid. It is unfortunate that while
much of the world, including certain developing countries with a colonial heritage, has been able to achieve a degree of economic and social progress, the African continent seems to find little or no relief in coping with its problems.
342.	For moral as well as practical reasons, the world can ill afford to ignore the hapless condition of millions of Africans. The situation adversely affects the social and political stability of the international community and has a negative impact on the very foundation of present-day civilization. The problems of Africa are our collective problems. We all have a stake in ensuring that a successful effort is made to resolve the African crisis. A healthy and prosperous Africa is the essential constituent of a healthy international environment. It is with this awareness that we welcome Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.2 This is a Programme that has been developed by the Africans themselves, and they hope it will help free their peoples from the shackles of economic and social deprivation. It represents the commitment of the African States to assume primary responsibility for their own development. Thus, they have committed from domestic resources 64.4 per cent of the total cost of the Priority Programme. We warmly endorse the emphasis on self-reliance as the objective of the Programme as well as its main driving force.
343.	Unfortunately, the problems Africa faces are too enormous to be adequately met by limited domestic resources. Financial assistance, particularly from developed countries, is sorely needed to supplement these resources. We therefore endorse the efforts of the African countries to have the recovery Programme accepted. We urge that every measure be taken to reach an understanding during this session and thereby make its acceptance possible. For the Programme to succeed it is essential that there be a genuine partnership between Africa and the international community. This partnership between Africa and the international community should be characterized by a sharing of responsibilities and the presence of a clear commitment for action. Above all, it must presuppose the existence of trust and confidence in the ability of each party to fulfil its part of the arrangement. 344. Most welcome in this context was the announcement of Canada yesterday of a moratorium on the repayment of loans by African countries [2nd meeting, para. 91}. We are also heartened by the information received with regard to the efforts of other developed countries to help Africa, such as by the conversion of official development assistance into grants. This reassures us that the spirit of co-operation is very much alive. We are encouraged by these developments; they can be counted as the first positive results of the special session. We look forward to hearing similar announcements from other developed countries.
345.	The Philippines is not in a position to approximate such acts of generosity. Nevertheless, in our own modest way, we should like to convey to the African countries our readiness to extend technical assistance in the context of economic and technical co-operation among developing countries. As we have done in the past, we shall continue to make available to African and other developing countries training courses in the Philippines under the auspices of the Technical Assistance Council of the Philippines.
346.	The presence of so many world leaders at this special session and the messages of concern and support that have been expressed in their statements give us every reason for optimism. It is our hope that we shall be able to translate our good intentions into clear and firm commitments of support for Africa’s programme of recovery.
Our experience in grappling with the critical economic situation in Africa should usher in a new era in the history of the United Nations. Eagerly the world of the developing countries—indeed, the whole world—looks forward to this development. Africa has become the testing ground for the principle of international co-operation and the ultimate ideal of human brotherhood. We cannot afford to fail.
347.	Mr. ALBAN-HOLGUIN (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): In the history of the United Nations there has probably been no other event that has attracted such intense international concern as the critical economic situation in Africa, which has brought the States Members of the Organization together in this special session of the General Assembly devoted exclusively to this issue. Other events, such as the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, have been solemnly commemorated, but, for reasons known to us all, none has been as comprehensive or striking as this one in which an entire continent, in concert and unity, is undertaking regional action in defence of its aspirations and legitimate interests. By the same token, this gathering demonstrates to us that never before has the world become so closely united.
348.	In this day and age we have a clear-cut awareness of the interdependence of all the nations of the world. We are familiar with the conditions of backwardness in most nations, and we know that there are places in the world where people aspire to a stage of development that will allow them to make an effective reality of more egalitarian societies, more in keeping with the dignity of the human person.
349.	Africa yearns for overall development and wishes to demonstrate its ability to guide that development to meet its needs and channel its resources. Assessment of its needs and analysis of the conclusions, backed by serious and carefully drafted documentation, have brought us to this important political forum, in which there is world-wide participation, to seek realistic and effective formulas that will make it possible to establish the indispensable structure that can provide Africa with appropriate tools, which, together with its own major human and material contributions and respecting the autonomy of its own decisions, will bring about the major reforms that are required.
350.	The disquiet felt by the international community at the worsening of the tragic situation of African countries stricken by the crisis became manifest in December 1984 with the adoption of General Assembly resolution 39/29, to which was annexed the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa. That resolution contributed to arousing the world’s conscience to the serious problems facing Africa. The international community responded generously to the appeal addressed to it, and there was a moving manifestation of human solidarity.
351.	The emergency situation has not ended; the serious economic problems continue, and it is now indispensable that we examine in depth the fundamental problem of medium- and long-term development.
352.	It has rightly been said that there is also a crying need for external resources, which should include reduction of the debt-servicing burden, an increase in capital flows and stable prices for the continent’s basic export products. The wealthy countries must shoulder their responsibility to play their part and use their power to remedy the difficult situation facing the weak and restore their hopes. Greatness of spirit and a sense of mission are needed to ensure that the benefits enjoyed by some peoples are more widely distributed.
353.	It is for this purpose that, in the political sphere, the world has entrusted power to the United Nations, which since its inception has been committed not only to maintain international peace and security but also “to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom”. The Charter establishes, among other standards, the concept that the solidarity of peoples is not solely political but also requires each country to study, understand and help resolve the problems of others created by situations of poverty, backwardness, injustice and instability.
354.	In fulfilment of this mandate we have gathered here to advance the immense and anxious process of Africa’s struggle to achieve development—a struggle shared by the vast majority of our countries—within the framework of a rigid and unjust international economic system. Important steps have been taken at various meetings toward an understanding and analysis of the crisis facing Africa, and priority programmes designed to provide the instruments for resolving the problems have been adopted. This was the purpose of the Lagos Plan of Action8 and Final Act of Lagos.16
355.	Africa’s programme of action, which is the manifestation of the collective and individual determination of the countries of that continent, embodying as it does a serious commitment to efforts to overcome their difficulties, is an invitation to resolve a problem of common interest to all States Members of this Organization.
356.	It is clear that in this revolt against underdevelopment and backwardness, while we pinpoint many of their causes, we must focus clearly on the urgent measures to be taken in terms of population, housing, education, health, production and consumption. What future awaits Africa if no solution is found to its problems? That is why there is talk of co-operation, because it is indispensable for us to contribute to the economic development of the peoples on that continent, development that will lead to all the benefits of the most democratic societies, in which rights, respect for the dignity of the human person, social justice, independence and the selfdetermination of peoples prevail.
357.	Africa has committed itself to mobilizing all its energies and resources in the task of achieving the objectives spelled out in the Priority Programme and setting in train the necessary measures of internal adjustment. All this is a clear indication that there is an acute awareness of the gravity of the hour.
358.	Yesterday [7st meeting] the President of Senegal said that this special session of the General Assembly represents an act of faith in Africa, in its destiny and the international community as a whole. Certainly there is no lack of faith in Africa. We are all aware of the fact that the time has come for the economic development and social integration of its peoples. Representatives fully appreciate, as has been confirmed in their statements, that efforts and sacrifices must be made if the desired result is to be achieved.
359.	The principal source of Africa’s economy is trade in commodities whose prices have been worsening continuously, to the detriment of the least advanced countries. The slow increase in production, the fall in export prices, the protectionism practised by industrialized countries and the burden of the external debt are some of the structural imbalances that Africa is facing.
360.	There is a general understanding that we must focus our attention on long-term prospects and growth policies and on regional development. Obviously this requires a concerted effort on the part of the industrialized countries to provide aid and assistance towards recovery in the long run.
361.	Of overriding importance, as President Diouf put it, are effective and efficient policies in the agricultural sector, because that sector is the principal vocation of the continent. The proposals set forth in this connection reflect the priority accorded the agricultural sector in national development policies and the allocation of resources to that sector by the various countries. Indeed the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity has committed the Governments of its members to a gradual increase in the participation of the agricultural sector in the totality of national life on the order of 20 to 25 per cent by 1989.
362.	Africa aspires to a better future marked by a more egalitarian society. As the Secretary-General put it in one of his reports, “The next five years will be decisive for sub-Saharan Africa, in view of the challenges facing it”. At this gathering we must take a positive step forward in coming to the aid of our brothers in Africa so that they may successfully confront the major problems of underdevelopment. A concerted, sustained effort is indispensable if they are to emerge from the critical situation and break out of the circle in which they are foundering, employing all their energies towards better, more prosperous times with freedom and maintaining their development in the knowledge of the benefits it will bring.
363.	Colombia reiterates its faith in Africa and in genuine international co-operation and renews its steadfast solidarity with that continent, which seeks from the international community a more comprehensive appreciation of its struggles and hopes.
364.	There are those who, by historic destiny and the circumstances of their lives, embody the yearnings, the aspirations and the most profound feelings of a given people and, in exceptional cases, of an entire continent. That is indeed the case with regard to the President of the Republic of Senegal, Mr. Diouf. He spoke in eloquent terms when he addressed the Assembly, aware as he was of the privilege to do so on behalf of Africa. His words were frank, dignified, heartfelt and full of hope and faith in the spirit of solidarity and international co-operation.
365.	Colombia endorses that message, since like our brothers in Africa, we believe in the international community’s capacity for mobilization and in its generosity. At a time when multilaterialism is under fire, the important lesson we must draw, as the Secretary-General said, is that the United Nations system can play a guiding role in the mobilization of all mankind and in its capacity to achieve positive results.
366.	Mr. WOOLCOTT (Australia): Let me say how pleased the Australian delegation is at seeing Mr. de Piniés presiding over these deliberations. I am confident that under his able guidance this special session will achieve the positive results we all desire and that the critical economic situation in Africa demands.
367.	Australia welcomes this special session and the presence of so many statesmen and ministers because it provides a timely opportunity for constructive discussions about Africa’s economic problems and possible solutions to them. We believe these discussions can lead to improved co-operation between African Governments and the concerned international donors. We also believe that this session can contribute to greater understanding of the medium- and long-term strategies which will be necessary for lasting economic recovery in Africa. The Australian delegation will be working towards these ends.
368.	Australia’s strong humanitarian concern over the situation in Africa will continue to be reflected in our assistance to that region. Since January 1984, Australia has provided about 120 million Australian dollars in food
aid and emergency humanitarian assistance to Africa. This assistance is channelled mainly through international agencies, but Australian non-governmental organizations and recipient Government agencies are also important channels for us. A significant proportion of our contribution to multilateral agencies, such as IDA, is allocated to African countries. This was a major consideration in Australia’s decision last year to make a special contribution of $A 60 million to IDA. Australia also supports a substantial eighth replenishment of IDA. Australia welcomes the substantial efforts already made on Africa’s behalf by United Nations agencies and through the recent initiatives of the World Bank and IMF, in particular the Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa and the proposed Structural Adjustment Facility. We have also indicated our support for the World Bank and for a general capital increase at the appropriate time. Australia also provides technical assistance and other forms of bilateral aid to African countries.
369.	Like their counterparts around the world and reflecting the Australian community’s concern for African problems, Australian private voluntary agencies were deeply involved in 1984 and 1985 in the international public response to the humanitarian crisis in Africa. Over this period, Australian non-governmental organizations raised from public donations over $A 50 million, which has been allocated for non-government relief and development programmes throughout Africa, in particular in Sudan and Ethiopia.
370.	In deciding the allocation of our aid, Australia must continue to take into account the legitimate claims of developing countries in our own region. There are countries in the region of the world in which Australia is situated—many Asian and Pacific nations—whose needs are also pressing and to which Australia is closely linked. Nevertheless, Australia will continue to provide significant levels of assistance to African countries.
371.	For Australia, the holding of this special session is timely, because we have initiated our own review of the form and nature of our bilateral aid to African countries. We shall, of course, be able to take the results of this session into consideration in the formulation of our aid policy. The basis of the review is Australia’s commitment to a programme of aid to Africa which focuses on long-term self-sustaining development, with a particular emphasis on food security, and which draws on Australian expertise and limited resources in the most effective way possible. By focusing on long-term food security we expect to address directly Africa’s critical need for agricultural growth and improved food-management strategies. Among the Australian voluntary aid agencies there is also an increasing emphasis on assistance leading to self-sustaining development, rather than humanitarian emergency assistance. Australian official aid is in part being channelled through voluntary agencies in support of this. .
372.	Australia shares the view expressed during discussions in the Preparatory Committee for this special session that far-reaching and imaginative policies are required to avert further economic deterioration. We also welcome the recognition, in the African submission to the special session1 and in the draft basic final document submitted by the Group of African States to the Preparatory Committee [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex F], that policy adjustment in many African countries is crucial to this economic recovery. We support the emphasis on food and agriculture: as I have indicated, Australia’s bilateral aid will focus on that area.
373.	Australia also supports the efforts of African countries to gain increased access for their exports to major world markets. Australia looks to the integration of African countries into the world trading system on an equitable basis. We also hope for an end to the disruptive effects of subsidies of agricultural production and exports by some other countries. Africa, having an economy dominated by agriculture, would be a net beneficiary from the strengthened and more predictable world food market which would result from the elimination of protectionist and trade-distorting measures.
374.	Australia is especially conscious of the problems faced by the African front-line States in their efforts to foster their economic development without dependence on South Africa and in the face of continuing South African acts of aggression and destabilization in the region. The most recent attacks on Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe are an outrageous breach of the Charter of the United Nations and have rightly earned the strong condemnation of the international community. These actions have also done great harm to what hopes there may be for peaceful change in South Africa. Also, they can only set back current Commonwealth efforts to foster negotiations to bring about the cessation of violence on all sides in the interest of achieving a multiracial democratic South Africa. ■
375.	Australia will continue to watch closely the economic impact of the deteriorating situation in southern Africa on the front-line States and will continue to support the commendable efforts of those States through groups such as SADCC towards economic self-reliance. 376. Australia is seriously concerned about the predicament of the African continent and the consequent hardships and suffering of so many African peoples. We look forward, therefore, to participating at this session in the discussion of the very serious issues before us. The Assembly can be assured that Australia will give these issues careful and sympathetic consideration, and we shall try to participate constructively in these deliberations.
377.	Mr. SHIHABI (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic): I am pleased to congratulate Mr. de Pinies on his election to the presidency of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly. I must recall here— and I am sure other participating delegations also recall— the competence and exceptional ability with which he directed the proceedings of the historic fortieth anniversary session, which was attended by the largest gathering of heads of States or their representatives in the history of nations. He played a large role in the success of that session.
378.	The heads of African States, whose countries are experiencing an increasingly exacerbated economic crisis which is exposing their political and social stability to great dangers that we all appreciate, have called upon one another and upon the world community to increase the efforts to save that continent, a continent rich in natural resources but lacking the means to exploit them and to reap the benefits of its endeavours.
379.	I should like at the outset to repeat from this rostrum that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has supported, continues to support and calls upon others to support all the efforts aimed at assisting Africa economically through international channels, regional bodies and bilateral action.
380.	The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, connected-geographically to Africa by the Red Sea, linked with its peoples by the strongest humanitarian, economic and historic ties—besides being related to it through the large group of peoples and communities whose origins go back to the ArabiatrPeninsula—supports Africa in its effort
to leave behind irrevocably the past era of colonialism for political and economic reasons. We consider that supporting its economic independence is an international responsibility, in addition to being the responsibility of its people to help it become a productive economic force, so that all of us will be able to stand together before God and history as having fulfilled the duty of brotherhood, religion, neighbourliness and humanity.
381.	The economic crisis in Africa has reached dangerous levels in recent years, threatening the social and political fabric of many of its countries, hampering economic growth and reducing production and living standards. The crisis has been exacerbated over the past years by the drought that affected a number of its countries, and by the drought and desertification affecting agriculture. The heads of African States have warned this session in the Priority Programme that the crisis has reached threatening levels and have asked for a response to their efforts to help them avoid the political and economic consequences that would have negative effects with global dimensions. The fact that the African States themselves are prepared to shoulder the largest responsibility in their own development programmes is the best indication that the problem is being addressed at its roots.
382.	The many danger signals sent by some African countries about their grave economic situation, which is accompanied by complex political and economic problems, are signals that we should read carefully. The lower production level, the imbalances in trade accounts, the fall in the prices of raw materials and the decline of economic growth are all danger signals in the life of any economic entity. Political independence loses its real content when it is not accompanied by economic independence. The genuine departure of colonialism from African States definitely requires that their economic structures become capable of standing by themselves.
383.	I should like to point out here that between 1973 and 1981 the development assistance that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia gave to the States of the developing world within the framework of its official development assistance programme amounted to $37.2 billion, including $17.7 billion in the form of grants and non-repayable assistance, which is equivalent to 47 per cent of its total official assistance. As of the end of June 1985, the share of the African countries in this exceeded 10 billion Saudi riyals, which is equivalent to about $3 billion, in the form of soft loans by the Saudi Development Fund, in addition to non-repayable monetary and food assistance and specific projects worth more than 1.3 billion riyals, equivalent to about $370 million. It is worth mentioning here also that the Kingdom has contributed more than $400 million to WFP, more than half of which was allocated to Africa. This is in addition to the Kingdom’s participation in other international efforts to assist Africa.
384.	In this context, I should like to mention that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, according to available statistics for the years 1982 and 1983, is second in the world only to the United States of America in the amount of the assistance it gives to developing countries and international agencies. Moreover, the Arab Gulf States, including Saudi Arabia, are far ahead of all the industrial States of the world which provide assistance and loans to developing States in increasing the percentage of their gross national product that is apportioned to aid in the form of bilateral and multilateral assistance. This percentage has ranged from 4 per cent to 15.9 per cent of their gross national income over the past 10 years. I am not mentioning these facts to court appreciation but to encourage others, especially the industrial States, to assume their
role in that field in which most of their contributions have not even reached 0.7 per cent of their GNP, which is the level recommended by the United Nations.
385.	I should like to conclude with a word of support and encouragement for co-operation with Africa. I reaffirm that my country, while playing an important and effective role in this field bilaterally, regionally and internationally, would be gratified to see all capable countries participate in supporting Africa at levels commensurate with the problem and will share in the discussion and evaluation of programmes, proposals and solutions emanating from the African continent.
386.	Our first duty, while we help Africa in overcoming the famine in some of its countries and economic deficit in others, is to help Africa become capable of sustaining itself and building its own society from its own resources in the long run; because a society that becomes accustomed to a style of life that depends on loans and grants is in fact conditioning itself to an impractical and unrealistic living standard that leads to problems which weaken countries and deprive societies of the foundations for vitality and growth.
387.	Africa, with its tremendous natural resources, great agricultural potential and abundant human resources, is in need of comprehensive development from a humanitarian standpoint, firstly, and from a material point of view, secondly, in all these fields, and that requires great efforts that will enable it to benefit from these potentials. I hope that we will all try to fulfil our role in this field.
388.	Mr. VONGSAY (Lao People’s Democratic Republic) (interpretation from French): I should like to convey to Mr. de Pinies the warm congratulations of the Lao delegation on his brilliant election to the presidency of this important special session of the General Assembly devoted to the critical economic situation in Africa. We are convinced that under his wise and competent leadership, already demonstrated during the fortieth session, the work of this special session will be crowned with success.
389.	We should stress the exceptional, even historic, significance of this session: this is the first time in the history of the United Nations that a special session has been devoted to the in-depth consideration of the economic and social situation of a continent. The Lao delegation welcomes this and wishes to state the position of its Government on the subject before the Assembly.
390.	My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-General and his staff for the excellence of the documents before the Assembly. Nor can we forget to mention the remarkable work of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole in placing before us working documents of great value. We would mention Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity in July 1985, and the draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990 [A/S-73/4 and Corr.l, annex V]. We consider the principles and purposes underlying the formulation of those five-year programmes to be well founded and to reflect eloquently the geo-political, sociological, economic, demographic and ecological reality of the continent, which boasts vast human and natural resources and whose subregional characteristics and diversity are also notable. It is remarkable that the 50 independent sovereign States of Africa have been able to transcend their political and ideological differences and rivalries to unite in a commitment to crusade against the common enemies of poverty, hunger, disease and ignorance.
391.	The Lao Government and people pay a tribute to the enormous determination now being displayed by the hard-working Governments and peoples of those African countries bravely facing and meeting the dual challenge of survival and development. We must also hail the extraordinary effort of African Governments and their peoples with a view to mobilizing the vast domestic financial resources—amounting to $82 billion—required for implementation of the five-year Priority Programme. The remaining $46 billion—$9 billion a year—ought to be provided by the international community, in particular market economy donor countries, whose special responsibility towards the African continent should be stressed.
392.	In that connection, I wish to discuss briefly the deep-rooted causes of the present economic and social crisis in Africa. As recognized by African leaders themselves, those causes are both internal and external in origin. As in the case of all developing countries, including my own, the economic and social structures of the African countries are a legacy from the colonial period, which was marked by the direct exploitation and systematic plunder of the natural and human wealth of those countries. After the restoration of their independence and freedom, these young nations were the object of the greed of imperialist and neo-colonialist Powers which, using the pretext of aid and assistance programmes for newly independent States, were in fact actively seeking to prevent them, directly or indirectly, from moving forward on the path of just, balanced and independent economic and social development. In other words, those Powers tried and are still trying to impose upon newly independent countries, including those of Africa, a development model that runs counter to the legitimate interests and aspirations of the peoples and countries in question.
393.	Natural disasters such as drought and desertification to which many African countries have fallen victim exacerbated the already precarious economic and social situation. What is more, African economies have suffered from the harmful effects of the world economic recession, as manifested in the collapse of commodity prices, the fall in real terms of official development assistance, higher interest rates, deterioration of terms of trade, the intensive use by capitalist countries of protectionist measures, the crushing burden of foreign debt and the cost of its servicing, and so on.
394.	The paradox, as stressed in the working documents before the Assembly, is that Africa is the only continent in the world where there is a reverse transfer of financial resources to the developed market economy countries, despite the abundant natural wealth and potential of that continent. As rightly pointed out by the leaders of the OAU countries, the evil must be attacked at its roots.
395.	Along with the rest of the international community, the Lao Government welcomes and supports a whole range of short-, medium- and long-term measures, including those in the draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990. My delegation believes that those immediate and long-term measures to whose implementation the African Governments have committed themselves individually and collectively can provide lasting solutions to the economic and social crisis in Africa.
396.	It is obvious that without radical structural change in the African economies any dynamic, balanced, selfcentred, self-sustained and independent economic and social development efforts—however commendable and determined—will be in vain. It is noteworthy that the Programme of Action gives absolute priority to the
agricultural and food sector and supporting sectors; production and productivity in those sectors must increase in real terms.
397.	My country, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, was prey to the same fate as the African countries, and in addition, like the other countries of Indochina, had to wage a long, heroic struggle against foreign aggression. Our economic and social structures were devastated by that imperialist war of aggression. Our indebted subsistence economy, basically neo-colonialist in nature, was inherited from the colonial period. After our total liberation in December 1975, the new régime promulgated the first five-year plan for economic and social development. A radical structural transformation then took place, with absolute priority given to the agricultural and food sector. We are proud to be able to say now that our country has essentially achieved self-sufficiency in food. We are convinced that the African countries too will achieve satisfactory results in this vital area of the national economy.
398.	I wish to stress that our country feels particular sympathy for those African countries facing an exceptionally unfavourable economic, social and ecological situation. In practical terms, our country faces the same difficulties and challenges, for it is both a land-locked and a least-developed country. Need I recall here that the international community, and particularly the developed countries which have moral and historical obligations towards those countries, should extend full financial and other support for Africa’s Priority Programme for economic and social recovery and development. With respect to the foreign debt problem that has crippled Africa, the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa annexed to General Assembly resolution 39/29, and in particular its paragraph 17, should be implemented.
399.	The Lao delegation holds that the international community, and particularly the developed countries and their transnational corporations, must without delay take measures vitally necessary to deter the racist Pretoria régime from committing new acts of aggression and destabilization against the front-line States in southern Africa. The Lao Government and people have staunchly condemned the recent barbaric South African raid against Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana. We have also expressed our solidarity with and sympathy for the peoples and Governments of those countries. It goes without saying that such acts of State terrorism seriously jeopardize any efforts of the front-line States aimed at recovery and long-term economic and social development.
400.	Equally indispensable is the imposition against the South African racist régime of mandatory comprehensive sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations if that régime persists in its refusal to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) concerning the granting of genuine independence to Namibia, which South Africa continues to occupy illegally, and the abolition of the criminal apartheid régime.
401.	If they are to be successful, any development efforts, be it in Africa or any other part of the world, must be carried out in a climate of peace and security. It is well known that the developing countries in general, and those of Africa in particular, have in recent years— and this continues today—allocated enormous sums to activities related to national defence, to the detriment of their economic and social development. Measures of general and complete disarmament have, as we know, been studied and decided on at two special sessions of the General Assembly, in 1978 and 1982. Unfortunately, aggressive imperialist circles have refused and continue to refuse to halt the unbridled race in boL conventional
and nuclear armaments, with the sinister goal of achieving military and strategic superiority over the Soviet Union and the other member countries of the Warsaw Pact. It is to be regretted that no tangible progress has been made in the Soviet-American negotiations at Geneva. The reason is well known. The American Administration, defying international public opinion and even the opinion of its own citizens, continues frantically following its so-called Strategic Defence Initiative—the “star wars” programme. Needless to say, a small share of the astronomical resources that could be released through measures of disarmament would be sufficient to relieve the suffering and poverty of many African women and children victims of the disastrous results of endemic droughts.
402.	Those are the thoughts my delegation wishes to submit to the Assembly for consideration with respect to the draft United Nations Programme of Action for the economic and social recovery of Africa. We are convinced that the adoption of such a programme by the international community, and particularly by the donor developed countries, would not only help to fight poverty, famine, disease and ignorance on the African continent but also open up the way to genuine international cooperation for development to the benefit of both the developing world as a whole and the developed countries themselves.
403.	My delegation expresses the hope that the work of this historic session will lead to specific concerted action. It will spare no effort to make its modest contribution. 404. Mr. AL-ATASSI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me to echo previous speakers in congratulating Mr. de Pinies on his unanimous election to the presidency of this important special session. We are convinced that, thanks to his experience and wisdom, the work conducted at this session will attain the hoped-for results.
405.	The international community is now witnessing a major manifestation of international co-operation. Indeed the economic and social crisis in Africa, which we are meeting especially to deal with, is no longer a crisis for Africa alone but is, rather, a crisis of the entire globe. From this fact emerges the big responsibility to be shouldered by the international community, that of saving millions of our African brothers and sisters and finding appropriate solutions and measures to help that continent overcome the difficulties which it now faces. That is what we can say concerning the thirteenth special session, devoted to an examination of the critical economic situation in Africa.
406.	In our time the world has become interdependent; it is an interlocked world; and the crisis afflicting Africa affects not only the African continent. Indeed the fallout from that crisis is spreading to countries the world over, whether developed or developing, industrial or agricultural, in the North or the South. The consequences are sparing no one; rather they are engulfing the entire world without discrimination.
407.	The African continent and the countries of Africa, in solidarity, have the primary concern in this problem, and on their shoulders falls the biggest burden in making every effort and sacrifice to see their continent emerge on the shores of peace. But the international community must provide various forms of support and aid and find the solutions and measures required in the context of the Priority Programme to stem the crisis and overcome it. 408. Once the dimensions of the crisis have been established, it can be determined what the possibilities are for dealing with it or how to ease the pressure. That is why my delegation appreciates the important address by the
President of the Republic of Senegal yesterday morning [1st meeting], in which he gave the true dimensions of the crisis and its significance. He described the crisis as facing the entire international community.
409.	The problems the African continent is facing today are clearly described in the report prepared for this special session by the Preparatory Committee of the Whole [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l], in which its causes are thoroughly analysed and specific proposals for dealing with it set forth. The majority of delegations that have already spoken at this session have in turn clearly enumerated them. From all that, it is clear that those problems have been created in part by natural factors peculiar to the African continent—drought and desertification—and in part from the inherited legacy of colonialism and imperialism which for long centuries exploited the continent and bequeathed to it the ills from which it is suffering today. The African crisis also stems in part from certain imposed factors like the racist régime in South Africa, which has not ceased its actions designed to destabilize a number of African countries, particularly the front-line States.
410.	Indeed, we feel that that problem—that of ae racist South African régime—is one of the most malignant problems suffered by Africa, and any measures to deal with the current crisis and any solution to it must involve the eradication of the apartheid policy of the South African régime, a policy that flies in the face of every humanitarian value and principle and all forms of social, economic and humanitarian development.
411.	We appreciate the efforts being made by our African brothers and sisters to overcome the crisis. I should like to reiterate here that Africa’s current crisis is that of the entire international community. The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, at its April meeting at New Delhi, stated its opinion, in solidarity with the African continent, that the present crisis is one facing all the non-aligned countries and that they should lend their support and assistance to Africa to help that continent overcome its crisis.
412.	The developed industrialized countries must regard the African crisis as one of the priority crises in today’s world. By the same token, the General Assembly at this special session should examine the emergency situation in the light of requests from developing countries to achieve just economic relations and to resume the global dialogue. The developed countries must also be keenly aware of their responsibilities to treat the emergency situation, not by giving alms, but by providing scientific and economic aid that will benefit all countries throughout the world, on the basis of a principle established after decolonization, that the world is integrated, interdependent and responsible for the situation inherited by African and other countries from long centuries of servitude, colonialism and exploitation. We believe assistance should be given without preconditions and without designs, with no purpose other than to deal with the economic crisis and end it. The need for aid from the developed countries must be emphasized, and programmes, priorities and policies must be established or re-established that take into account the parameters of the North-South dialogue and the need for the establishment of a new international economic order, for if there were a just economic order, Africa would not be enduring the crisis now afflicting it. 413. A good omen for the future is that today we are awaiting the convening of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development. There can be no peace with increasing armaments. Peace can prevail throughout the world only through the
elimination of all conventional and nuclear arms. If that Conference can succeed in achieving positive results, its effects would obviously be felt by all developing countries, including those of Africa.
414.	The Syrian Arab Republic is also a developing country and a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In spite of its limited resources, it continues to provide aid and assistance to its African brothers. That support and assistance take many forms and can be described as falling under two broad categories. First, support is given through Arab action, which we believe in unreservedly, expressed in Arab-African co-operation. Syria has employed all its resources to establish and develop such co-operation, which now has its own institutions, structures and funds. In this connection, I must mention the latest Arab-African conference, held at Damascus, and the decisions it made with a view to developing such co-operation still further. Secondly, there is the support provided by the Syrian Arab Republic on a bilateral basis in keeping with the agreements that link us with a number of friendly States of the African continent. I must mention also that many African nationals are pursuing higher education in Syrian universities and institutions and that they return to their countries with the experience and knowledge gained.
415.	Finally, I wish to assure our African brothers that in spite of our currently limited resources, we will spare no efforts, whether through the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States or bilaterally, in the short, medium and long term, to help the fraternal peoples of Africa pass through this difficult trial in their struggle to end the crisis. Just as the African peoples have thrown off the yoke of colonialism, they shall soon manage to eradicate the last vestiges of racism and colonialism and rid themselves of the inheritance of underdevelopment imposed upon them by colonialism in all its forms. They will certainly overcome the crisis they are now enduring.
416.	The PRESIDENT: In accordance with General Assembly resolution 3209 (XXIX) of 11 October 1974 and the decision taken by the Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting of the current session [decision S-I3/2I], I now call upon the observer of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
417.	Mr. KUROWSKI (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, I should like to thank the Assembly for the opportunity to speak at this special session devoted specifically to the critical economic situation in Africa on behalf of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance [CMEA].
418.	The world community is deeply concerned over the complexity and acuteness of economic problems in Africa. That concern is shared by the countries members of CMEA. To the extent possible, they are taking part in the effort to overcome the existing critical situation by rendering assistance to African States in various forms, as the representatives of the CMEA countries that have already addressed the Assembly have observed.
419.	Africa’s serious economic difficulties have complicated, complex causes, which are aggravated by natural disasters. The present critical situation of the African countries is mainly the result of their colonial past and current, neo-colonial exploitation, in which the uncontrolled activities of transnational corporations play a great part.
420.	We share the opinion expressed by several delegations that to overcome the critical economic situation of the African countries, it is necessary to provide assistance not only through immediate emergency supplies,
primarily foodstuffs and drugs, but also through a structural retooling of their economies, the training of skilled manpower and the establishment of an industrial base. In this connection great importance is attached to the efforts of the African countries in their struggle to achieve economic decolonization and full sovereignty over their natural and other resources and their economic activities, limit the negative effects of the domination of foreign monopolies, stop the outflow of capital and skilled workers, increase the role of the public sector and the effective management of sectors of the national economy and make other progressive social and economic changes.
421.	Africa’s economic problems are inseparable from the general world political climate and the political situation in the continent. The escalation of the arms race, especially that in nuclear weapons, draws huge resources away from social and economic development needs. The principle imposed by militarism—arms in place of development-should be replaced by the reverse—disarmament for development. The close relationship between real progress in strengthening peace, halting the arms race, disarmament and the social and economic development of all peoples is quite clear today. Disarmament is the most realistic and effective source of the means required to meet the economic and social needs of developing countries, including those of the African continent, and to deal with such global problems as overcoming economic backwardness and eliminating vast areas of poverty, illiteracy and famine. Therefore, the wide-ranging initiatives put forward by the CMEA member countries are of special importance. Their implementation would not only help strengthen peace in the future, but make possible the diversion of huge resources to improve the living conditions of the people, including the people of Africa. The latest extension by the Soviet Union of the unilateral moratorium on nuclear tests until 6 August 1986 is a new expression of goodwill and confirmation of its unswerving efforts to improve the international situation.
422.	At its 118th meeting, in January 1986, the CMEA Executive Committee supported the programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons throughout the world, together with the banning of space-strike weapons, the prohibition and liquidation of chemical weapons and the radical improvement of the international situation.
423.	The improvement of international economic relations and their restructuring on a just and democratic basis, the provision of international economic security and the stabilization of general economic, monetary and financial conditions are prerequisites for a long-term solution of the social and economic problems of African countries. We believe in strict observance of General Assembly resolutions on the strengthening of the United Nations system as a basis for constructive dialogue, joint action to deal with international economic and social problems, the strengthening of confidence-building measures in the economic sphere and so on. These resolutions are very important and should be fully implemented.
424.	We oppose all forms of interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States and the use of economic ties as an instrument of political pressure, which we regard as a gross violation of the universally recognized norms of international law.
425.	The economic and technological assistance rendered by the socialist community to African countries is aimed primarily at developing their productive forces and strengthening their economic self-sufficiency. The contribution of the CMEA member countries to solving the
food problem consists in strengthening the national agricultural production base and helping to establish the complex of economic branches necessary for the development of agriculture in the African countries. This includes the creation of irrigation systems, the building and equipping of machine and tractor stations and projects for processing farm produce, the provision of veterinary clinics, grain elevators and freezers, research laboratories and experimental stations and the construction of major projects for the production of farm and transport equipment. The CMEA member countries have assisted African countries in establishing over 1,800 projects, including about 380 in the agro-industrial sector. There are plans to establish about 500 other projects in the next few years, of which over 130 will be in agriculture and the food industry.
426.	The CMEA member countries provide extensive assistance in training personnel from African countries. At present, over 45,000 African nationals are studying at higher and secondary specialized educational establishments in CMEA member countries, including more than 2,000 whose studies are financed by the CMEA Fellowship Fund. The brochure published for this session, entitled “CMEA and Africa”, gives many examples of assistance provided to African countries.
427.	The CMEA Comprehensive Programme of Scientific and Technological Progress to the Year 2000, which was adopted recently, says that the CMEA member countries will continue, to the extent possible, to give economic and technical assistance to the newly free and independent States in their efforts to develop their national economies. This has been stressed once again in the statements of representatives of CMEA member countries at this session.
428.	In conclusion, I hope that the work of this special session will end with the decision to take major international action aimed at overcoming the economic difficulties experienced by the African countries. Within the area of its competence, CMEA will play its part in that action. 429. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the observer of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States. I call on him in accordance with General Assembly resolution 36/4 of 15 October 1981 and the decision taken by the Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting of the current session [decision S-13/21].
430.	Mr. GIAMA (African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States): First of all I should like, on behalf of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States [ACP], to convey our deepest thanks to the General Assembly at this special session for the opportunity it has so kindly afforded to the Group to address this body for the first time. The ACP Group is particularly moved by this occasion and by the historic sense of timing attendant on this moment by virtue of the critical subject-matter before the Assembly. We are in this circumstance deeply appreciative and grateful to the Assembly.
431.	We wish also to extend our congratulations to Mr. de Pinies on his election to the high office of President of this historic special session. We have full confidence in his leadership, a confidence justified by his able handling of the session. We thank him in particular for assisting in our efforts to address this body, and we look forward to his steering our deliberations to a final and successful conclusion.
432.	We of the ACP Group are most intimately involved in and deeply affected by the present African economic crisis and will benefit enormously from the deliberations at this session. Established as we were by the Georgetown Agreement, which was signed on 6 June 1975 by the
countries that earlier that year had entered into the first Lomé partnership with the European Economic Community [EEC], the ACP Group of 66 developing countries includes all 45 developing African countries south of the Sahara. Therefore nearly 90 per cent of the African nations are members of the ACP Group. With their 13 Caribbean and 8 Pacific brother and sister States, they constitute the ACP Group. As 66 countries, the Group represents fully one half of the world of developing nations and approximately 40 per cent of the United Nations family of nations. We are, therefore, very much involved and very, very much affected.
433.	We are here with one overriding purpose only, that is, to support in all ways possible the critical and praiseworthy initiatives launched by the OAU and reinforced by the United Nations. To this end, we are deeply grateful and extend our sincere thanks to President Diouf of Senegal, current Chairman of the Organization of African States, for his clear, profound and insightful address to the Assembly conveying Africa’s vision of the problem —its diagnosis, its prescriptions, its indigenous undertakings and commitments and its external requirements. None of the many statements we have heard has departed in their analyses in any major way from that of President Diouf.
434.	We of the ACP fully share the fundamental analysis of the African situation undertaken by the OAU. We do not intend to repeat it here. After two days and scores of speakers, we do not think that necessary. We recommend, therefore, concentration on the identification of and undertakings by all participants in regard to the supporting measures to be provided to assist the African peoples at this crucial juncture. .
435.	We of the ACP have but one important asset— our unity. And we intend to make full use of it in support of our African brothers and sisters. Our presence here today is a demonstration of that support. Even the composition of our delegation is symbolically representative. But important as it is, symbolism is not all. We are at present working towards the development and implementation of an intra-ACP co-operative programme of action in a number of sectors, including co-operation in air and maritime transportation and trade and. trade financing. Success in this regard would bring some small benefits to the African situation, as indeed to the general ACP condition.
436.	In our North-South relations, we have improved the quality of our co-operation with our EEC partners to the benefit of both sides. We consider this co-operation to be of critical importance at this stage of our development, and we look forward to the EEC being among those playing a substantial leadership role in this quest for additional support for the critical African situation. In this regard, yesterday’s undertakings by the EEC have, like many others, been encouraging in many respects. However, further and more courageous undertakings would almost surely have been even more deeply appreciated and encouraging.
437.	The ACP Group appreciates the positive response by the international community. The ACP Group, having established a special relationship with the EEC through the Lomé Convention, would like to ensure that this relationship focuses adequately on the critical economic situation in Africa and contributes to the urgent measures necessary for bringing about economic rehabilitation, recovery and development in Africa. The ACP Group is cognizant of the Lomé provisions, including financing and technical assistance, which might be duly applied to the economic situation facing Africa. These provisions
are, we know, already being put into operation. However, the gravity of the economic situation in Africa calls for specific commitments by the EEC beyond those of the Convention so as to give even greater support to agricultural development and food production in particular, and to the supporting sectors and the infrastructure.
438.	The ACP Group specifically urges the donor countries to make substantial financial contributions towards facilitating the implementation of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery.
439.	We further call on the international donor community to consider favourably, among other measures, converting Africa’s debts and debt-service obligations into grants. In this regard, we salute the Canadian, Dutch and other delegations which have undertaken to take positive steps in this direction.
440.	Finally, we appeal to all industrial countries to adopt policies that are conducive to economic recovery and growth, such as increasing the participation of African countries in the processing, marketing, distribution and transportation of their domestic and export commodities. We urge them especially to take immediate steps to ensure that all protectionist measures on African exports to their markets are eliminated. We also look forward with great expectation to the forthcoming multilateral negotiations in addressing fully the problems of Africa.
441.	In all those steps we reiterate our appeal to the European Economic Community to play a leading role in the spirit of special co-operation existing between them and the African countries as acknowledged by the EEC itself in its statement to this special session [2nd meeting].
442.	The struggle facing Africa today is a struggle ultimately facing mankind. Not merely the implications of economic interdependence are relevant in this situation; the wider questions of world peace and stability, world social and political order and man’s relation to man are at stake. No country and no man’s conscience shall truly escape from our failure to rise to the challenge which Africa’s situation represents today. We therefore join the OAU in supporting Africa’s commitment to internal changes and in calling on the international community to respond courageously in removing the obstacles and in providing the resources sought from it which, in the wider sphere of the use of the world’s resources, is really
a modest investment in the world’s—and every country’s —future development.
The meeting rose at 10.35 p.m.
Notes
’Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social Crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC.229/2).
2A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl.l (XXI), annex.
3	Uniâo Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola.
4	Lomé Declaration on Security, Disarmament and Development in Africa (see Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1985, document S/17573, annex, part A).
5	Programme of Action for Peace, Security and Co-operation in Africa (ibid., part B).
«A/41/143 and Corr.l.
7	Cartagena Consensus signed by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Ministers of Finance of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela at Cartagena, Colombia, on 22 June 1984.
8	Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
’Adopted by the Second African Population Conference, held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 9 to 13 January 1984.
1	0A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl.l.
1	1A/41/354, annex I.
12	Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 15, vol. I, part two, annex I.
13	Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.82.I.8), part one, sect. A.
,4	Caracas Programme of Action on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, adopted at the High Level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981.
15	Adopted at the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973.
16	Adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
5th
PLENARY MEETING
Thursday, 29 May 1986, at 10.35 a.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIES (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)
1.	Mr. IGLESIAS (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): We are attending this special session of the General Assembly to convey to the Governments and peoples of Africa a message of solidarity and fellowship from the people and Government of Uruguay. We wish thus to tell the African nations that Uruguay is fully aware of the magnitude and complexity of the grave crisis that besets them.
2.	In its analysis of the continent’s economic and social situation and prospects, EC A dramatically points out the threats that hover over those countries if present trends continue with no awareness of change, noting that with their weak and fragile socio-political systems, the sovereignty of the African States is thus endangered. In these conditions, Uruguay believes that what is at stake is not only economic and social development or political stability, but Africa’s very survival.
3.	It is this understanding of the present African phenomenon that moves us all to express our full and steadfast solidarity, as manifested by the presence of so many and such distinguished delegations. We must now give tangible effect to our solidarity by taking practical and effective measures based on agreed collective aims , and efforts.
4.	Uruguay, like all of Latin America, has embarked on the arduous task of promoting its economic and social development in freedom and within its regained traditional democracy. For this reason, we know how difficult an undertaking it is and we have a clear awareness of the pitfalls, many of which are similar to those facing Africa, arising for the most part from unjust and regressive international trade and financial relationships. This may place us in a privileged position to understand the dimensions of the problem that besets Africa, the legitimacy and justice of its claims and the urgency with which all the members of the international community, to the extent possible, must respond to that call.
5.	Because of its origins, its history, the fact that it belongs to the Latin American family of nations, within which it shares common problems and ideals, and because of its traditional conviction that there are political and legal principles of universal value, Uruguay, which throughout all its history has developed a sharp sense and clear vision of the interdependence that governs the world, wishes on this occasion to reiterate its firm belief
that the problems which today beset Africa concern us all and that, acting together, we can all help solve them. 6. It would be superfluous to dwell here on the harsh data set forth in the valuable documents resulting from the technical work of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] and ECA and from the discussions of the Preparatory Committee for this special session.
7.	Africa has emerged from the decolonization process with disjointed economies incapable of laying the foundations of dynamic, self-sustained development, as a direct result of the various forms of colonial exploitation. Compounding the traumas and maladjustments that tend to accompany national independence processes, recent years have brought dramatically persistent natural events, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, where famine, death and destruction have spread across the entire continent—not to mention the alarming desertification process, which not only imposes a heavy burden on the present but also undermines the foundations of any future development. 8. Within this complex of problems, the continent, like all of us, has felt the effects of an unjust international economic order which thwarts all development efforts. We all know the signs: high interest rates applied to debts, often incurred to service other debts; spectacular drops in the prices of raw materials, the African countries’ main source of foreign earnings; unfair competition in the international markets, as a consequence of agricultural policies in the industrialized countries which undermine— if not paralyze—all our efforts to expand agricultural exports; shrinking capital investment and the international community’s inability to provide the region with the resources required for accelerated development.
9.	But Africa’s problems are not just economic and social; they are more than natural disasters: we wish to stress again that they are also the unjust and inhuman effects of apartheid imposed by racist policies which not only slow death and destruction, but further inhibit the economic and social development of countries suffering the effects of the legitimate struggles against racial discrimination in the region. Uruguay takes this occasion to reiterate its strongest condemnation and repudiation of these policies, as well as its solidarity with Botswana, Zaire and Zimbabwe, recent victims of attacks against the most elementary norms of international law, morality and civilized coexistence.
10.	In keeping with our repudiation of racism, Uruguay has just signed the International Convention against Apartheid in Sports [resolution 40/64 G, annex].
11.	We reiterate our call for compliance with United Nations mandates designed to ensure the independence and sovereignty of Namibia within the framework of the norms approved by the overwhelming majority of the international community.
12.	In this respect, we must be very clear: as long as these problems persist it will be very difficult to generate on the African continent an authentic relationship of cooperation among African States which will allow the advancement of effective development policies. Without peace, without respect for human rights in the region,
113
A/S-13/PV.5
it will be impossible for Africa to devote its energies to promoting truly just and balanced development. That is the contradiction most African countries find themselves in today.
13.	On the basis of the record only too well known, the competent bodies of the OAU, with the co-operation of each of the African States, have provided us with a valuable document.1 It is based on factual information encompassing the national, subregional and regional aspects of the problem. It analyses frankly, maturely—I would say even courageously—the nature of the African development crisis, as well as that rich, vast continent’s development potential, with all its immense untapped spiritual, material, human and cultural and other resources.
14.	Taking these clear and precise diagnoses as their starting point, the African countries have come to these deliberations committed to doing all they can to attack the root causes of the crisis, which demands the adoption of difficult and painful internal measures for structural transformation, modernization and improved efficiency in the management of their economic policies. The developing countries have been accused more than once of evading their own responsibilities by blaming all their problems on the operation of the international economic order. That is certainly an over-simplification. Such criticism, though often an oblique way in which the rich countries evade their own responsibilities, is not well-founded.
15.	The Africans have come up with ideas and programmes; they have evinced the political will to embark upon their own domestic tasks, implicitly acknowledging failings or errors of policy that might have existed in the past. We fully share the priority given to agriculture, the basis for sound development plans. Nothing can be of greater priority in Africa today than food production. Yet there must also be a bold campaign against the agonizing processes of desertification. Moreover, only through active preparation and training of human resources will it be possible to defend policies of structural change in the region to achieve dynamic and self-sustained development.
16.	We know, from our own experience, how frustrating and restricted one’s own effort is when circumstances are not propitious or when they are openly adverse to the ripening of such efforts. The African countries’ acceptance of their responsibility for the development of their continent and their declared will to attack the root causes of poverty and backwardness will not achieve the desired results without a simultaneous change in external factors inconsistent with the will of the countries affected, so as to create an international climate in which the national and regional efforts of the developing countries may bear fruit. The unjust prices paid to developing countries for their commodities, the deterioration in the terms of trade, high interest rates, the foreign debt burden, which increased more than sevenfold in Africa between 1974 and 1985, protectionism and trade restrictions are all factors outside the will of our countries and that of Africa and represent a critical dimension of the crisis, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Fall, has said.
17.	Within that perspective, the duties of the international community are clearly defined. The African economies, as studies have shown, are at the mercy of the vicissitudes generated by those numerous external factors; they are tremendously dependent on them and cannot attain self-sufficient, self-sustained development by their own efforts alone.
18.	The words of President Sanguinetti at the 6th meeting of the fortieth session of the General Assembly are particularly relevant. He said:
“It is short-sighted and insensitive to believe that the only factors which have placed the debtor developing countries in this vertiginous spiral of debt that generates further debt are lack of responsibility on the part of those countries, their poor administration and their lack of foresight . . .
“If the industrialized countries persist in denying the real origin and nature of these problems, if they do not shoulder their share of responsibility for the situation that prevails in the developing world, if they do not become less inflexible with regard to just demands for more equitable treatment, all our sacrifice will be a forlorn, wasted effort and there will be no reason for optimism regarding the survival of democracy.’’
The international community must therefore help Africa to find specific, concrete solutions for the external factors beyond its control.
19.	Some initiatives have already been taken in the realm of international financial institutions such as the World Bank, IMF and IDA, but, given the magnitude of the problem, we believe that those initiatives are not enough. Important complementary financial resources on preferential, soft terms are required urgently. It is necessary to liberalize the harsh conditions imposed by the present economic and financial order, thus relieving the debt burden. The co-operation and assistance of the international community should complete the great efforts that the African countries have shown they are determined to make, and its contribution must be adjusted to their needs.
20.	We must also be very clear in this respect: the international community is assuming a responsibility that is its duty and that cannot be fulfilled at the price of extranational forms of guidance or tutelage regarding the development of each country or any type of interference in the sovereign decisions of States, which alone must guide their own destiny, and the focus which—without prejudice to the assistance they deem pertinent—they wish to give to their development process. The international community must shoulder its share of responsibility in this new state of international relations characterized by interdependence and the need for co-operation, taking the measures that it should to maintain peace and stability in international relations and strengthen justice, the source of peace.
21.	We, the developing countries, must also recognize our responsibility. Uruguay gives high priority to trade and relations of co-operation between developing countries. Much of its external trade is guided by this. We believe that in the present circumstances South-South cooperation, including such co-operation in the field of technology, must be a valuable instrument, repeatedly called for at this special session, in the recovery and development of Africa. We are prepared to collaborate in these initiatives.
22.	The contribution and assistance of the international community is inspired, naturally, by an ideal of human solidarity, but solidarity is not a gift but a duty. The basis of that contribution is a reciprocal commitment based on the principle of the legal equality of States and mutual interest. It is in this spirit that we are here, knowing that this is one more challenge that the United Nations must face in carrying out its mission to preserve and maintain international peace and security; to foster friendly relations among nations based on mutual respect; to promote the development of peoples, which, as Pope Paul VI said, is the new name of peace; and to achieve international co-operation.
23.	This session provides us with an opportunity to respond effectively and efficiently to that challenge and to demonstrate concretely, as was said by the Foreign Minister of Senegal in a statement in the Preparatory Committee for this special session, “our common will to live in common”.
24.	I wish to close my statement with a final thought. This session should be something more in the life of the United Nations. It should be a challenge to the very existence of the United Nations as a forum for solidarity and co-operation. At a time when there is widespread weariness and disbelief regarding its virtues and potential, when interests of all kinds assail the principles of sound multilateralism that it has been so hard to build over the 40 years of the Organization’s existence, when the upheavals in the world economy are particularly evident as it lavishes progress and well-being on a few while incapable of generating equality of opportunities for a developing world, in these difficult times arises this opportunity, precisely for a continent that harbours the most dramatic areas of poverty and misery in the world. 25. The success of this special session will be a breath of fresh air in the atmosphere of disbelief in which we move today in this Organization. We hope that it will bring forth concrete and effective decisions and truly rise to this challenge.
26.	Uruguay, a developing country, unassuming and beset by severe problems of its own, feels united with the African peoples by common interests and aspirations. Within the limits of its possibilities and in the spirit of South-South co-operation, in which it has always believed, it is prepared to add its effort to make this special session the beginning of a new, fruitful stage in the era of international co-operation.
27.	Mr. NOORANI (Pakistan): The convening of this five-day special session of the General Assembly is an important step towards redressing the serious economic problems of Africa, which came into sharp focus as a result of the persistent drought and famine conditions obtaining in many parts of that continent. The grave conditions in the famine-stricken areas evoked an extraordinary response all over the world and galvanized the international community to provide emergency assistance on an unprecedented scale to ameliorate the hardship and suffering of the afflicted people.
28.	The most important response to the crisis has come from the African countries themselves. It is they that have resolved to take concerted action to improve the wellbeing of the people of Africa and to initiate processes which will promote self-reliance and ensure the sustained growth of their economy. They are to be congratulated on drawing up a bold and comprehensive plan, embodied in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 which was adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity in July 1985.
29.	This Priority Programme provides a comprehensive framework for structural as well as medium- and longterm solutions. It is predicated on a new development approach for Africa and an improved framework for international co-operation. Full implementation of this Programme can bring about the necessary economic development, ensuring the well-being, prosperity and future progress of the African people.
30.	While delivering the keynote address at this special session on behalf of the OAU at the 1st meeting, President Diouf of Senegal presented a detailed account of the difficulties which have seriously undermined every effort to break the vicious circle of underdevelopment in the
African continent. Africa remains in the grip of a persistent economic crisis which forces tens of millions of its inhabitants to live on the edge of hunger and starvation. The President of Senegal courageously acknowledged mistakes in the past economic policies pursued in Africa which contributed to the present predicament and the chronic economic difficulties of the continent. At the same time he lifted our spirits with a note of optimism based on the determination of the African States to launch a programme for economic recovery and rehabilitation and to mobilize all their resources to ensure its successful achievement.
31.	Being a developing country ourselves, we have studied the African development programme with great care. In this regard we have noted the important emphasis which the Priority Programme places on agriculture and food production. Indeed, this sector is vital for a self-reliant economy and for ensuring the well-being of the people. A gigantic and sustained effort and great sacrifices are required on the part of the African States, to achieve the goals and objectives that they have set for themselves. Africa’s laudable undertaking to help itself creates a corresponding obligation on the part of the international community to supplement this massive indigenous effort, since the world as a whole has a stake in its success.
32.	The nature and magnitude of the efforts necessary to reverse the crisis in Africa and the extent to which international co-operation is required to achieve this aim have been outlined in the OAU documentation and the draft basic final document, entitled “United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990” [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V]. According to this documentation, the total financial requirement for the successful implementation of the Priority Programme is $128 billion over the five-year period. The African States have indicated that they will themselves raise $82 billion, or nearly 64 per cent of the total resources required, from the mobilization and more effective use of their own domestic resources. The remaining $46 billion will have to be generated from outside by way of contributions from the international community. The present special session provides an opportunity to extend the necessary assurances to the African countries in regard to the availability of external resources consistent with the international community’s determination to rid the world of the scourge of poverty and hunger.
33.	In addition to the specific financial requirements stipulated in the Priority Programme, Africa needs international assistance to enable it to implement existing development programmes and policies. In this context it is self-evident that the African States need action on the part of the international community to provide relief from their heavy debt-servicing burden. If the. problem of African debt and its heavy servicing is not redressed urgently, the success of the Priority Programme will be in serious jeopardy.
34.	In an inspiring response to Africa’s needs, people all over the world have joined in spontaneous rallies to express support for and solidarity with Africa and to raise funds to help the people in the afflicted areas. This great effort calls for a matching commitment on the part of Governments all over the world. The decisions at this session must reflect the same concern and resolve. Timely and effective action at this session to help our African brothers to overcome their current economic difficulties can substantially reduce the burden of hard-pressed Governments in Africa and set an unprecedented example of international co-operation and collective willingness to
employ all available resources to combat adversity in any part of the world and thus ensure a life of dignity for all mankind. Relying on their own talent and resources, the African States are making a determined bid to overcome the many problems which they have inherited from their colonial past. In this undertaking they feel justified in expecting the international community to come forward with unstinted support.
35.	The concepts of universal brotherhood and the unity of mankind are deeply ingrained in the belief of the people of Pakistan. We respond easily to suffering in any part of the world. The persistent drought and famine in Africa, which have claimed hundreds of thousands of precious lives, move us deeply. Within our very limited resources, we have extended substantial assistance to African countries in the form of emergency relief and long-term technical assistance.
36.	In 1985 Pakistan extended humanitarian food assistance, with an estimated value of $4 million, to a number of African countries. Under its technical assistance programme, Pakistan provides training facilities to African nations on a regular basis in the fields of civil aviation, banking, railways, medicine, energy, engineering and agriculture. We hope soon to be able to establish an African technical assistance programme especially designed to provide more systematic and long-term assistance to the African countries, especially in the agriculture, irrigation and livestock sectors. I take this opportunity to reassure our African brethren that the Government and people of Pakistan stand ready to do everything within their means to assist them in their courageous efforts to achieve economic recovery and development.
37.	Before concluding, I should like to emphasize the role that the international organizations within the United Nations system can play in mobilizing and channelling both emergency and long-term developmental assistance to the African countries. During the past two years efforts concentrated on emergency requirements for Africa have led to the development of a new alliance between peoples, Governments and the United Nations system, bringing into being a process of practical consultations and collaboration which has saved the lives of millions. It is essential that we maintain this alliance in the future as we deal with both the continuing emergency situation and the equally urgent problem of rehabilitation and development.
38.	The fundamental problem of long-term development can be addressed most effectively by an integrated approach and a sense of collective urgency on the part of the international community as a whole. Experience shows that situations of economic crisis in the past have been overcome by such an approach. Emergency aid, recovery and development programmes must be viewed as a continuum. To fail to recognize that is to condemn millions of our fellow human beings to a vicious cycle of poverty and deprivation.
39.	An effective response by the international community to the current economic crisis in Africa is no less important than the endeavours of the African countries themselves to achieve self-sustained economic development. It is, therefore, imperative that this special session extend its full support to the initiative taken by the African States themselves and evolve a set of international measures and financial commitments vitally needed to supplement their efforts to implement the Priority Programme designed to overcome the critical economic situation in Africa.
40.	Mr. IACOVOU (Cyprus): May I, Mr. President, at the outset echo the sentiments of those delegations that have preceded me in expressing satisfaction at seeing you
presiding over this special session. Your experience and wisdom will once again guide this body towards fruitful and concrete discussion and action. Both are essential if Africa is at last to embark on the road to self-sustained development.
41.	Our meeting here this week is historic. It is clear evidence that the economic and social crisis that has had a stranglehold on the continent of Africa is cause for grave concern to us all. It is also a clear signal of solidarity with the people of Africa.
42.	The interdependent nature of the world today inescapably dictates that when one nation or region is affected by events, we are all in some way affected. Today the continent of Africa is in the midst of a severe crisis . This was acutely manifested during the height of the drought-induced emergency of 1983-1985 that plagued the continent. The spontaneous expressions of solidarity by the international community, though much needed, were but a temporary respite in the crisis. This year again, about 19 million African people will be affected by drought and hunger. Emergency relief is therefore still absolutely essential.
43.	The situation existing today has strengthened the resolve of African countries, both individually and collectively, to take into their own hands the economic recovery of the continent. No clearer resolve has been shown than in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the African Heads of State and Government at Addis Ababa last year. However, Africa’s long road to development needs the support, solidarity and commitment of the international community. Without constructive interdependent action there can be no solution to Africa’s needs for its medium-and long-term development.
44.	As many African delegations have stated, the Priority Programme is what Africa needs to lead it from the burden of structural inequalities towards long-term structural transformation. The potential for human advancement in Africa is abundant; yet it has thus far been stifled. This is indeed a sad reflection of the world we live in, where a continent with great natural and human capabilities coexists with famine, illiteracy and destitution, as eloquently stated by the President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, Mr. Diouf, in his inspiring opening address.
45.	African countries themselves have recognized that there exist internal constraints which have produced major social and economic distortions in Africa’s development. These have been recognized, and through the Priority Programme action will be taken to rectify them. These efforts have our full support. However, these internal constraints cannot be looked at in isolation. The finger of responsibility cannot be pointed solely at the Governments and peoples of Africa. Factors outside the control of those Governments and peoples have had a catastrophic effect on the magnitude of the critical economic situation. The international recession, the collapse in commodity prices, which in real terms are at the lowest level since 1940, the adverse terms of trade, the decline in real terms in official development assistance, increased protectionism, high interest rates, currency fluctuations and the heavy burden of debt—as well as debt servicing, which has had a debilitating effect on African economies —have all aggravated the crisis.
46.	Much discussion has been devoted to the question of an appropriate policy framework for the development of Africa. It is my delegation’s firm belief that the African countries should be enabled to determine their own
priorities, in accordance with the specific nuances of their own social, economic and political circumstances. We believe that there is a consensus emerging internationally that the problems of Africa must be addressed in a spirit of compromise and interdependence. The Priority Programme, we feel, has emerged as a well-thought-out, coordinated programme that will guide Africa towards economic recovery.
47.	We are greatly impressed and encouraged by the special place given to food and agriculture in the Priority Programme. It is primarily agriculture that is the lifeline of many millions of African people. This crucial element has led the African Governments to commit themselves to 'allocating 20 to 25 per cent of public investment to agriculture and to strengthen the support sectors of agriculture. Parallel to this is the simultaneous need to accelerate industrial development.
48.	We have seen that in the fight both for mediumterm and for long-term alleviation of the crisis, Africans are helping themselves. However, it must also be clear to us all that they will not be able to see their development dreams fulfilled without our concrete support. A new partnership must emerge that will lead Africa towards self-sustained development. It is imperative that there be an immediate improvement of the external environment and structural changes in the global economic system. It is of central importance that there be relief from that crushing debt burden that has weighed' and is weighing so heavily on the shoulders of African countries and their economies. Relief should be coupled with an essential increase in concessional assistance from both Governments and multilateral financial institutions so that the Priority Programme may be implemented. .
49.	The Government of the Republic of Cyprus expresses its full solidarity with the peoples of Africa. They have shown us individually and collectively their unshakeable resolve to undertake urgently measures that will lead to a substantial improvement in the well-being of their people. The question that we must all ask is: are we, the international community, ready to join them in their commitment? The time has come for the brotherly support heard in this Hall to be echoed throughout the continent of Africa.
50.	Mr. GOTSEV (Bulgaria) (interpretation from Russian): It is with profound and sincere concern for the fate of millions of people on the African continent that the delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has come here to participate in this special session of the General Assembly. We are guided by our understanding of the seriousness of the matter and our desire to help, within our means, to resolve Africa’s medium- and long-term development issues.
51.	To achieve those goals it will be necessary, first, to tackle and eliminate the root causes of the difficulties that have brought the majority of the population of the African countries to the brink of a sub-human existence. Analysis of those causes demonstrates objectively that they are complex and intricate.
52.	The countries of the African continent are among the youngest independent States. The majority have been developing in conditions of political independence for no more than 20 to 25 years. They continue to suffer the heavy legacy of colonialism in all areas of life. For long years, in pursuit of their selfish interests, the former metropolitan countries imposed on Africa the development of a stunted, single-crop economy, based on raw materials or agricultural produce, and turned the colonies into their raw-material appendages.
53.	After the collapse of the colonial system imperialism succeeded in establishing a new system of neo-colonial exploitation through various political manoeuvres, blackmail and frequent direct interference in the internal affairs of other countries, including the use of various economic levers. A system of unequal international economic relations was imposed on the developing countries. That system is characterized by growing protectionism and discrimination in trade policy and practice, refusal to introduce overdue structural reforms in the world capitalist economy, large-scale use of economic measures as instruments of political and economic pressure and so on. At the same time, the developed capitalist countries continue their efforts to transfer the burden resulting from the crisis of the capitalist economy to the developing countries.
54.	More covert methods of economic burglary have been introduced in the guise of good intentions and concern for the plight of the developing countries. For example, world statistics show that a substantial part of the national income of the United States and some other imperialist countries is derived from neo-colonialist exploitation, the main conduits of which are the transnational corporations, which each year extract enormous wealth from Africa. Neo-colonialist exploitation, which is particularly acute in the field of monetary and financial relations, has aggravated the debt problem of the developing countries, whose indebtedness has now grown to over $1,000 billion. For the African countries alone it is nearly $200 billion. The debt problem of the African countries is demonstrated by the fact that it has adversely affected the already low rate of growth of their social and economic development. For some countries the foreign debt has surpassed the volume of their gross national product.
55.	Analysis has shown that if the present inequitable relations in the world capitalist economy are maintained, the developing countries will be unable to resolve the debt problem without sacrificing their economic development for an indefinite period. This has created a real threat of political and economic tension in the developing countries, which could have serious social, economic and political implications for international relations. There is now no doubt that the debt problem is no longer a purely economic matter and that its solution will require political efforts.
56.	The international community is well aware that the critical economic situation in the African countries has been further aggravated by the aggressive and expansionist policy of imperialism. Imperialist forces have been attempting to prolong the existing armed conflicts in Africa and to foment new ones. They do not even stop at direct military intervention. We were shocked by the armed aggression against sovereign Libya. Nor is it any secret that imperialism has been supporting forces whose aim is to overthrow the legitimate Governments of certain countries.
57.	Another important reason for the critical economic situation in a number of African countries is the policy and practice of apartheid of the racist régime of the Republic of South Africa. As is emphasized in the Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa,3 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first session, South Africa has been carrying out a policy of economic and military destabilization of the States of southern Africa. A recent brazen demonstration of that, and a serious challenge to all mankind, was the criminal raids by South Africa on Zimbabwe, Zambia and
Botswana. There is no end to the racists’ acts of aggression against Angola or to their support for the bandit groups in Mozambique.
58.	Influenced by world imperialism’s policy of blackmail, conspiracy and open armed intervention, many African countries have been drawn into an arms race which has forced them to squander enormous material and financial resources.
59.	The problem of the critical economic situation in Africa has been discussed in many international forums. Recently, for example, it was discussed at Sofia, where, at an international meeting with representatives of 126 political parties and organizations, including 32 from African countries, the President of the Council of State of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, Todor Zhivkov, said, “Responsibility for economic underdevelopment, poverty and the existing acute social problems in the majority of developing countries rests, above all, with imperialism.” 60. The Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa adopted by the General Assembly states that “the maintenance of peace and security and the strengthening of international co-operation are important for meeting the challenge of development” [resolution 39/29, annex, para. 8]. We share that position and would even go further by saying that it is crucial for development in general and for overcoming many problems throughout the world.
61.	The realistic approach to the maintenance of peace is to end the arms race, prevent its extension to outer space and gradually deliver mankind first from nuclear weapons and then from all other means of destruction. The member States of the Warsaw Treaty Organization have put forward a number of initiatives to that end.
62.	Of particular importance is the programme for the elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2000, which was set forth by Mikhail Gorbachev on 15 January this year. The implementation of that programme would lay a solid foundation for the solution of many economic problems and furnish new and truly great opportunities for increasing the level and improving the terms of financial and economic assistance to the developing countries. Herein lies the overriding significance of the principle of disarmament with regard to development. Proceeding on that basis, the People’s Republic of Bulgaria is in favour of holding the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development at the time already agreed.
63.	Of primary importance in resolving the problems of the African countries are the restructuring of international economic relations on a just, democratic basis, stabilization of the general economic, monetary and financial situation and implementation of United Nations decisions, in particular the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)] and the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolution 3201 (S-VI)]. In that connection, we support the idea of establishing a system of international security, including economic security, which would ensure conditions for the normal development of all peoples. We also support the convening of a world congress on the problems of economic security, which could give thorough consideration to the factors that have been hindering international economic ties.
64.	The press release circulated at this session by the Bulgarian delegation attests to the principled approach taken by the People’s Republic of Bulgaria in developing its relations with the African countries. Our co-operation will continue to be aimed at the over-all development of their national economies by means of setting up projects
in agriculture, industry, energy production, expansion of the transportation infrastructure and training. More than 7,000 African specialists have been trained in my country’s educational establishments, while over 2,000 young people from the African continent are now studying there. More than 10,000 Bulgarian experts are sharing their experience in various areas of the economic life of African countries.
65.	For a country with its economic potential, the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has provided substantial assistance to developing countries. Approximately two thirds of that assistance is channelled to Africa. The volume of such assistance in 1985 alone was 0.88 per cent of the country’s gross national product [GNP]. Also, since 1984 Bulgaria has deferred payment on the credits and other financial obligations of a number of African countries amounting to more than $100 million.
66.	The People’s Republic of Bulgaria is convinced that the total mobilization of national resources on the basis of long-term development planning and strengthening the public sector of the economy are crucial for achieving progress in the socio-economic area. In this context we support the basic positions taken by the OAU in the Lagos Plan of Action4 and in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1
67.	The People’s Republic of Bulgaria consistently upholds the principle of solidarity and will continue to support, in so far as it is able, the aspirations of the African countries for independent and progressive socioeconomic development.
68.	Mr. ELHINDI (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I am honoured to speak before the General Assembly on behalf of the African continent on a question that is foremost among our concerns, namely, drought and desertification. Before briefly reviewing the reasons for and consequences of that drought and desertification, as well as the solutions proposed to combat them, I should like to express to you, Mr. President, and to Mr. Lewis, representative of Canada, our congratulations on your unanimous elections to lead our work at this important special session.
69.	It might be appropriate to begin by answering a basic question: Why, indeed, does Africa attach such importance to the question of drought and desertification, and why has it made the combating of those conditions one of its most urgent priorities and brought it before the international community as represented here in the General Assembly? Drought and desertification are two phenomena that are not unique to Africa, as their destructive consequences extend to every continent of the world and affect a very large number of countries, both rich and poor, to varying degrees.
70.	The answer to the question includes a number of factors, foremost among which undoubtedly is the fact that over the past few years the consequences of drought and desertification have been the final straw that has broken the back of African economies, causing great upheavals in the lives of most of the continent’s population. Consecutive years of drought and its spread to include the countries of the east and south of the continent, in addition to the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian belt, which extend from the Red Sea to the Atlantic Ocean and which have been experiencing drought since the late 1960s, have had a profound effect on livestock and food production and have turned the situation into a catastrophe afflicting the entire continent and created a famine threatening the lives of half of its population, uprooting millions from their homes and forcing them to migrate to the fringes of the cities in search of food. They have
seriously crippled the economies of the rural areas, probably for years to come. The drought has spread to many areas of the continent, accompanied by spreading desertification which annually advances nearly 10 kilometres over land suitable for agriculture and grazing. Land is the basic asset of the rural population, who are the majority of Africa’s population and the producers of its food and the pillars of its economies.
71.	It was thus only natural that the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity last year listed the questions of drought and desertification as among the most pressing priorities, since they are vitally linked to the productive sectors, foremost among which are food, agriculture and rural development, and have a direct effect on the lives and economies of the population of rural areas and intensify the degradation of the environment in the region. Drought and desertification also drain the land of its fertility and destroy the vegetation cover, threatening rural energy sources, ground and surface water and thus the lives of both people and livestock.
72.	The OAU Assembly, by setting the issues of drought and desertification among Africa’s highest priorities, affirmed a basic fact which can usefully be reaffirmed here. There is no way for Africa to get out of its current economic crisis other than by assigning prime importance to the food and agriculture sector, and the food sector, which is foremost among African priorities, cannot stand unless there is development in rural areas and concern for their population. That, in turn, cannot be accomplished in most African countries unless the consequences of drought and desertification are combated, desert encroachment stopped and the overall ecological balance preserved.
73.	I wish to mention briefly some of the causes of desertification and degradation of the environment, because finding the sources of the problem will help us to find appropriate solutions. The basic cause of desertification can be traced to the irrational use of natural resources, in particular on the margins of the Sahara and in the poor savannah area. Excessive agriculture exhausts the soil, overgrazing eliminates the vegetation cover and cutting down trees to provide fuel for both the rural areas and the cities loosens the soil. Poor use of water resources in rural areas, burning off the pastures after prolonged drought and other irrational human activities lead to an ecological imbalance and breakdown, as seen in the impoverishment of the soil, reduction of its productivity, loss of its cohesion and its desertification. All this can be linked to social and economic roots, including persistent negligence of the rural areas, mismanagement, the population explosion, a change in consumption patterns due to different and increased requirements, the irrational increase in livestock, and the fact that the afflicted regions are included in the economic, monetary and trade cycle.
74.	From this brief review of the causes and roots of desertification and ecological imbalance resulting from human activity and linked to the scarcity of rain, it is clear that comprehensive action on a broad front is necessary to combat drought and desertification and maintain the ecological balance, including legal, social, economic and political measures that take into account all the elements and causes I have mentioned. The ideal way to deal with the consequences of drought and to combat desertification in Africa requires the following basic guidelines.
75.	First, a scientific approach must take into account the comprehensive character of the problem and the need to persevere and avoid partial solutions.
76.	Secondly, the question of desertification and drought must be dealt with within a clear strategy based on integrated development of the areas affected.
77.	Thirdly, solutions must include preventive measures by the enactment of the necessary laws prohibiting the cutting down of trees and agricultural expansion in marginal areas, protecting pastures and forests and providing remedial measures, such as planting tree belts, sowing grass and stabilizing sand dunes.
78.	Fourthly, popular participation must be encouraged as much as possible in both remedial and preventive measures and in finding solutions compatible with the environment and social and economic conditions of each area, thus guaranteeing the continuing participation, understanding and co-operation of the population of the affected areas, without which protecting the environment and maintaining ecological balance is impossible.
79.	Fifthly, scientific research must be intensified and its results applied, in particular, to developing droughtresistant trees, plants and crops suitable for regions where there is little rain, and to the most effective use of new and renewable sources of energy, in finding substitutes for firewood or in increasing the efficiency of firewood and other traditional sources of energy, so as to reduce the pressure on natural resources in the marginal areas concerned and the poverty and physical exertion of the rural population, especially women.
80.	Sixthly, efforts must be made to increase awareness of and training in environmental matters, particularly among women, who constitute the majority of the farmers in Africa and are responsible for the provision of water, housing and fuel and for tending the herds.
81.	Seventhly, regional and subregional co-operation is necessary in Africa to combat desertification and drought through the establishment of regional facilities to coordinate the efforts of African States, particularly since these two phenomena have no geographical limits, and also to co-ordinate the implementation of joint projects and establish regional research institutions to rationalize the use of resources, profit from experiences acquired and facilitate the exchange of experiences and information.
82.	Eighthly, international co-operation must be harnessed to support African national and regional efforts to combat drought and desertification, in particular, and protect the environment in general. This co-operation must be used to mobilize the necessary financial resources, exchange information and experiences, transfer appropriate technology and the results of scientific research and participate in the creation of the trained cadres needed to set up and implement the programmes to combat drought and desertification. In that context it is necessary to support the efforts of the African States to set up early warning systems in Africa to enable the continent to face the dangers of drought and desertification in a scientific manner.
83.	Ninthly, since projects and programmes to combat drought and desertification are medium-term and longterm, the necessary financial resources must be made available for their implementation in a predictable, dependable manner, to facilitate planning. These financial resources can be mobilized on two levels: first, on the local and national level, as a reaffirmation of the principle of popular participation and local concern; and secondly, on the international level, to provide the resources necessary to implement the programmes and projects to combat desertification. ,
84.	Here, we must pay a tribute to the statements ar.d positive initiatives presented by some delegations duris?
this debate to help Africa avoid the effects of drought and desertification. The welcome efforts made by the non-governmental organizations in this regard deserve support, thanks and appreciation.
85.	This is the analysis of the causes, roots and consequences of drought and desertification and of the basic tenets on which any radical solution must depend. Africa attaches great importance to this problem, which directly threatens not only its chances of overcoming its current economic crisis and remedying the ecological imbalance in very large parts of the continent, but also the lives of millions of African people, as has been made clear by the experience of the 1970s in West Africa and the 1980s in most parts of the continent. That is why the twenty-first session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity made drought and desertification one of the basic priorities in its Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 19861990.2 Despite the fact that the struggle against drought and desertification requires long-term plans, the African summit conference and ministerial meetings convened to prepare for this special session decided that it is essential to take action immediately on the national, regional and continental levels to implement a comprehensive programme to combat drought and desertification, encompassing definite preventive and remedial measures in protection of the environment, the rational use of natural resources, especially water sources, pastures and forests, afforestation and reforestation to stabilize the soil and the development of alternative sources of energy, in particular in the rural areas.
86.	Africa is fully aware that the implementation of such an urgent programme demands an enormous national effort, as well as close co-operation on the regional level and continuing support by the international community for those national and regional efforts. The African Governments have adopted national plans to combat drought and desertification. They have established or support facilities that co-ordinate efforts in this area and have committed themselves to providing the local resources to implement existing plans.
87.	On the regional level, in recognition of the role of regional co-operation in combating drought and desertification, last year saw the establishment of the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development, which includes the East African States and is headquartered in Djibouti. It is based on the example of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel, based in Ouagadougou. Further, there is a large number of regional organizations concerned with more comprehensive matters, including the struggle against drought, such as the Southern African Development Coordination Conference and other institutions created to protect African lakes and river basins, in whose activities the environmental aspect is an important element. I also wish to note the importance of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment, convened last December at Cairo by UNEP, and of its resolutions. We look forward to the donor countries providing the necessary assistance to implement that important programme.
88.	On the international level, the African estimates made it clear that the implementation of the urgent regional and national programme needs almost $3.5 billion for the next five years, of which the African States have committed themselves to providing $1.5 billion. That leaves some $2 billion to be provided by external sources. It must be mentioned here that the comprehensive plan of action to combat drought and desertification in Africa needs enormous financial resources that go far beyond
the estimated funds and that the figures mentioned in the African document represent the minimum needed for the implementation of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.
89.	Despite the fact that Africa’s implementation of programmes to combat drought and desertification is not conditional on international support, everyone knows that those programmes are less likely to succeed in the absence of continuing financial support from the international community. Hence, in the light of the international consensus on the gravity of the African economic crisis in general, and the gravity of drought and desertification in particular, Africa expects that the international community will—at the bilateral and multilateral levels— exert special efforts to provide the external financial resources necessary for the success of the programmes to combat drought and desertification. Africa also expects that the various United Nations organizations and programmes will contribute effectively in supporting the efforts of African States to combat drought and desertification and that the number of such organizations will grow and enhance the contribution of the United Nations in Africa instead of weakening and impeding the effectiveness of the common efforts. .
90.	Finally, I wish to borrow a phrase heard repeatedly throughout the past week: “Africa is in a race against time, a feverish race to survive and to develop”. Those words are applicable to the problem of drought and desertification in particular, since Africa is in a real race against the constantly creeping desert and against drought that is killing the vegetation and desertification that is transforming fertile land into a wasteland. Africa is resolved to win that race; it has harnessed its energies and resources to achieve that goal. The duty of the international community, as represented in the Assembly, is to provide all the necessary support for Africa to win that race.
91.	Mr. FLORES OLEA (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, the delegation of Mexico would like to join those who have already congratulated you on your assumption of the task entrusted to you by the General Assembly at this special session. Your able guidance and diplomatic experience will help us attain results that will permit the mitigation of the present critical situation in the continent of Africa.
92.	Our solidarity with Africa is profound. For years we have struggled together for peace, and we continue to strive to preserve our political and economic independence. We have faced similar problems and promoted common aspirations. We have joined forces in the quest for a more just and equitable system of international relations, a system that can provide our people with a better hope for development and well-being.
93.	We are strong supporters of the African countries in their struggle against apartheid, a system that is contrary to the most elementary human rights and the principles of civilized coexistence. Unfortunately, in spite of the efforts of the United Nations, apartheid continues to be an odious system that oppresses our South African brothers and shames the community of nations. At the end of the twentieth century we cannot tolerate that outrageous abuse which still persists through force in southern Africa.
94.	Mexico recently condemned South Africa’s attacks against the territories of Zimbabwe, Botswana and Zambia.
95.	Mexico takes pride in taking part in this decisive session on Africa. For the first time the General Assembly has met in a special session to examine the economic
situation of a whole continent. We are witness to a major event in international life and an historic milestone in multilateral diplomacy. The political will of the world community now has the opportunity to turn this meeting into a victory for economic development co-operation and peace in accordance with the principles of the Charter. 96. Africa has felt the impact of the crisis in a serious way. Falling commodity prices have been accompanied by growing protectionism in the developed countries, by international financial and monetary disorder and by the burden of foreign debt. But Africa has also suffered in recent times unprecedented drought and desertification. 97. We the Member States are fully conscious of the stakes: the economic and political future of an enormous continent which accounts for one fourth of the world’s land surface and, above all, the lives of a great number of human beings, who by the end of the century will number close to 900 million. A universe of men, women and children that has seen its existence challenged by natural disasters, drought, desertification, the terrible aftermath of colonialism, and, recently, by an international economic recession.
98.	Confronted with the greatest economic crisis ever faced by any region of the planet, Africa today has turned to the United Nations in search of solidarity and action. Although the most urgent needs of the situation that prevailed from 1982 to 1985 have been partially alleviated, the profound crisis of the continent requires concerted world action to rehabilitate and restore as soon as possible its capacity for growth and development.
99.	Twenty-five years after the independence of the majority of the African countries, and in spite of the great efforts made, the basic structure of the continent’s economic relations has not yet been substantially transformed. National economies have become more vulnerable to changing external factors. We still find 60 to 80 per cent of GNP in the subsistence sector, and the result is that today one in five Africans depends on imported food. Africa’s foreign debt appears small compared to that of Latin America. However, in terms of income and exports, it is actually the highest among the developing countries. For the debtor countries of sub-Saharan Africa, debt represents about 50 per cent of their GNP.
100.	Between 1974 and 1985, the accumulated foreign debt of the region grew more than sevenfold, to $175 billion. Altogether, African Governments have rescheduled their debt more than 32 times over the past three years, and yet they still face a critical situation. The restructurings that have taken place, while they may have lightened the immediate burden, have increased the debt payments from approximately $4.3 billion per year between 1980 and 1982 to over $15 billion over the next five years. This situation, as explicitly recognized by the OAU, totally surpasses the means and repayment capacity of the African countries.
101.	Problems of underdevelopment cannot be solved exclusively from abroad. It is necessary to make enormous domestic efforts and to adopt the necessary internal measures to make economic headway. Nevertheless, the international community cannot elude its responsibilities and must assume its share of the costs.
102.	First of all, we must achieve better living conditions for all peoples and more just and equitable economic relations. Domestic efforts cannot sustain growth in debtor countries under adverse international conditions. Debt-servicing must be linked to the real capacity of each country to pay. No people can renounce its development and resign itself to recession. It is now time for the international community as a whole to recognize that the
payment of debt requires, as an indispensable condition, adequate growth and development and that this is impossible without opening the markets of the industrialized countries to our products. Those goals will not be reached without the adoption of concerted measures in the areas of money, finance and trade. The more we delay these necessary steps, the greater the suffering of our peoples will be and the greater the risk of seriously endangering the democratic structures established through the enormous efforts of our peoples.
103.	At stake is the harmony and stability of the world community. Without equitable economic and social development, without a just solution to national and regional problems, peace will be increasingly precarious, increasingly fragile.
104.	We vigorously support Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted at the twenty-first session of the OAU Assembly. The Programme encompasses the immediate recovery needs indispensable for attaining the long-term development goals and sustained development of the African nations.
105.	Africa’s Priority Programme is the j oint response of the Governments of Africa to the challenges of their countries’ immediate future. It reflects a political will at the highest level, flowing from the sovereign decision of States and their free will to undertake national actions with a specifically continental vocation. Its adoption clearly reveals the unquestionable decision of the peoples and Governments of Africa to exercise their own responsibility in the promotion and conduct of their development process: a free, autonomous and firm development in solidarity with the world community, which should respond with broad understanding to such unquestionable demands for justice.
106.	The Programme will require $128 billion for its implementation. The African nations have undertaken to provide, through enormous effort, 65 per cent of the funds needed. However, it is imperative that the international community fully activate the machinery for institutional and multilateral solidarity in order to channel $9.1 billion annually over the next five years towards underwriting the remaining 35 per cent.
107.	We have stressed that, given the extreme gravity of the situation, the proposals contained in the Priority Programme are but the first “common point of reference” of a broader series of international actions, to be taken together in order to redirect the economic life of the continent towards a renewal of its development process. That is how Mexico understands the unequivocal meaning of the African proposal to the General Assembly.
108.	Member States should now undertake the task of examining in depth and with a sense of respect, understanding and solidarity towards the nations of Africa the possibilities and machinery the world can and should implement in order to co-operate with them for the most successful outcome of their historic commitment to development. The Government of Mexico, as the representative of a sovereign State Member of the Organization, fully understands that the international community— by developing this draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990 [A/S-13/4 andCorr.l, annex F], and, most certainly, in the process of its implementation, follow-up and review— is committing its best efforts to strengthening the independence, autonomy and sovereignty of the nations of the continent without new attempts to impose tutelage. This independence and autonomy have been won as a result of centuries of struggle against political oppression and natural adversity.
109.	We wish to point out that at the annual academic seminar of Latin American and African students, which is now taking place in the capital of my country, it has been proposed—yesterday, in fact—that the General Assembly should proclaim 1987 as the Year for International Co-operation with Africa. We very much hope that this suggestion will elicit a favourable response from the international community.
110.	We should make full use of the opportunity offered by this special session and make the necessary political commitments. We must make use of our collective political will to identify the measures that will make it possible to overcome the critical situation in Africa.
111.	Mutual respect and the conviction that only when we are united will we be able to build a new system of international relations based on justice and equity should provide the framework for our deliberations. Each country, on the basis of its own historical experience, defines its own path. That path should be respected by others and should receive the necessary support, especially when it coincides and identifies completely with the purposes and goals of the San Francisco Charter.
112.	My delegation reiterates that Mexico is ready to serve this noble cause, within the limits of its possibilities, in order to ensure the success of this session, the result of which should be a better future option for Africa and the developing world.
113.	Mr. HOANG BICH SON (Viet Nam) (interpretation from French): First, on behalf of the delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, I wish to convey to the President and the members of the General Committee my warmest congratulations on their election to the leadership of this special session of the General Assembly. I am confident that under their expert and talented guidance this session will prove fruitful.
114.	This special session is of crucial importance, because it is the first time that the General Assembly has held a session to discuss medium-term and long-term measures to put an end to the economic crisis of an entire continent. 115. Mankind is preparing to enter the twenty-first century. With the transformation of economic structures oriented towards in-depth development going hand in hand with the most recent progress in the scientific and technological revolution, profound changes are occurring in production and people’s lives. At the same time, the economic and social situation in Africa is worsening every day. Underdevelopment, backward material and technical infrastructures, serious economic dependency on the outside world, the ever-present dearth of food and the everincreasing debt burden are the salient features of the present state of the economy in Africa, a situation which is a source of serious concern for the international community. 116. The delegation of Viet Nam believes that the state of poverty, backwardness and dependency of the African economy stems first and foremost from centuries of domination and exploitation by colonialism. By means of a difficult, determined struggle, the African countries have by turns regained their political independence, but imperialist forces are doing their utmost to continue to plunder Africa’s natural and human resources and to keep the African countries dependent on the imperialist States by means of neo-colonialism. The policy of the imperialist countries, which consists in shifting the burden of the crisis on to the developing countries and implementing measures of economic terrorism, has done serious damage to the African countries. What is more, those countries do not enjoy a situation of peace and stability in which to bring about their economic development. The racist régime of South Africa and other reactionary forces,
assisted by a certain number of Western countries, indulge in destabilizing activities which merely exacerbate the critical economic situation of the African countries at the present time. The United States armed attack against Libya, its assistance to UNITA5 against Angola and the recent attacks by the Pretoria régime against Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana not only endanger the independence and sovereignty of those nations but undermine their economic development efforts. For southern Africa alone, the economic damage caused by the racist régime of South Africa over the past five years amounts to more than $10 billion—more than four times the assistance received by the affected countries.
117.	In addition to those basic causes, natural factors— natural disasters, drought and desertification—as well as economic management shortcomings, have helped to exacerbate the crisis.
118.	In the circumstances, the search for a comprehensive solution combining emergency measures with longterm ones is vital. First, it is necessary to eliminate the causes of the critical economic situation in Africa, that is, the capitalist developed countries and the racist régime of South Africa must end their neo-colonialist policies and acts of aggression, intervention and destabilization. At the same time, the African countries must carry out progressive economic and social reforms internally. Confidence must be established in international economic relations. Recourse to economic measures to exert political pressure on the developing countries must cease and disarmament must be effected in order to release resources for development investment, including increased assistance to the African countries.
119.	My delegation supports the measures advocated in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the OAU Assembly at its July 1985 session and submitted by the OAU to this special session of the General Assembly. In the opinion of the delegation of Viet Nam, the most important sector on which to concentrate efforts is agricultural production, which must be stepped up if food self-sufficiency is to be achieved by the end of the century.
Mr. Pop (Romania), Vice-President, took the Chair. 120. The establishment of a solid economic infrastructure is decisive for the success of the recovery programme. In my delegation’s view, to achieve that goal the African Governments alone are capable of strengthening their social and economic institutions in order to meet the development challenges by improving their management systems, rationalizing their activities and eliminating overlapping.
121.	Given the gravity of the economic crisis besetting Africa and the limited means available to the African countries, the assistance of the international community is particularly vital. However, we must stress that the responsibility lies first with those States that more or less participated in exploiting the African nations. We believe that in lending assistance to the African countries, other countries must respect their independence, sovereignty and development options.
122.	My delegation endorses the proposals of the African countries, supplemented by the measures put forward by the Secretary-General and the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee concerning the position of the international community on Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery. They are as follows. First, the developed capitalist countries must be more flexible in regard to loan conditions and administrative procedures, increase their assistance budgets and depoliticize such assistance. Secondly, the international community must enter into
viable practical commitments with the African countries so as to alleviate the debt burden and debt-servicing for the African countries, including the conversion of the public debt and interest into grants. Thirdly, the developed capitalist countries must assume responsibility for guaranteeing terms of trade for commodities by instituting income-stabilization plans. Fourthly, the economic destabilization policies of the racist regime of South Africa must be neutralized by the imposition of an economic embargo against South Africa. Fifthly, SouthSouth co-operation must be stepped up in the spirit of collective self-reliance of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Caracas Programme of Action.6
123.	Viet Nam, a developing country, spent a hundred years under colonial domination and more than 30 years resisting a war of aggression and sabotage waged by enemy external forces. It therefore well understands the economic difficulties that beset Africa. Despite the geographical distance and the many economic difficulties Viet Nam faces, it has sought and will continue to seek as far as it can to increase co-operation with the African countries by sending specialists and sharing our experience in various fields such as culture, education, health, hydraulics, transport and communications, and so forth.
124.	The urgent question facing African countries and this special session is that of defining effective comprehensive measures to overcome Africa’s present economic situation. Viet Nam has experienced similar circumstances and has special relations with the African countries in their struggle to win and defend their political independence and economic development. The delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam pledges close co-operation with the President and the other delegations, in particular those of Africa, to make this session a success.
125.	Mr. CAVE (Barbados): The delegation of Barbados welcomes this opportunity to address the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. This is an historic occasion, since it is the first time that the representatives of nearly all mankind have come together to focus attention on the problems besetting a whole continent and its people. Moreover, the convening of this session, following a call by the twenty-first session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, is a positive indication of the responsiveness of this body to the evolving needs of the African States.
126.	The situation in Africa holds many lessons for the international community. It is ironic that on the very threshold of the twenty-first century, with the stars within our reach, famine and premature death still stalk the land believed to be the cradle of human life. It is equally paradoxical that Africa, despite its vast size and abundance of resources, remains the least developed of all the continents. Africa is a lesson in the consequences of neglect by the international community. At the same time, Africa presents a unique opportunity to redress past mistakes.
127.	Much has already been done to meet the basic needs of the millions that suffer in Africa, and so far the providing of emergency relief assistance to Africa has been emphasized. Indeed, the international response has been admirable and without doubt has helped to relieve some of the suffering of countless men, women and children. The global outpouring of concern and generosity has reaffirmed faith in the essential goodness of mankind.
128.	Short-term, stop-gap measures have their place. However, a much greater task lies ahead: that of ensuring
that a recurrence of the African crisis is humanly preventable. The challenge facing the international community is to extend the humanitarian response to the drought-aggravated emergency in Africa into a commitment to finding solutions to Africa’s more entrenched economic problems.
129.	Today there is growing appreciation that drought, desertification and famine are but symptoms, albeit of catastrophic proportions, of deeper problems besetting Africa. The delegation of Barbados wishes to remind all here that the problems Africa now faces are not uniquely African. They are the classic and traditional problems of development: those of finding institutions that will address the idiosyncracies of environment, the prejudices of culture and the legacies of history. The drought has merely accentuated the more pervasive structural problems of the African economy. Taking this into account, it seems to us that no amount of relief assistance will prevent a recurrence of the ecological and human disaster in Africa. A major shift in emphasis to rehabilitation and long-term development is therefore required.
130.	The delegation of Barbados will not dwell on an analysis of the origins and causes of Africa’s economic crisis. These have already been discussed by our colleagues from Africa. However, differences in perception of the nature of Africa’s problems are important in so far as they predicate the type of response which is supported or endorsed. Regrettably, ad.hoc short-term treatments have now become prevalent features of international economic relations. These do nothing to cure the deep-rooted illness afflicting the patient but merely assuage the more obvious symptoms.
131.	The delegation of Barbados suggests that the longterm solution of Africa’s economic problems is possible only if economic struggles are adjusted to accommodate the dynamics of African development. Africa remains largely dependent on primary production, while many other parts of the developing world have embarked on programmes of industrialization. Weak linkages between productive sectors at the domestic level and a relative absence of interdependence between the national economies of Africa also combine to prevent the continent from realizing its full potential.
132.	A major step would be taken if this special session were to give effect to the concept of a partnership between African States and the rest of the international community. Regrettably, there have been some disconcerting signs that, while the developed countries have been quite magnanimous in providing emergency aid to Africa, the commitment of some States to the long-term recovery and economic development of Africa has not been readily apparent. The delegation of Barbados wishes, however, to take public note of the marked commitment of the Government of Canada to the future development of Africa.
133.	There is nothing to be gained and much to be lost by Africa remaining economically disadvantaged. There can be no true international economic recovery while the threat of economic disaster hangs over Africa’s millions. International peace and security will be fragile if the international community continues to turn a blind eye to the long-term development needs of Africa.
134.	At the same time, we recognize that no solution to Africa’s economic problems can be achieved without the African States themselves becoming the driving force behind their economic development. The African States have acknowledged that they have the primary responsibility for revitalizing their economies, and we note with
satisfaction that they have taken the initiative in formulating strategies geared towards the rehabilitation and economic recovery of Africa.
135.	The adoption by the OAU Assembly in July 1985 of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 is the most recent indication that African States are not satisfied to look only to the international community for the solution to their problems. In the Priority Programme they have adopted a package of measures intended to achieve self-reliant and self-sustained development at the national and continental levels. The Government of Barbados whole-heartedly supports this effort which places due emphasis on self-help programmes. In the long run, whatever positive results are achieved will be better integrated into the national and regional economic milieu of Africa.
136.	However, there are certain realities which must be recognized. One is that the African States will not be able by themselves to mobilize all the resources necessary to relaunch their economic development process. The other is that there are many obstacles to this process in the international environment, obstacles which, we suggest, are beyond the control of African States: obstacles in the form of protectionist policies by developed countries, shrinking prices for commodities, declining terms of trade, massive debt and crippling terms of debt repayment. All these are factors which highlight the need for urgent action by the international community in support of the Priority Programme. .
137.	The crisis in Africa can in years to come be regarded as just another symptom of global catastrophe, or Africa can be remembered as the continent in which the downward spiral was checked and reversed. The scenario depends in large part on the decisions which will be taken here. The major developing countries can build upon their outstanding record of humanitarian assistance by supporting the economic recovery programmes of the African States, or they can allow the efforts of the last few years to be wasted. There should be no illusions: unless a significant effort is made to address the fundamental structural problems of Africa, another crisis of even greater proportions is entirely possible.
138.	For a few days last week, while discussions proceeded in the Preparatory Committee, another issue of critical importance to peace and security in Africa seized our attention. I refer, of course, to the raids by the racist régime in Pretoria against Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Barbados, which only yesterday had its fourth general election since independence in 1966, understands all too well the correlation between genuine self-determination and the process of economic development. The Government of Barbados views the continued existence of the illegal Pretoria régime as a major obstacle to the economic recovery and development of the front-line States, and indeed the true development of all of southern Africa. How can these States devote their full energies to solving their economic problems in the face of attack and the threat of attack by South Africa? How can they make maximum use of their scarce financial resources when they must attempt to defend themselves against the military might of Pretoria?
139.	Nature and history have not always been kind to Africa and its peoples. The delegation of Barbados understands in intimate terms the pillage that was slavery, the tragedy that was colonialism and the scars they have left on the African psyche. Today, the remnant of these vicissitudes survives, shamelessly and brazenly displayed in the politics of Pretoria.
140.	Harsh climatic conditions have frequently made life for millions of Africans a monumental challenge in survival. Now, as the stricken continent frees itself from the ravages of famine and drought, we are informed by FAO that a plague of locusts stands poised' to do more damage to African lands. This new menace can only underscore the urgency with which wé must bestir ourselves.
141.	Mysterious are the powers that govern the destinies of man. Perhaps the locusts, an old and relentless enemy of the welfare of mankind, have come to us as a timely signal, a reminder that we should not, must not, turn our backs upon our neighbours.
142.	We end our remarks with a resolute pledge of solidarity with the States of Africa and with the solemn hope that this special session shall not have been summoned in vain. ■
143.	Mr. GYI (Burma): My delegation welcomes and appreciates the President’s able direction of this special session and takes this opportunity to extend our felicitations to him.
144.	As we pursue our deliberations on the critical economic situation in Africa, it is indeed noteworthy that, through their will and determination and with the cooperation of the international community, the African States have managed to overcome the immediate crisis. Despite this situation, there remains a continuing need to maintain the momentum for relief and rehabilitation, and beyond that the imperative need to find longer-term measures for the building of viable economies. That calls for further co-operation at the international level which is more comprehensive in scope and character.
145.	In his report to the fortieth session of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General mentioned that African countries had been adversely affected by various demographic and political pressures, desertification, structural problems, agricultural difficulties and an unfavourable international economic climate. Hence, it would only be appropriate that the international community should perceive the need for concerted action to assist African nations in overcoming their difficulties; that would require co-operation in accordance with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and, accordingly, on the basis of the principles of equal rights and self-determination for the peoples of Africa.
146.	It is in that spirit that we welcome the convening of the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. This session will enable the international community to continue its concerted efforts to search for appropriate measures for the recovery and development of Africa—an issue that has been of vital importance in debates in the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for the past two years.
147.	Acting in accordance with the wishes of the African States, the General Assembly last December adopted without a vote resolution 40/40, providing for the convening of a special session of the Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. The primary objective of this session is to focus discussion on the medium-and long-term problems and challenges facing African countries, with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures. Among the most important issues to be deliberated and acted upon at present are issues of food and agriculture, debt and the related issues of resource flows and export earnings, the infrastructure and other supporting sectors.
148.	The countries of Africa no doubt look to this session to focus on the restoration of their economies and
on medium- and long-term development problems and to achieve results in programmes aimed at the economic recovery of their continent. It remains the task of the world community to assist in this endeavour with an integrated approach toward the effective mobilization of financial and material resources for the rehabilitation of the economies of Africa.
149.	Here, it would be pertinent to mention that the OAU has been appropriately in the forefront of mobilizing support to alleviate the multitude of difficulties afflicting their continent. The holding of this special session and the results it could achieve testify to their will and courage and their determination to overcome the difficulties they face. Indeed, it was the African leaders and Governments themselves who showed the vision and will to deal with the situation and to initiate action for the convening of this session. It may be recalled that at the twenty-first session of the OAU Assembly in July 1985 at Addis Ababa, the African Heads of State and Government proposed this special session. The decision of the African leaders was that it should address the root causes of the critical economic situation in Africa, to prevent such emergencies in the future and to enable Africa once again to take the path of self-sustained development. Moreover, the African leaders have reaffirmed that the primary responsibility for the development of their continent lies with the peoples themselves. Accordingly, they have dedicated themselves to all efforts towards the achievement of that end.
150.	The OAU has already adopted a Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa,3 with a priority programme for sustained development providing for: accelerated implementation of the Lagos Plan of Action,4 improvement of the food and agricultural situation in Africa, relieving the burden of external debt, a common platform for action at various regional and international levels and action against the effects of South Africa’s systematic policy of destabilization of the States of southern Africa. Hence, it is to working out a common platform for joint action at the international level that this session is required to devote its efforts.
151.	The United Nations and its various agencies have played a commendable and significant role in dealing with the emergency situation. The management of the economic crisis in Africa has clearly demonstrated the effective role that the United Nations system can play in promoting international co-ordination and co-operation. Such co-ordination demonstrates the kind of resources that the United Nations can effectively muster once a concerted decision has been achieved to respond to an international emergency. In view of their organizational capabilities and budgetary resources, the United Nations system and other international organizations will undoubtedly continue to play an important role in the co-ordination and implementation of further measures.
152.	Much has been said about the root causes of the situation in Africa. Internal economic factors affecting the continent are among the critical areas that deserve to be examined more closely in order effectively to overcome the crisis. An assessment that the economies of African countries are in many ways similar to those of developing countries elsewhere would not be incorrect. Moreover, desertification continues to eat away 600,000 to 700,000 square kilometres of arable land each year, and Africa periodically suffers from other natural disasters such as heavy rains and floods. Despite heavy rains at times, Africa has been termed the driest of continents, where only one fifth of the land can be cultivated.
153.	Apart from the problems of an internal nature, external economic factors have severely affected the
economies of many African countries. The world economic recession of the past few years has greatly reduced export earnings, leading to increased external indebtedness. This has resulted in a marked decrease in standards of living. The lack of growth in the GNP, the fall in export prices, the stagnation of development assistance, protectionism on the part of some countries: all have their effects on the African crisis. The priority in this area should be economic co-operation between Africa and countries elsewhere in the world, particularly in the fields of debt, trade, development assistance and finance. And in this regard the countries of the developed world, particularly the major industrialized States, by virtue of their capacities have a greater role to play.
154.	In response to appeals by the Secretary-General, Burma has endeavoured to contribute, within the limits of its means, material assistance to the affected areas. Its contribution, though relatively modest, is ample demonstration of Burma’s solidarity and friendship with the countries and peoples of Africa in their time of difficulty.
155.	In conclusion, the process of transition from emergency relief to ensure survival to medium- and long-term assistance for economic recovery and development will require sustained co-operation. At the same time, it cannot be denied that Africa possesses tremendous potential for growth, and the continent is rich in minerals. With this abundance of human and natural resources, and with the support of the international community, the countries of Africa should overcome their difficulties and resume the path of self-sustained development.
156.	Mr. MELÉNDEZ (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): The economic rehabilitation and medium- and long-term development of Africa are among the most important and urgent issues of our time. Hence, my Government considers the convening of this special session of the General Assembly to be very timely.
157.	This is the first time the Assembly has met. to consider the problems of a specific region. As is clearly stated in resolution 40/40, the objectives of the session will be attained only through practical and concerted measures. In this regard, we should not lose sight of the fact that the critical economic situation in Africa is an inseparable part of the whole picture of the poverty and backwardness of the developing world and that the measures we are requesting today for Africa should, within the wider context of solving the economic problems of the third world, make a significant contribution to the inauguration of the new international economic order.
158.	The critical situation of Africa has become a priority issue in the international debate, precisely because of the obvious fact that its gravity allows for no postponement. The time has come for the international community to show its capacity to find solutions urgently to deal with the situation and contribute to the genuine economic and social development of Africa.
159.	While the continent is suffering an unprecedented decline in its food and agricultural production, which has led to an alarming increase in the number of people suffering from hunger and malnutrition, or even dying of starvation, some developed Western countries are destroying food to keep up prices in the world market, or using “food aid” as a means of economic coercion for political purposes or permitting their transnational corporations, against the will of the international community and the decisions of the United Nations,-to foster agricultural and food development in South Africa, for the exclusive benefit of the racist Pretoria régime. In contrast with the poverty prevailing in the rest of the continent and among South Africa’s majority black
population, the South African racists enjoy standards of living comparable only to those of their Western partners and supporters.
160.	Cuba has closely followed the dramatic situation in Africa and has always shown its solidarity with the African peoples. We have devoted particular attention to Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity in July 1985, which contains the appraisal made by the countries of the region of their own problems and the means for their solution. It was at the twenty-first session of the OAU Assembly that the initiative for convening this special session emerged. Therefore, it is only logical that the African countries themselves should be the ones to indicate the ways and means by which the international community can be of assistance, on the basis of the principles elaborated by the developing countries over the last two decades.
161.	As the African Governments have rightly pointed out, the main causes of the profound social and economic crisis of Africa are of a structural nature, arising both from internal insufficiencies and imbalances and from the prevailing system of international economic relations. We agree with their acknowledgement of the need to transform the obsolete structures inherited from colonialism, which have helped to maintain the dependency and vulnerability of their economies and which constitute an obstacle to the implementation of comprehensive social measures designed to involve the entire population in the development process.
162.	We observed with concern the way in which, during the preparations for this session, some delegations persistently supported concepts implying that the Africans are primarily and almost exclusively to blame for the African crisis and that it could be resolved with greater use of the old, discredited formulas of IMF and the World Bank which, without promoting any development whatsoever, have resulted only in the greater economic dependence of the underdeveloped countries and the elimination of programmes benefiting the people.
163.	To all these difficulties have been added in recent years adverse climatic factors, which have had negative effects precisely because of the weaknesses of the national economies. Crop yields have been affected by severe and continued drought in some regions and by floods or variable rainfall in others, as well as by pests and disease, which have found an environment propitious to their development.
164.	In order to combat those factors—or, rather, their effects—we believe efforts must be concentrated on strengthening and diversifying African economies, developing technically supported, intensive agriculture, fostering industrialization and the development of science and technology and training the human resources on a large scale. That task is, of course, incumbent upon the African Governments, implementing in each case their own economic and social policies to assist in the realization of the national and regional endeavour that they intend to undertake. We support, in general terms, the proposals in the Priority Programme, and we share the view that agriculture and food should be the priority sectors for the purpose of achieving those goals, as a starting point from which to bring about comprehensive, self-sustained development.
165.	However, the African peoples will not be able to undertake this gigantic task entirely on their own, They will require all the assistance the international community can mobilize, without conditions and with a sense of true
solidarity towards the continent. The assistance rendered must be really effective and free from any discrimination whatsoever.
166.	We are convinced that there are many areas in which the United Nations could play an important role, both in mobilizing the needed resources and in implementing specific measures to deal with the critical needs. Much could be accomplished by the international community, and much more expeditiously, if the present crusade being waged by some imperialist countries against multilateralism and the pressures they exert upon the Organization and the United Nations system as a whole did not exist.
167.	We have said in other forums, and we reiterate today, that Africa is an inexhaustible reservoir of intelligence, skill and energy and that therefore it does not need any alien instruction to handle its own destiny. Rather, Africa needs to be freed of the shackles that have hindered its integral development, which include, apart from its inherited structural problems, unequal terms of trade, protectionist barriers and the usurious financial and monetary policies of some developed countries. Africa requires, in sum, the termination of the prevailing system of unjust economic relations affecting all underdeveloped countries.
168.	It is clear that immediate international assistance will have to encompass a substantial mobilization of concessional financial resources, because in present conditions there are no productive capacities in Africa that can generate the means required to implement even a shortterm process of economic recovery. In addition, the scarcity of foreign exchange is largely a consequence of the reverse transfer of resources which characterizes the continent’s relations with developed countries. Hence the moral and historical responsibility of the former colonial Powers and the need for them to commit themselves to share in those efforts.
169.	The international community should contribute to a lasting and effective solution to Africa’s economic and social crisis. That will be possible only through the adoption of political decisions allowing, without further delay, for the establishment of the new international economic order and the creation of fair and adequate external conditions consonant with the internal efforts to be made by the African nations.
170.	Solving the problem of Africa’s external debt, which amounted to more than $170 billion in 1985, and whose servicing will imply an annual disbursement in the next five years of between $14 billion and $22 billion, is particularly relevant in this connection. It would thus be inconceivable to initiate the economic recovery of Africa without solving this unbearable problem. As indicated in the document adopted by the OAU in March of this year,1 if international support is limited simply to meeting the financial-investment requirements without substantially alleviating external-debt servicing, by the end of the recovery period 1986-1990 African nations will be worse off than they are today.
171.	We are aware of the difficulties presented by the mobilization of such vast resources. However, the international responsibility is clear, and the means for obtaining such resources do exist. By reducing by 10 or 12 per cent the military expenditures of but one imperialist Power—the United States—enough resources would be obtained to cover the financial obligations not only of Africa but of the entire third world, including its investment needs.
172.	This special session of the General Assembly must produce real solutions for the problems that afflict the
vast majority of our peoples exclusively, problems that threaten to produce social cataclysms of unsuspected historical dimensions if their current manifestations are not confronted in time and with the resources required. 173. On the other hand, the economic and social situation in Africa, as in the rest of the so-called third world, is aggravated by tensions, interventions and the use of force in international relations. The destabilizing and criminal actions by the racist régime of South Africa against several States in the region, in particular the front-line States, its illegal occupation of the territory of Namibia and its policy of apartheid, are elements that must be resolved if a definitive response to the problems of the continent is to be found. The racist South African régime, which enjoys the financial, political and military support of the major Western developed countries, will always be an obstacle to the economic and social welfare of the African peoples and to peace in Africa.
174.	Development efforts are also compromised by acts of aggression and attacks such as that recently perpetrated against Libya, in flagrant violation of international law and of the Charter of the United Nations. That attack also revealed the imperialists’ contempt for the peoples of Africa and their true designs on those nations that have opted for independent development.
175.	The development of Africa, like that of all our countries, must be based on respect for the sovereignty and independence of each one of the States and on its right to live in peace in a necessarily interdependent and diverse world.
176.	Despite being an underdeveloped country with scarce economic resources, Cuba has lent its modest and disinterested co-operation to many African nations on the basis of the principle of solidarity and mutual respect. For years, our co-operation has been developed through sending doctors and teachers and through granting technical assistance and scholarships, among other modalities of co-operation.
177.	For example, between 1981 and 1985 the technical assistance rendered amounted to more than 46,000 expertmonths per year. High-level experts represent 35 per cent of that figure, and middle-level technicians 45 per cent, and the remainder are skilled workers. According to their occupational profiles, 36 per cent have been engaged in health, 24 per cent in various branches of the productive sector, 21 per cent in the various levels of education and the remaining 19 per cent in other activities and areas of the economy.
178.	Another important form of co-operation has been the training of personnel in our country in various productive, technical and scientific fields. More than 16,000 African students are studying in Cuba, including 12,600 in the schools of the Isle of Youth, where middle- to high-level education in various specialities is provided. During the same period 1981 to 1985, 8,376 trainees upgraded their qualifications in short-term theoretical and practical courses.
179.	What Africa needs is urgent and generous international co-operation and the creation of conditions that will make possible a self-sustained economic and social development, with independence and respect for the sovereignty of its peoples. While it is necessary to focus attention on meeting their immediate basic needs, it is indispensable that actions be taken for the comprehensive and longer-term development of the region.
180.	In conclusion, we should like to express our full support for Africa’s desire that this special session not become a mere exercise in rhetoric but, rather, the political expression of genuine support for the solution of its problems. It is the responsibility of all and a moral and historical obligation for those who, having benefited from colonial exploitation, today have the inescapable duty to contribute to building a better future for the African peoples.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
.	Notes
■Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC.229/2).
2A/40/666, annex I, declaration AGH/Decl. 1 (XXI), annex.
¡Ibid., declaration AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI). .
4	Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
5	Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola.
6	Caracas Programme of Action on economic co-operation among developing countries, adopted at the High-Level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981.
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
6th PLENARY MEETING
Official Records
Thursday, 29 May 1986, at 3.20 p.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINliS (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)
1.	Mr. PANGALOS (Greece): Mr. President, at this historic session of the Assembly, I wish to express the hope that with your long experience in the United Nations you will successfully guide our efforts in seeking the lasting and accelerated development of the African continent.
2.	Greece particularly welcomes this special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, since this is one of the greatest challenges facing the world today. For the first time, all nations of the world are joining together to examine ways and means of helping an entire continent overcome its present difficulties and achieve social and economic development. The initiative could become a unique example of international solidarity. The task is vast and extremely complex. The support of all concerned is needed if the endeavours of the African countries to restore the necessary economic growth are to succeed. So far as Greece is concerned, we intend to contribute, to the utmost limit of our possibilities, to the success of this session.
3.	Our attitude is not guided by a sense of international human solidarity only. Greece for centuries has promoted very close ties with the African continent, where important Greek communities are active, thus contributing to an increase in genuinely friendly relations and links of close co-operation with the peoples of Africa. Mutual interest and sincere co-operation have led to close political ties, which have been further strengthened in recent years within the wider context of Greece’s international orientation. It is my Government’s intention to further promote these ties in the political, economic, commercial and cultural fields.
4.	The whole continent of Africa, and particularly the sub-Saharan States, was severely tried by the disastrous droughts and famine of 1983-1985. The internationally co-ordinated response to this calamity was successful and managed to save thousands of lives. It was one of the most encouraging examples of international co-operation and solidarity, with the United Nations playing an important role. The people of Greece were profoundly moved by the crisis and responded by participating substantially in the international relief efforts. Those efforts have continued through the first half of 1986. Greece has made an important contribution in food aid to Ethiopia, Madagascar and the Sudan. In 1986 the Greek Parliament, despite serious budgetary constraints imposed in other
fields, adopted its first bilateral aid programme for African countries. Furthermore, Greece, as a member of the European Economic Community, played its part within the Community in the adoption of a series of measures to deal with the African emergency.
5.	However, the challenge remains. It is not enough simply to try to alleviate the results of natural disasters. Long-term efforts should focus on fundamental structural changes and on strengthening the productive capacity of African economies. The international community is beginning, through the present special session, its attempts to deal with the basic needs and difficulties of the African continent.
6.	The problems facing Africa are not of recent origin. They are the disastrous conclusion of a long process of exploitation of human and natural resources that defies reason. Since the eighteenth century the internal development needs of the peoples of Africa have systematically been subordinated to the successive priorities of the northern metropolitan countries.
7.	The majority of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa gained their independence less than 30 years ago. At that time, poverty was prevalent, infrastructures were almost non-existent, educational levels and workers’ skills were very low and agriculture was still at a very early stage of development. The prevailing conditions were further aggravated by adverse developments on the international economic scene. The oil crises, the world-wide recession of the early 1980s and the instability and gradual decline of commodity prices are among the well-known factors which have so negatively and deeply affected the economies of practically all African countries. Moreover, in many cases political difficulties have produced fragile systems with inadequate institutional infrastructure and management. In this context, cases of inefficient and misdirected use of resources should also be noted. This situation worsened further because of the recent weather-induced environmental disruptions.
8.	This deteriorating situation, which was caused by a combination of internal and external factors, has led the African States to start taking the measures necessary to deal with the critical situation. On their own initiative they have recently embarked upon important policy changes in order to improve their economic management and strengthen incentive schemes in agricultural production.
9.	In 1985, African heads of State and Government adopted Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 The Programme outlines the determination of the African people to initiate durable structural change and points out the principal directions in which the much-needed external resources must be channelled to ensure a successful recovery. The Programme has greatly influenced our thinking, and it is an indispensable input for our work at this special session.
10.	The consensus emerging among the African countries on the need for policy changes is an encouraging development and must be further pursued with determination. However, it is for the African countries themselves freely to adopt the measures necessary for the reversal of
the negative trend of their economies. There should be no outside pressure to force the African States to adopt policies they are unwilling to accept. History has shown that outside pressure is, in the long run, an ineffectual way to resolve difficulties.
11.	I would like to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s appreciation to the Preparatory Committee and its officers for the exemplary way in which they have tried to bridge the unavoidable differences of opinion that exist. The deliberations of the Preparatory Committee have identified a number of areas in which action is needed. The most critical of these are: the question of the increased flow of resources, the better use of aid, the problem of debt, and food availability and production. 12, There is clear recognition that external resources alone cannot cause a breakthrough in the development efforts of the countries in the region. However, it is difficult to see how recovery can start without a significant injection of liquidity. The crisis in Africa clearly calls for the mobilization of more funds. In the context of effective international action, substantial resources could be released from the arms race and channelled into the desperately needed economic and social development of Africa.
13.	There is an emerging consensus that the particularly difficult external economic environment has caused a severe loss for Africa of much-needed export earnings. The present trend in concessional finance should be improved and the lending capacity of multilateral development institutions should be strengthened. The successful replenishment of IDA resources by $12 billion is essential, and improvements should be devised in the operation of multilateral frameworks for debt reorganization. We fully endorse that approach.
14.	Better use of aid to African countries should be ensured by improved co-ordination between bilateral donors and international agencies and banks in support of policies of African Governments geared towards more efficient use of resources.
15.	The debt situation of Africa should be of particular concern to all members of the international community. The total debt of sub-Saharan Africa is estimated to be of the order of $70 billion. Although the amount is not exorbitant in view of the large number of countries concerned, that debt constitutes a crushing burden on African States, particularly in view of the fragile situation of their economies. This situation is further aggravated by the fact that during the past two years there has been a virtual withdrawal of voluntary lending by private banks. The trend of declining flow from major sources when Africa needs them the most should be of serious concern to the Assembly. Africa needs immediate relief from the crushing burden of its debt.
16.	Regarding the question of food availability and production, I should like to refer to the thorough analysis of the agricultural problems of Africa contained in the Priority Programme. The thrust of the analysis is towards the transition from food emergency to the establishment of long-term measures for self-sustaining development and self-sufficiency in food for the African continent. The efforts of African Governments should be supported by a considerable flow of concessional resources. The European Community and its member States contribute substantially to that end, both bilaterally and within the framework of the Third Lome Convention.
17.	In the quest for efficiency we should not sacrifice certain fundamental human needs. The adjustment process should not be seen as an economic exercise only but as a broader approach encompassing basic elements such
as the preservation of minimum levels of nutrition, the provision of acceptable services for all age groups and support of young children. Attention should be paid to low-income families and the maintenance of decent levels of health and education. The human being is the ultimate objective of economic development.
18.	I would be remiss if in this context I did not refer to the abhorrent policies of apartheid. It is a practice which, apart from being a flagrant violation of human rights, also undermines the development process in Africa. The Government of Greece once more most categorically condemns apartheid and demands that the South African Government eliminate it. My Government equally condemns South Africa’s continued acts of violence, which extend even beyond its borders.
19.	As far as the question of Namibia is concerned, my Government demands the unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) without further delay.
20.	The challenge to the Assembly is to mobilize the efforts of the entire international community to assist the African continent to overcome its present difficulties. We support all efforts to strengthen open, balanced, fruitful co-operation based on dialogue and equality. The international community should consider all feasible and effective measures so that, through international financial co-operation, policy recommendations and guidelines can be worked out for the alleviation of the serious position of many African countries.
21.	In concluding, I wish to stress once more that Greece, which has been deeply touched by the situation in Africa, will continue to address the continent’s problems with the great attention they deserve. I reiterate my Government’s commitment to the cause of the development and progress of Africa. We are ready to share with our African friends the experience gained from the development efforts of my own country.
22.	Mr. MIKULICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): The problem of the critical economic situation in Africa before this special session has deep social, economic and political roots. We share the opinion of those delegations that view it as the result of such long-term factors inherited from the colonial past as the social and economic backwardness and poverty of the continent, the neo-colonial exploitation of African nations by the monopolies of the developed countries of the West, and rapacious exploitation of natural resources by transnational corporations.
23.	Many facts attest to the critical economic situation of the African peoples, and the following data may serve as an example. In 1985 the gross national product per capita in most African countries fell to the level of that of 1960 and was 20 per cent lower than in 1980. As pointed out by the representative of Nigeria at this session ¡2nd meeting], the survival of one in five Africans depends on food imports.
24.	We express our sincere sympathy with the suffering masses of Africa. We believe that the crisis in Africa cannot be overcome by isolated acts of assistance. Radical action to reorganize the entire structure of the present inequitable international economic relations is needed.
25.	First of all, the general political situation in the world must be normalized. The arms race, provoked by imperialism, and the dangerous plans for the militarization of outer space are diverting gigantic sums from social and economic development needs, reducing the ability of the international community to promote the progress of
the developing countries, and forcing the latter to spend already scarce resources for military purposes.
26.	We support those delegations at this session that have denounced United States aggression against Libya. It is common knowledge that the United States policy of State terrorism encourages Israel and Pretoria in their aggressive acts.
27.	Recently the racist régime of South Africa carried out yet another act of banditry in attacking the neighbouring States of Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana. In its statement in this connection on 21 May the Soviet Government stated emphatically that
“The demand of the world community for the application to the racist régime of the Republic of South Africa of comprehensive mandatory sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations should at long last be carried out, in the interests of the peaceful future of our planet”.
28.	The disastrous situation in developing African countries and the arms race that continues because of imperialism are directly interrelated. As indicated by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, M. S. Gorbachev, on 15 January 1986, “The principle imposed by militarism—arms instead of development—must be replaced by the reverse: disarmament for development”.
29.	We wish to emphasize the importance of establishing a comprehensive system of international security, the basic principles of which were formulated by the XXVIIth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has made another proposal, on convening a world congress on problems of economic security. These proposals are directly related to the solution of the problem of the critical economic situation in Africa. The resolutions of the General Assembly on restructuring international economic relations on the basis of equitable and democratic principles provide an excellent basis for the implementation of those proposals. All countries must intensify their efforts in the struggle to bring about the implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)] and the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolution 3201 (S-VI)].
30.	Representatives of certain Western States talk about employing so-called private initiatives to solve the problems facing African countries. Under cover of such assertions they are pursuing a policy of unlimited expansion of foreign private capital, above all by means of their transnational corporations in those countries, and by forcing them to develop in such a way as to keep them within the sphere of the world capitalist economy as subordinate suppliers of raw material. Because they control from 75 to 95 per cent of exports from Africa and manipulate prices, foreign transnational corporations appropriate 90 per cent of the proceeds from the sale of African iron ore, bauxite and cotton, and 60 to 80 per cent of those from the sale of tea, coffee, cocoa and citrus fruits.
31.	In this connection, we must state with regret that in the report of the Preparatory Committee to the present session the question of the predatory activities of transnational corporations in many developing countries of Africa has been passed over. It must be noted that, owing to the stubborn unwillingness of Western countries, the code of conduct for those corporations has not yet been developed. The corporations, because of their selfish interests, do not want to take into account the basic development needs of Africa.
32.	Several representatives speaking from this rostrum have demonstrated a desire to force the African countries to abandon the participation of State organs in the solution of economic development problems. Behind this there is the wish to leave the door wide open for the biggest capitalist monopolies, and give them the opportunity to exercise unrestricted control over the economy—and not only the economy—of African countries. It is precisely the uncontrolled functioning of the chaotic forces of private enterprise and the yoke of big monopolistic capital and its transnational corporations that stifle all manifestations of initiative by African States and lead to the one-sided, monocultural development of their economies, which suffer the adverse consequences of fluctuations in world prices.
33.	In order to solve their problems African countries need external assistance that will enable them to become self-sufficient and function without such assistance in the future. The Byelorussian SSR makes its own contribution to aid for African countries. Industrial equipment, agricultural machines and other products manufactured in our Republic are being supplied to many African countries, while 1,500 students from 45 African States study at secondary and higher-level specialized institutions in Byelorussia. Our specialists share their accumulated experience and knowledge with their colleagues in a number of African countries. Byelorussia helps African countries also by its voluntary contributions to UNDP and UNICEF. Byelorussia will continue to lend assistance to African States.
34.	The Byelorussian SSR shares the view expressed in the documents on the economic situation in Africa adopted at the twenty-first session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity in July 1985, that the economic difficulties of African countries can be solved through a more rational use of resources for the development of agriculture and by strengthening their own industrial base and other sectors of the economy. As was justly pointed out in the report of the Secretary-General to the fortieth session of the General Assembly entitled “Overall socioeconomic perspective of the world economy to the year 2000”, “Industrialization has failed to provide the dynamic force required for the structural transformation of the African economies”.2
35.	The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR therefore favours the adoption at this session of decisions which will be not a step backward but a step forward, with the objective of establishing a new, just international economic order, eliminating discrimination and arbitrariness from international economic relations, exercising effective control over the activities of transnational corporations, securing the just settlement of the problem of foreign debts and ensuring the economic security of the countries of the African continent.
36.	Mr. POP (Romania) (interpretation from French): I should like at the outset to stress the importance that Romania and its President,' Nicolae Ceausescu, attach to this special session devoted to the critical economic situation currently besetting Africa. The Romanian people and socialist Romania have consistently shown their support for and solidarity with the peoples of Africa in their struggle to eradicate colonialism once and for all, to consolidate their national independence and to develop in full freedom along the path of economic and social progress.
37.	In the view of the President of Romania, the gravity of the world economic situation, in particular the serious situation of the developing countries, demands that
everything possible be done, in a fresh and realistic approach, to tackle the economic questions, the underdevelopment and the foreign debt of developing countries and to establish a new international economic order.
38.	The present session is taking place in conditions in which the international situation continues to worsen as a result of the stepping up of the arms race, above all the nuclear-arms race, the existence of many conflicts and areas of tension, the world economic crisis, and the policy of force and interference in the internal affairs of other countries. Against this sombre backdrop we have witnessed a worsening of the extremely difficult situation of the developing countries, especially the least developed of them. The economic and social crisis in Africa is assuming tragic proportions. The very difficult situation inherited from the colonial period has been compounded by persistent, widening disparities in international economic relations, to the detriment of the developing countries. These disparities and inequities have been reflected in the persistence of dominant positions in the financial and banking system, the policy of excessively high interest rates, the increasingly heavy burden of foreign debt, and the protectionist measures that deny the products of African and other developing countries access to the markets of developed countries.
39.	At the same time, the world economic crisis is further aggravated by the continued increase in military expenditure. The gigantic material, technical and scientific, human and financial resources involved—currently assessed at the colossal figure of $1,000 billion per year— are an increasingly heavy burden on the shoulders of the peoples, acting as a brake on their economic development and an impediment to international economic and technical and scientific exchanges by creating new artificial barriers. The developing countries are the first to feel the damaging effect of this situation, which impedes their efforts to achieve economic and social progress. All that is further compounded in Africa’s case by the catastrophic effects of the prolonged drought, the process of desertification and other natural catastrophes, together with considerable losses caused by the persistence of the serious conflicts on the African continent, particularly in southern Africa. We believe that our present debate should help us to understand better the extremely injurious consequences for the world economy as a whole of the phenomena related to underdevelopment and thus lead all States to redouble their efforts to overcome these grave difficulties.
40.	Like other delegations, we wish to stress the special significance of the endeavours of the African countries within the OAU in producing Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 It is true that the essential element in giving effect to that Programme will continue to be the efforts of the African countries themselves, the mobilization of all their material and human potential in the cause of achieving their fundamental national objective: economic and social emancipation in conditions of full independence, equality of rights and co-operation with all the other States of the world.
41.	As a socialist developing country, Romania views its relations with the countries of Africa in the context of its general policy of close co-operation with and mutual support for other developing countries. We practise this co-operation drawing on our experience as a country which itself has been called upon during the past 40 years to resolve complex problems arising out of its economic and social development. On the basis of experience, Romania has identified and is developing various plans
and programmes of co-operàtion with the countries of Africa. The especially favourable climate created by frequent contacts between President Ceausescu and the heads of State or Government of a number of African countries has led to the signing of some 400 agreements, which have contributed greatly to a substantial development of trade and economic co-operation. This co-operation takes various forms, including the establishment of joint enterprises and the implementation in African countries of a considerable number of economic projects. Cooperation between Romania and the countries of Africa is developing in a fruitful manner, on the basis of economic principles of equity and mutual advantage.
42.	Bearing in mind the priority demands of the process of economic recovery and development in the African continent, as reflected also in the draft Programme of Action submitted to this session by the African countries [A/S-13/4 and Corr. J, annex V], Romania intends to strive similarly in the future to strengthen and expand its economic relations with the African countries. To this end we are ready to participate, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis and in conditions of mutual benefit, in carrying out economic projects of priority interest to African countries. With regard to the areas envisaged in the draft Programme, Romania is studying with interest the possibility of participating in the concerted implementation of projects aimed at developing and improving agricultural land, setting up and equipping centres for the mechanization of agriculture, developing activities in connection with livestock, constructing facilities for the storage and distribution of foodstuffs, supplying plants and providing technical assistance in the industrial sector, exploiting forests, producing fertilizers and building materials, and assembling trucks, tractors and agricultural machinery.
43.	Romania has always been ready to provide all possible support in the training of national management personnel, an essential element in any rapid development process. In recent years thousands of young Africans have studied in universities and institutions of higher education in Romania. We shall continue to provide all the necessary assistance in the training of new groups of specialists.
44.	A lasting solution to the problems faced by the African countries must be sought in the context of redoubled efforts to eliminate underdevelopment as a whole at the global level. We take the view that it is in the interest of all States, including industrialized countries, to ensure . the eradication as soon as possible of underdevelopment and the great economic gulf that divides the world into rich countries and poor countries. The grave problems of underdevelopment cannot be solved by any one group of States; they can be solved only through the participation of all the countries in the world, within the United Nations. Quite clearly, this calls for a fresh policy based on the equality of all nations.
45.	At the present time the gravest problem besetting the developing countries is that of external debt, which in recent years has reached alarming proportions. We therefore believe that there is need for urgent action to find ways to solve this problem. To that end, Romania has proposed that creditors—States, banks, financial institutions—and developing countries identify a set of principles capable of governing negotiations with each country concerned. We have in mind in particular the cancellation or reduction in various proportions of existing debts, rescheduling debt over the long term, fixing ceilings for interest rates and foreign debt servicing rates, and access to loans on advantageous terms. International credit should cease to be a burden on debtors and a brake
on international cooperation. It should resume its role of stimulating economic relations, between States and economic growth in the debtor countries. Thus, the problem of debt will be resolved not by condemning the developing countries to stagnation and deterioration of their already low standard of living, but by action capable of stimulating economic growth. It goes without saying that we advocate reform of the international monetary system to make it a factor of stability, so that it meets the heeds of all States, including developing countries, and is based on democratic management.
46.	Support for the developing countries must include the equitable solution of other important problems. Protectionist policies and restrictive measures must be eradicated, access to markets of the products of developing countries, must be facilitated and the stability of commodity prices must be ensured, and there must be a fair relationship between .the prices of commodities and those of industrial products. We are thinking also of the need to facilitate the substantial transfer of up-to-date technology on advantagequs.terms to support the training of national managerial personnel and to put an end to the brain drain.
47.	Measures to reduce military expenditure so that the funds thus released can be used to support the programmes of the developing countries are undoubtedly of great importance. The reduction of military expenditure would constitute a source that would make it possible to increase considerably international assistance to developing countries. In 1979 Romania proposed the establishment of an international support fund for. developing countries based for the most part on savings made through disarmament measures. The conclusions and appeals of the African countries contained in the Lom6 Declaration of August 19853 are equally significant. In this context, we wish to stress that the scale and complexity of the problems faced by the developing countries require of them close cooperation, strengthened solidarity and unity of action. We emphasize here the message of solidarity addressed to the special session by the Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77 that took place recently in Brazil.
48.	Like other developing countries, Romania , sees the solution to all these problems as lying in close cooperation with the developing countries and among all countries of the world. This is the true meaning of the proposals put forward by Romania, within the framework of the United Nations, for breaking the deadlock in the North-South negotiations and organizing for this purpose an international conference, with the participation of both the developing and the developed countries, to find overall solutions to the problems of underdevelopment, to define the principles of the new international economic order and to promote the solution of the world economic crisis, the economic and social development of each nation and international co-operation , based on equality of rights and mutual advantage.
49.	In conclusion, I assure you, Mr. President, that the Romanian delegation is ready to make its contribution and to co-operate actively with the delegations of other countries so that by our concerted efforts we may obtain results that will meet the aspirations of the African countries, really help them overcome their economic difficulties and ensure their economic and social advancement.
50.	Mr. SIDDIKY (Bangladesh): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to express on behalf of my delegation our particular pleasure in seeing you preside over the deliberations of this historic session. I also take this opportunity to extend our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his inspiring leadership m mobilizing the United Nations
system to assist our brothers in Africa in the most trying of circumstances that they have ever faced.
51.	Never before in human history has virtually an entire continent faced disaster and destruction, hunger and famine, of such intensity and magnitude as that which has been witnessed in. Africa over the last three years, threatening the very existence of millions and -millions of people. It is to the credit of the valiant people of Africa and the support and solidarity extended by the international community that the darkest period of agony and suffering is now largely behind us. But unless the comity of nations as reflected in this world body is able to come together in solidarity to prevent the recurrence of that tragedy and take concrete steps here in this forum to support our African brothers in achieving the objectives they have set for themselves for the lasting solution of the problems faced by the continent, the, convening of this special session will be meaningless. The efforts that went into fighting the emergency situation must be appropriately broadened and focused to meet adequately the objectives of rehabilitation and reconstruction in the medium- and long-term perspectives.
52.	This was thé message that we received from Mr. Diouf, President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, in his inspiring and thought-provoking statement at the beginning of this session [lit meeting]. This is the message that we see in the report of the Secretary-General [A/S-13/2], This is what my delegation believes to be the vital responsibility of the Assembly. We wish to express our solidarity with our brothers in Africa in their determined struggle to bring their continent back to the road to durable and sustained development.
53.	It is important to note that a number of unfortunate. factors detrimental to the interests and well-being of the; people of Africa converged, making the crisis very severe and intense. Some of those factors were natural, others man-made. Some of them were the consequence of retaining the previous structures of the economies, while others resulted from developments in the world economy. It is equally important to note that this situation developed over a period of years. In the 1960s and 1970s the food self-sufficiency ratio of African countries dropped consistently to a point at which total food production in the region as a whole was growing at only half the rate of growth of the population. Over a period of two and a half decades the basic economic structure of the African countries remained virtually the same while the objective realities changed drastically. Subsistence or near-subsist-ence sectors dominated vast segments of the African . economies.
54.	Roughly two thirds of the least developed countries . belong to the continent of Africa. Yet the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,4 adopted by the international community in 1981, experienced setbacks from the beginning. The global economic recession, the collapse in commodity prices, the adverse terms of trade, the decline in real terms in official development assistance, increased protectionism, high interest rates and currency fluctuations are some of the factors which joined together to bring havoc to the African economies. .
55.	Through all these difficult circumstances, and largely as a consequence of them, the accumulated external debt of the African countries increased more than sevenfold over the decade 1974-1985 to a staggering $175 billion. The heavy burden on these countries of servicing this huge
debt can easily be imagined. Most of the African countries continued to remain dependent on the production and export of one commodity or a very limited number of commodities, the prices of all of which have been particularly affected by the global recession. Commodity prices in 1982 were at their lowest level since 1940. African countries lost some $13.5 billion over the first three years of this decade through the fall in commodity prices alone.
56.	This illustrates the fact that the crisis in Africa is indeed an extension of the crisis faced by the developing countries as a whole. The difference is that in Africa other factors have combined to aggravate and intensify the crisis to an extent which defies all comparison. For Africa, inseparable from this crisis is a tragedy more deeply footed and less immediately apparent: the destruction of its land and the disruption of its ecosystem. The rate of growth of Africa’s population, which will double in 22 years and increase about eightfold in approximately 70 years, makes the situation even more complex.
57.	The most reassuring thing of all in this critical situation was the following statement in paragraph 6 of the Declaration of the African heads of State and Government at their summit meeting last July:5 “We are . . . determined to take concrete actions and measures individually and collectively for the achievement of the economic development of our continent.”
58.	Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990* has been presented to this session in the true spirit of global interdependence, and it reflects a commitment to overcome the handicaps of the past and a determination to move forward. We believe that the attainment of food self-sufficiency, reversal of the cycle of drought and desertification and reduction of the population growth rate are the areas which should be considered first among the priorities for action. We also strongly believe that a development strategy which, besides having economic goals, restores and preserves the natural support system is best suited to the African situation. In this great endeavour, the international community must come forward to assist Africa to pursue the path of successful development; otherwise, all the determined efforts that the Africans make will be vain and the crisis will linger on. This holds true not only for Africa, but also for other developing countries, whose development heeds and aspirations must also receive attention, unless the international community wishes to shift the crisis elsewhere. Africa’s need to receive the focused attention of thè international community must be acknowledged in the perspective of the overall development of the developing countries. .
59.	Africa is a continent of much potential and promise. The resource endowments of that vast continent, both natural and human, are waiting to be harnessed. It is necessary to create conditions conducive to their development with adequate international support. For the unimpeded development and progress of the countries of Africa, nothing is more important than a favourable international climate based on a spirit of interdependence and mutual respect, free from the menace of apartheid. Africa must be enabled to devote single-minded attention to the struggle for development. It is the fervent hope of my delegation that the efforts that have been undertaken by the United Nations will reach a successful culmination and will set an example of global determination to work together for a better future for Africa, and thereby indeed for all the people of our planet. The promise implicit in the “act of faith” committed in the convening of this special session should be redeemed by concrete action.
60.	Mr. GUMUCIO GRANIER (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): First, I have the honour to transmit to the Assembly a message from Mr. Guillermo Bedregal Gutiérrez, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Worship of Bolivia:
“Bolivia cannot remain indifferent in the face of the desperate situation in Africa, and we naturally feel deep sympathy with our brothers on that continent. Our own experience of crises in Bolivia makes it easier for us to understand this problem, and we thus fully comprehend African aspirations and the efforts that have been made to overcome it.
“Bolivia understands that in that continent the growth of food production has not kept pace with population growth and in some cases has diminished. Many African countries are threatened by generalized famine compounded by the climatic disaster of drought, which in turn leads to the disruptive phenomenon of refugees.
“The situation in the continent is desperate. Yet the efforts directed towards recovery, growth and development undertaken by the brother countries despite the grave political and social implications which they entail will not succeed without full and effective support from the international community for their development activities in the medium and long terms, without which there can be no lasting solution to the present emergency situation.
“At the same time, there is something else that we cannot overlook, and here I reaffirm the message that I sent on the occasion of the brutal act of armed aggression perpetrated by the Government of South Africa against Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe. It was a message of categorical rejection of the abhorrent régime of apartheid and repudiation of racial discrimination of any kind, with its profound injury to the dignity and fundamental rights of the individual, and a reaffirmation of our opposition to and condemnation of any and every act of armed aggression.”
61.	My delegation would like to express its thanks to Mr. Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, who, when he opened the debate at this special session, spoke to us in the voice of Africa and bore eloquent witness to the commitment of that brother continent to efforts to overcome its present distressing adversities.
62.	The problems affecting Africa today are complex. Nevertheless, they clearly demonstrate that the economic dimension of the crisis is profoundly interrelated with the political and social dimensions, all these elements being the result of historical developments which cannot be ignored because of their profound effect on the social and economic structures in African countries.
63.	Twenty-five years ago the international community gave its resolute support to the struggle of the African peoples to attain political independence. Bolivia was present at that time and made its voice heard, affirming its full solidarity with the anti-colonial cause, whose success is not complete while Namibia is kept in chains, in open defiance of the United Nations and the conscience of free peoples.
64.	The community of nations has for 40 years publicly rejected the abhorrent practice of apartheid. Bolivia has consistently supported all the measures adopted to combat that racist practice and we now reaffirm our position, for we believe that as long as racial segregation persists in southern Africa it will not be possible to speak of the development of the human person.
65.	The members of the United Nations have come together in this special session to give special consideration to the grave economic crisis affecting all African peoples. Bolivia, which is one of the nations of Latin America hardest hit by the world economic crisis, has come here today to bear witness to its solidarity with and understanding of the efforts of the Governments of Africa to resolve the problems resulting from this crisis.
66.	My delegation wishes to emphasize three of the external factors which affect the situation in Africa, because they also have profound repercussions in other regions. They are: the staggering drop in the prices of commodities; the collapse of international markets, owing in part to pernicious protectionist measures; and, finally, the heavy burden of external debt, aggravated by erratic high interest rates.
67.	Bolivia associates itself with the appeal made by the African States for the donor States to join in this crusade to eradicate backwardness and resolutely open up a new chapter in history. For that, it is necessary to make some innovative changes in the practices of international cooperation. The donor countries must realize that emergency situations call for programmes financed with freely available and immediately delivered resources, in addition to projects financed through existing regular cooperation programmes. The timely availability of such special resources is of great benefit to Governments and has a multiplying effect for other activities, in particular those in which individuals can engage in their private capacity.
68.	The machinery to establish freely available aid should be flexible, and control systems should be efficient and should not impose restrictions that would have an adverse effect on State sovereignty. We are trying in a short space of time to overcome long-standing situations of injustice and backwardness. Thus, it is vital for the new approaches to be innovative and not seek to set conditions that will undermine the political independence achieved at such sacrifice.
69.	In addition to new forms of assistance, the African States require changes in the situation relating to the heavy burden of external debt and its servicing. Liquidity and availability of currency are vital for policies designed to achieve the reactivation and rehabilitation of the productive apparatus. Hence, Bolivia supports initiatives for the rescheduling and lightening of the external-debt burden, with generous payment deadlines that will make possible the systematic and sustained generation of the resources necessary for the proposed programmes. In that regard, we congratulate the Western nations that have announced in this body new, flexible criteria for approaching the debt problem, and we urge other nations that have not yet done so to adopt the same kind of criteria.
70.	My delegation has noted with satisfaction the efforts of the Governments of the African States to overcome the internal causes that aggravate the economic crisis. Readjustment and modernization of State machinery, coordination of development plans, and overall criteria to promote social change must eventually bear positive fruit. The experience of other developing countries should be useful. South-South co-operation offers broad promise for the future.
71.	The Governments of the African States have shouldered their responsibility to promote their own development and to shape the destiny of their peoples. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery proves this. The Government of Bolivia expresses solidarity with the
peoples of Africa and associates itself with their Governments in urging the international, community to take up the historical challenge of transforming that continent. The times call for political commitments at the highest possible level' The cause of development in Africa should be the cause of all our peoples.
72.	Mr. PAPAJORGI (Albania): The Albanian people and its Government have followed closely and with concern the great difficulties the African peoples are facing today, because those difficulties affect the living conditions of millions of people and their vital present and future needs. Entire regions of the African continent are experiencing great poverty. The food situation, which continues to deteriorate, actually constitutes one of the most serious concerns of many African countries, where famine has been wreaking havoc.
73.	But the consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa would not be satisfactory and fruitful if we did not uncover and discuss the real motives that have caused it and that help to maintain it. It is a well-known fact that Africa is one of the richest regions of the world in natural and human resources. The peoples of Africa possess all the physical and intellectual capabilities to meet the needs of production in agriculture and industry. They have the great vitality to face today’s rates of economic, scientific and cultural development. That is why the causes of the existing situation in Africa are to be found in the century-old colonial domination, during which the peoples of the continent were severely exploited and oppressed, when Africa and its peoples were kept in a state of complete ignorance and backwardness. For the colonialists, Africa was an inexhaustible source of vital raw materials and of their slaves. For centuries, the natural and human resources of the African continent served the interests of foreign metropolitan countries. They laid the foundation for the present wealth and development of those countries.
74.	No one can deny the fact that Africa would not be suffering these serious difficulties if the great natural resources and human potential of the African countries had been used for their benefit. Had that been done, the peoples of Africa not only would have been able to meet their food needs today but would have attained all-round development for the future as well. What is worse, the chains of the old colonialism in Africa have today been replaced by modern exploiters, by the neo-colonialists, by the multinationals, by imperialist Powers—and in the first place the two super-Powers, the United States of America and the Soviet Union, whose main aim is to continue plundering the natural resources of Africa and to maintain the African countries as a source of raw materials.
75.	The resources of the soil and sub-soil of most of those countries continue to be the object of cruel and barbaric exploitation. Because of the discriminatory policy, the raw materials of Africa are sold at lower prices. The practice of stimulating a single-product agriculture, a policy pursued so far by the multinationals, ensures them huge profits at a time when the African countries are confronted by various difficulties, including a lack of daily food.
76.	This entire complex of activity by the neo-colonialists in Africa is designed to keep the countries of that continent in the existing situation of inferiority and economic disadvantage; it is designed to impede the all-round and proportional development of their agriculture and industry and of all other vital branches of their economies as well.
77.	The overall crisis that has the capitalist-revisionist world in its grip has affected the African countries too. Such practices as the high interest rates, the fluctuation in the value of the dollar and the protectionist barriers— practices which big monopolistic capital pursues in keeping with its interests—have created serious problems for the economies of the countries of the African continent. A direct consequence of such measures is a reduction in the exports of many African countries, which has caused a great imbalance and has led to economic stagnation.
78.	Another way of plundering Africa is through the debt mechanism. Many African countries have incurred huge debts to various imperialist Powers. As everyone knows, not only are all the loans granted on the most severe terms, but sometimes the amount to be paid in interest swallows up all that the debtor countries produce. In those circumstances, they are obliged to acquire new debts in order to liquidate the existing ones.
79.	The so-called aid that the imperialist Powers claim they are giving the African countries has not helped and will never change and improve the existing situation in Africa. Those Powers have not helped and will never help the African countries to overcome the serious difficulties they are facing today, including famine. That is. because imperialist aid never has had and cannot have a generous character. The philanthropic gestures of the super-Powers are nothing but neo-colonialist chains, and the aim is to force the African countries to run up new debts and to get them involved in other, more complicated obligations. Experience has shown that in no circumstances have the super-Powers ever invested a dollar or a rouble without first calculating their political, economic or military profits.
80.	The African peoples have suffered and continue to stiffer many casualties and great destruction because of regional conflicts in various parts of the continent. As part of the general situation prevailing in Africa today, those conflicts cannot be considered outside the context of the whole hegemonistic policy of the two imperialist super-Powers. Their expansionist aims and policy incite and instigate such confrontations between peoples. Having created those turbulent situations, the super-Powers try to exploit them in order to divide the African peoples and create more favourable conditions for their intervention whenever and wherever their interests are in danger. By stimulating the regional arms race, the super-Powers try on the one hand to sell arms from their stockpiles and on the other to grab the daily bread of the African peoples in exchange for their arms and bullets, which are then used to kill innocent people. At the same time, they do not hesitate to carry out acts of aggression against African countries, as they do in various other regions of the world.
81.	In addition, a number of African countries and peoples are suffering the grave consequences of the aggressive imperialist policy practised by the racist régime of South Africa. The Pretoria régime’s most recent act of aggression, against Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana on 19 May this year, which has been strongly condemned by the Socialist People’s Republic of Albania, constitutes a fresh crime against the peoples of those countries. It is precisely that aggressive, racist policy of South Africa that has led to the increase in tensions in southern Africa and the creation of more dangerous situations there. In applying its militaristic policy, the racist régime of South Africa has always had, and it continues to have, the overall support and encouragement of the imperialist Powers— the United States of America in particular. That support encourages the apartheid régime of South Africa brutally
to suppress and exploit the Azanian and Namibian peoples, as well as to commit acts of aggression against neighbouring African countries. This policy of Pretoria forces those countries to use a large part of their funds for defence purposes, instead of using them to improve and develop their economies.
82.	There is no doubt that the blind forces of nature, such as the serious drought and desertification, have had negative effects on the economies of many African countries. But the policy of plunder and exploitation pursued by the super-Powers and the other imperialist Powers makes it even more difficult to take effective measures that would help relieve and minimize their effects. The Albanian people understand the situation that the African peoples are experiencing, because in the past we have had experiences of the same kind. Before liberation, famine, poverty and backwardness dominated the entire life of our country. In those circumstances, after liberating the homeland we had to continue the struggle to reconstruct the country, to change its old face. New Albania started that reconstruction and development from scratch. By relying on our own internal human and natural resources, we have built a multi-branch economy, with heavy and light industry, advanced agriculture and progressive education and culture.
83.	Just after the liberation, some foreign so-called advisers, allegedly wanting to help us, insisted that to develop our economy we should concentrate only on the extraction of minerals and the cultivation of some agricultural products. They promised us that Albania would never want for anything and therefore should not invest in the development of agriculture, the building of a minerals processing industry, metallurgy, energy and so on. But we did not do as those advisers told us, and we were not wrong. As a result of the policy we have pursued, today we have an independent, sovereign country, with an economy capable of meeting the country’s needs in basic products and of overcoming the difficulties created by natural calamities, such as drought, floods and severe winters. With exports covering imports, owing not a penny to other countries and being completely self-reliant, we have created the necessary conditions for a continuous improvement in the working people’s material and cultural well-being.
84.	As a small country, we do not have the ability materially to assist other peoples fighting for their political, economic and social liberation and independence. However, in addition to offering the benefit of our modest experience in building a stable, independent economy, we see it as our obligation to continue to expose the aggressive policy of the imperialist Powers, in particular the super-Powers, and their plans for enslavement. In supporting the efforts of the African countries to overcome the critical economic situation through the mobilization of their natural and human resources, the Socialist People’s Republic of Albania affirms that each country has the right to choose its own path of development and independently to decide its own future.
85.	Mr. AL-SHAALI (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me great hope for this session, Sir, to see you presiding over its proceedings, especially in view of the great competence and objectivity with which you guided the deliberations of the Assembly’s fortieth session.
86.	At this time perhaps there is not much left to be added to the subject under review, since many speakers have expressed their opinions and dealt with the various aspects of the problem. This debate is an indication of
the size of the economic crisis facing Africa and demonstrates the world-wide interest in it. Previous speakers have amply analysed the crisis and suggested ways and means of solving it.
87.	We believe that nobody is more aware of the nature of the crisis and the ways to solve it than those who are involved in it themselves—the Africans who are living through the trial and experience daily and directly, its causes and consequences. We therefore wish to avoid elaborating on the details of the subject and its ramifications. Suffice it to note the creative effort, the wellthought-out work and the objective and comprehensive study that culminated in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 which was approved by the heads of State and Government of African States at their meeting at Addis Ababa in July 1985. We believe that the Priority Programme reflects a true sense of responsibility and a bold collective effort aimed at achieving a set of clearly defined goals.
88.	If the famine that struck large parts of Africa last year demonstrated to the world the devastating economic tragedy suffered by Africa, the Priority Programme reveals the courage and ambition aroused in the African States by that challenge. It also reveals that greater selfreliance and collective action in resolving the common crisis are the sine qua non of the achievement of economic development.
89.	If Africa has resorted to the international community in an effort to meet some of its needs, it has done so because of the belief that a great part of the problem is attributable to the international dimensions of current economic relations. It should be emphasized that those relations are dictated by the nature of the international economic system, which is imbued with conditions that are extremely unfavourable to the countries that export primary products. This constitutes one of the major obstacles in the way of development in Africa. Moreover, the African States have resorted to the international community in order to regain some of the debts that have accumulated over several decades as a result of colonialism, which drained the resources of Africa.
90.	There is no doubt that the advanced industrial nations and multinational corporations bear part of the responsibility to compensate Africa for that economic drain. Past experience should also be taken into consideration, since the interest of some parties in maintaining Africa as a source of cheap raw materials for the sake of their development is a short-term, partial remedy. The development of Africa so that it can attain interdependence among its States is the basic guarantee for long-term development, and for that collective rather than selective development must be emphasized. That is the thrust of the Priority Programme.
91.	We believe that the internal factors underlying the current economic crisis in Africa are intertwined with external factors. Similarly, the political causes of the crisis cannot be separated from the economic ones. In this respect, the policy of apartheid and destabilization of neighbouring States pursued by South Africa constitutes a serious obstacle and a major burden in the way of development in southern Africa. The combined efforts of the international community are essential if that policy is to be extirpated conclusively and in a collective manner. Furthermore, one of the afflictions that have befallen the countries of the third world, including African countries, is that they have been forced to allocate a substantial part of their budgets to armaments to defend their independence, especially in the context of the unstable international political climate and the hegemonistic attempts
being made by certain major Powers on those countries by expanding spheres of influence. Hence, it is essential to put an end to international tension, whose prime victims are the developing countries.
92.	Africa’s development has been one of the fundamental considerations in the foreign policy of the United Arab Emirates. Despite our recent independence, and despite the domestic needs arising from that independence, the United Arab Emirates is committed to allocate a large part of its national income to the developing States, especially African States, with which we share deeply rooted historic ties. Consequently, over the past decade my country has extended some $3 billion in the form of aid and direct financial grants to African States. The total amount of aid extended to the most affected and least developed countries is $3.5 billion, with more than half that sum going to Africa.
93.	The Abu Dhabi Fund for Economic Development has financed development projects in Africa in the amount of $350 million. The Fund subsidizes 28 projects in nonArab African States. Those projects, which are undertaken in 20 such States, cover infrastructure projects, manufacturing industries and light industries, all on easy, soft terms.
94.	In addition, the United Arab Emirates contributes $40 million to the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, which was established on my country’s recommendation. The United Arab Emirates also contributes $3 million to the Arab Fund for Technical Assistance to African and Arab States. We have also contributed an additional $5 million in support of the Fund’s activities. Since 1979 the United Arab Emirates has contributed $10 million to the African Development Fund. My country also responded positively in the aftermath of the catastrophes and crises that afflicted some African States last year by extending emergency assistance in the form of food and medicine on both the official and the private levels.
95.	The United Arab Emirates has committed itself to an important principle of not tying its aid to any conditions or political attitudes. Recognition of development needs is the main principle for granting aid, and the principle of economic feasibility in providing loans for development projects.
96.	As we review these figures, we are sure that Africa’s need is much larger than that. We did not undertake this work and do not review it as a hint or reminder, but we believe that we are carrying out part of the duty which we are able to do. In spite of the difficult economic conditions whose causes and consequences are known to all, I announce from this rostrum that the United Arab Emirates did not and will not abandon its duty towards the African States but rather that we will be committed to our portion of the responsibility and will fulfill our obligations within the limits of our ability irrespective of whether such tasks are based on the recommendations of this session or on the goal we have committed ourselves to completely, which stems from our conviction that a developed and economically stable Africa is a free Africa. We therefore consider ourselves and Africa to be very much in the same boat, a boat that we must all see safely into port.
97.	Africa has come to the international community with a clear vision and a specific plan; therefore, it requires a clear commitment and a specific answer.
98.	Mr. CONSALVI (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I have pleasure in extending to you the greetings of the Venezuelan delegation. We are confident that your experience and wisdom will play an
important role in the success of this special session of the General Assembly.
99.	In conformity with the principles underlying the creation of the United Nations and according to the provisions of its Charter, it is the job of the Organization to promote social progress and the improvement of the quality of life of the peoples in keeping with the broadest concepts of freedom and justice. Thus, the United Nations must act as a centre for the co-ordination of the common efforts and determination to find solutions to international economic, social, cultural and humanitarian problems.
100.	We are met today in this Assembly to seek, within the framework of co-operation and closer international solidarity, the solution to a problem which is of concern to the entire international community: the critical economic situation in Africa.
101.	Africa is a vast continent. Most of its constituent countries are young States which became part of the community of nations barely two decades ago. To date their efforts have focused on their own consolidation and the creation of national unity, which are indispensable if the demands of economic and social development are to be met. .
102.	For several years the African countries have faced complex structural problems stemming from such factors as the scarcity of basic services, vulnerable economic infrastructure, fragile political foundations, increasing population pressure and demand for social participation and natural factors such as the desertification and drought to which they have been mercilessly subjected. Those internal problems have been compounded by the impact of the world economic crisis, as a result of which African economies have suffered severe deterioration, with increasing debt and internal tension and paralysis of the means of production. The sudden stagnation and continuing deterioration of physical structures have had an alarming undermining effect on the economic capabilities of these countries and have brought with them hunger and the disruption of their economies, dragging the African continent into an arduous struggle for mere survival.
103.	The dimensions and implications of this grave crisis perturb all mankind. As the Secretary-General has said, the African crisis has claimed more human lives than were lost in any war in history. Out of a population of 500 million, some 100 million people—a large percentage of them young people and children—are harshly affected. Forecasts based on present developments on the assumption of nothing being done to alleviate the situation would be horrifying and unacceptable.
104.	Yet while it is true that the economic situation in Africa is critical, it is no less true that Africa is a continent favoured by nature. It has enormous agricultural and mineral potential; if this were rationally and profitably exploited with the organized co-operation of the African States themselves and the international community, a sound foundation would be laid for the economic development of those countries. The African countries have taken account of those considerations in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity last year. We firmly support that Programme.
105.	The contribution of international agencies and non-governmental organizations, as well as bilateral assistance, has been great, and this should be recognized. However, it has not been possible to resolve the problems; only incidental improvements have been brought about.
106.	A careful analysis of the economic situation in Africa is impossible without relating the African economy to the unacceptable context of world economic relations, which enables the industrialized countries to benefit from those relations and to gain obviously unfair advantages.
107.	We see that according to the draft Programme of Action before us [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V\, annual additional aid averaging $10 billion will be required. In our view, that is a modest figure compared, for example, with the amount of reverse transfer of resources from developing to developed countries in recent years. We trust that the international community will respond to this urgent, understandable challenge with the necessary co-operation.
108.	The delegation of Venezuela agrees that the top priority for Africa should be agricultural development with a view to achieving self-sufficiency in food. Agricultural development is vitally important not only for Africa, but for the whole developing world, for it will halt the spread of poverty, disease and hunger.
109.	We believe, too, that the development of human resources is important. The training of the individual to be a factor of greater productivity in society is unquestionably important, particularly in Africa, where human potential has not been properly developed. We believe that Africa’s principal resource is its people. The time has come to give due weight to the human factor; if we do not, population growth in Africa will become an obstacle difficult to overcome. It is necessary, therefore, to tackle problems of training, education, cultural identity and the role of women in the economic development of these countries. It will be necessary also to support the peoples of Africa without attempting to impose alien systems upon them, and it is time that this was done.
110.	Another priority for Africa is to combat natural factors such as desertification and drought, which limit economic prospects. Scientific advances can contribute to victory in this hard battle against nature.
111.	Many of Africa’s problems are not alien either to Latin America in general or to Venezuela in particular. But we believe that the dimensions and scope of the African crisis are very special, since the ability of those countries to respond is greatly restricted by the present situation and by their own economic realities. Thus, we supported resolution 40/40, of 2 December 1985, which calls for the convening of the present special session, and shall support the conclusions of this session.
112.	None the less, we insist that thé stabilization of commodity markets and access to the markets of the developed countries are problems common to the entire developing world and that therefore we must seek comprehensive solutions which will ultimately benefit all countries of the world, developed and developing alike. Preferential, non-reciprocal treatment for our exports and the protection of their purchasing power are a requirement of the entire developing world and should therefore be established.
113.	The problem of the external debt is extremely serious in Africa. Although it . is a phenomenon shared by many developing countries, we recognize that in Africa it has specific features. It is obvious that those countries have a minimal capacity to respond to what is a very harmful situation. A just solution must be found to this problem without neglecting, of course, the foreign debt problems of other developing regions, which represent an extremely serious potential danger to the world economy. As a country that adhered to the Cartagena Consensus,6 we reaffirm our view that the foreign debt problem of
developing countries must be dealt with in a political process. In this process debtors and creditors share responsibility, and no one should seek to assign that responsibility solely to the countries whose stability is at stake.
114.	Venezuela has been watching this situation with the greatest interest and hopes that international co-operation will manifest itself in a concrete and effective way in the form of measures that will promote the full incorporation of Africa into the economic and social development process. Among the specific measures of cooperation that have already been announced in the Assembly, we wish to highlight those put forward by the Minister for External Relations of Canada [2nd meeting]. Measures such as these should also be taken by other developed countries.
115.	By participating in this session, we wish to emphasize our solidarity with Africa. This is a suitable opportunity to reaffirm the concern of Venezuela and its readiness to strengthen its bilateral relations with the countries of that region and thus reinforce the ties which we have cultivated in this and other multilateral forums, in the light of so many shared struggles to bring about a better, more worth-while world for all peoples.
116.	We have said time and again that the proper balance of the international economic and political system requires intelligent, flexible and concerted international economic co-operation. The developed countries cannot turn their back on this fact, nor should they in this case forget the links that united them at one time to the African continent. We believe that the actions of the industrialized countries should be aimed at a transfer of resources and knowledge that will directly contribute to alleviating the African situation—a transfer that should be carried out bearing in mind the real needs of Africa within a broad and resolute approach such as that proposed in the draft Programme of Action. We, the other developing countries, for our part, could and should answer the appeal of our brothers in Africa with SouthSouth co-operation activities, following the norms set by the Caracas Programme of Action on economic co-operation among developing countries.7
117.	We believe that one aspect that should be looked at with especial care is the so-called monitoring or followup machinery proposed in the draft Programme of Action. The emergency situation arising from this crisis should not lead us to take hasty decisions which we may regret in the future because we failed to make specific the distinction between international technical assistance to carry out these programmes—which is necessary—and potential interference by third parties in the internal affairs of States, which would, of course, be inadmissible from any point of view.
118.	The developing countries have committed countless errors, and Latin Americans do not have any particular advice to give; rather, we have very harsh experience to share. One of those mistakes has been to believe that solutions can come only from the big industrialized countries; we have despised our own abilities, our own resources and our own possibilities. We, the developing countries, must be the protagonists in shaping our own destiny. And what is true for Latin America and the Caribbean is also true for Asia and Africa.
119.	On this point, it is worth referring here to the historic Arusha message on collective self-reliance. These principles should continue to guide and govern all developing countries. In this context, we note with satisfaction that African intra-regional co-operation is taking on an ever greater impetus through the work of the OAU and its
subregional integration systems; and that in fact intracontinental monitoring or follow-up machinery is envisaged as a. first step towards an international machinery. 120. The United Nations system has bestirred itself to address the critical situation affecting this part of the world, and the General Assembly, mindful of its role, will continue to keep the question under review. We hope that the international community, particularly the industrialized countries, which cannot shirk their responsibility, will not remain indifferent to the problems of Africa, because such indifference would be tantamount to repeating the old mistakes of history and would lead to a truly tragic conclusion.
121.	Once again, on behalf of Venezuela, we reaffirm our determined, unswerving solidarity with the African peoples in their great causes and our consistent position in favour of the independence of Namibia and the elimination of apartheid and racial discrimination, sources of violence and instability which not only contribute to aggravating the general outlook for Africa but are incompatible with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
122.	Mr. RANA (Nepal): We are assembled here in special session to consider an issue of far-reaching consequence: the critical economic situation in Africa. The socio-economic crisis facing the African continent, and for that matter most third world countries today, may be attributed to many factors and cannot be resolved through ad hoc measures or in isolation. Self-sustained development needs collective efforts and co-operative programmes drawn up from both medium- and long-term perspectives.
123.	Indeed, in today’s interdependent world it is virtually impossible for a country or a group of countries of a particular region to conceive of effecting major structural socio-economic transformations without the supportive action of the world community. It was with that in view that my delegation looked forward with a measure of optimism and expectation to this special session, the very first devoted by the General Assembly to any particular continent. This opportunity for beginning a new and stirring chapter in international co-operation should therefore not be lost. In other words, the international community is faced with a test: whether it is prepared to recognize and respond to the travails and tribulations of a continent reeling from serious social and economic problems or, despite all, choose to remain uncertain and indifferent. .
124.	My delegation applauds Africa for showing imagination, for demonstrating such an exemplary degree of unity and, above all, for the political will and pragmatism reflected in the five-year Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 Based as it is on the premise that African countries are themselves responsible for their development, the Priority Programme is very logically rooted in the concept that it is up to the African countries themselves to undertake the social and economic steps or to initiate the policy reforms necessary to sustain a medium- or long-term plan for economic recovery on a priority basis.
125.	The grim situation facing the countries of Africa is not hidden from the international community and has been projected in a frank and forthright manner in the relevant OAU document. My delegation, at the outset, notes with appreciation that African countries have committed themselves to finance 64.6 per cent of the Programme. Also worthy of appreciation are the frankness and objectivity with which the challenge of drawing up such a bold and sweeping recovery schem ’’as been taken
up. In particular, my delegation finds it entirely realistic that the primary focus of the Priority Programme—or 44.8 per cent in terms of estimated cost—should be on agriculture, which not only is the mainstay of the African economy but all too often in the past has been the chief determining factor between prosperity and deprivation in Africa.
126.	My delegation also finds it eminently sensible that this segment of the Priority Programme not only takes into account the particular situation in each country but also envisages other specific subregional and regional measures to reinforce national measures in the agriculture and food sector. Similarly well-conceived are such supportive schemes as pertain to the rehabilitation and development of agro-related industries, to the development of transport and communications and to the sphere of trade and finance. We also find ourselves in full agreement with the proposed programme concerning drought and desertification. We are particularly pleased to note that such measures envisage not only massive afforestation and reforestation but also better management of water resources, including river basins, through concerted and carefully integrated efforts at the national, subregional and regional levels.
127.	As Nepal itself is facing many socio-economic problems—with the same degree of severity, in many instances—we can fully understand and sympathize with Africa in the critical economic situation it faces. Indeed, it is precisely such understanding that also explains our appreciation of the Priority Programme’s well-placed emphasis on such other national development priorities as are detailed in the section on human resources. We also find ourselves in agreement with the rationale advanced for the institution of a number of major policy reforms, such as those relating to improvement of the management of the economy, and various difficult adjustment measures undertaken in the recent past.
128.	As a land-locked country, Nepal is encouraged by the attention that has been focused on the special needs and problems of the land-locked and semi-land-locked countries of Africa, including those relating to storage, transport and transit, the alleviation of which requires large investments.
129.	Similarly, as a least developed country, we share the view that some of the more serious of the external constraints that have aggravated the economic crisis in Africa might well have been moderated had it not been for the failure of the international community to honour its commitments in pursuance of General Assembly resolutions on the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,4 as well as several UNCTAD resolutions on trade and development. We therefore particularly support the call for the international community to make special efforts to increase its contributions to the least developed countries of Africa to enable them to achieve the objectives of their country programmes within the framework of the Substantial New Programme of Action.
130.	This brings us to the other important segment of the Priority Programme, which is. that concerned with complementing the efforts of the African countries by assistance from the international community. What needs to be borne in mind is that the unfavourable international economic outlook has made it virtually impossible for African countries to bring about economic recovery on their own, since exogenous factors have contributed to the current situation. A number of external corrective measures are imperative and obvious in this context.
These fall into two broad categories: official development assistance and debt servicing.
131.	Although my delegation is aware that the $45.6 billion—estimated as the resource gap that the international community is called upon to fill for the five-year period covered by the Priority Programme—may not be considered a small sum in these days of financial stringency, we believe that it is a necessary and, in the long term, pragmatic investment for underwriting prosperity and peace in Africa. While noting that there is now wider support for international co-operation within a multilateral framework than seemed to be the case in the not-too-distant past, we stress the urgency of providing meaningful debt-servicing relief to the African countries, whose condition without it could be much worse than it is today, even if the $45.6 billion five-year resource gap is met. My delegation thus strongly supports the reasoned proposals in the Priority Programme dealing with international support measures. In particular, we endorse the urgency of the debt-servicing requirements of African countries during the next five years, which are estimated at an average of between $14.6 billion and $24.5 billion annually.
132.	Africa is the continent which has suffered most from colonial exploitation. But, if some of the present economic problems besetting that continent can indeed be traced to such exploitation, no one can deny the vigour and exhilaration that have been injected into international relations by the wave of African independence that has swept across the continent since 1957. On this occasion, Nepal acknowledges Africa’s many contributions to peace and delights in the fact that it can very rightly be called the continent of non-alignment.
133.	Yet it is hardly a secret that that continent is suffering from political destabilization, owing particularly to Pretoria’s racist policy of apartheid, which is at the root of much of the violence and instability currently sweeping southern Africa. South Africa’s racist policies have been responsible for diverting precious human and other resources from development purposes, especially in front-line States such as Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, whose sovereignty Pretoria so flagrantly flouted only the other day. Such acts of remorseless terrorism continue to add to the economic woes of the already overburdened African people and contribute to the steady flow of refugees into countries neighbouring South Africa.
134.	My delegation therefore appeals to the international community to consider the creation of a political climate conducive to the peace and Stability which are indispensable for the success of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery—in this case by working for the dismantling of the apparatus of apartheid.
135.	In conclusion, we declare our total support for Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery in both its African and international dimensions. We do so fully aware of the legitimacy of the African cause and, as one of the least developed countries, because we fully understand—and sympathize with—their plight. We wish this special session all success, conscious that the socioeconomic progress of the African peoples would not only greatly contribute to the advancement of society as a whole but also make a definite contribution to the cause of regional and world peace. In the process, it could make a singular contribution to strengthening the credibility and efficacy of the United Nations as the world’s most effective multilateral agent for development.
136.	Mr. DAZA (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me first of all to convey to you my country’s congratulations on your election to preside over the special session of the General Assembly. Your
remarkable work during the fortieth session of the General Assembly makes us confident that under your skilful guidance this session will produce the positive results for which the world hopes and which Africa in particular so needs.
137.	Chile, a small and distant country, has come before the Assembly to express in the clearest possible terms its support for and solidarity with Africa in the face of the critical economic situation besetting that continent.
138.	We are advancing with great strides towards the year 2000, and as this century approaches its close, man has acquired wealth beyond the imagination of even the most ambitious dreamers. He has acquired almost complete mastery over his environment and over space, and technological development has attained unimagined levels, transforming knowledge into the last true raw material. The ability to produce knowledge is the essential foundation of wealth.
139.	For this reason, it is an affront to the human conscience that there still exists a vast part of the world where the average life expectancy is only 49 years, where there are countries that have an annual per capita income under $400, where the average daily caloric intake per capita is only 90 per cent of the minimum daily requirements for human beings. The World Bank maintains that Africa today is poorer than it was in 1960. While there are parts of the world that are very well prepared to take up thè challenges of the coming centuries, here we have a continent on its knees, tragically destitute, unable to make its vital contribution to the development of the world.
140.	Of late, natural disasters and the generalized spread of famine have inspired spontaneous solidarity across the world, which has brought relief and saved many lives in Africa. Nevertheless, manifestations of solidarity, however significant, do not solve problems. Charity, however noble a feeling it may be, is no basis for economic development.
141.	A noted African writer said that the peoples’ poverty can be converted into wealth through a pact of solidarity by which their spirits feel the spur of advancement.
Mr. Hepburn (Bahamas), Vice-President, took the Chair.
142.	I ask myself whether this special session will yield such a pact of solidarity for a continent which is indissolubly bound up with our destinies and the future of the world. Shall we be able to find this spur which will impel us to set aside our persistent selfishness and to tackle the realities of Africa in such a way as to sow, alongside the wheat and the maize, hope among the peoples of that continent? Shall we be able, faced as we are with the dilemma of uncertain assistance or of ever more complex development programmes, to opt for the latter in the knowledge that at the end of the road we shall all have benefitted through the growing contribution of African economies to the world economy?
143.	The OAU documents before us, the report of the Secretary-General and other documents make it very clear that in the daunting situation facing Africa, in addition to natural disasters there are internal and external factors which have contributed to the situation. In the first group, concrete action is needed from the African countries themselves. The second group can be overcome only if international co-operation really works, and this is the challenge thrown down before the Assembly.
144.	The President of Senegal in his eloquent address, [tó meeting] referred to Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 In that Programme the
countries of Africa have frankly recognized their limitations and have described the major undertakings to which they are committed. They have clearly indicated the actions which will enable them to overcome the mistakes they have made and that they themselves acknowledge.
145.	The African countries stress that agriculture must be a priority in the future development of Africa. On the basis of past and present experience, my country, together with many others, wholeheartedly supports that stress on agriculture. It might be useful to recall the experience of Latin America in this respect.
146.	In past decades the need for industrialization in Latin America often caused us to neglect agriculture and to speed up the industrialization process at agriculture’s expense. Our industrialization efforts disrupted the necessary harmony between the two sectors, and we have had great difficulty making up for lost time. It is useful to bear in mind Latin America’s experience and to assess it in relation to the emphasis on agriculture which has been given by the African Programme, so as to avoid committing the same errors in the process.
147.	Endeavours by Africa are one part of the process; the other inescapable part is international co-operation based not merely on the demands of justice but also on the very raison d’etre of the international community. In our Organization, in all international forums, from time to time we stress the fact that we live in an interdependent world. The situation of the African countries is incompatible with such interdependence. Therefore, the problem before the Assembly today is one that affects the entire international community and, for that reason, the community has a duty to act.
148.	We said earlier that there are external factors for which the African countries are not responsible. Their problems are in great part relics of their colonial past. Protectionism, decline in raw material prices and the debt burden are some of the problems that have made a short-term economic situation far worse, and they can be resolved only through the resolute will of the industrialized countries. On the other hand, racism and apartheid have introduced violence and political instability into Africa, presenting an impediment to the region’s economic development.
149.	Many of those countries have made recommendations in this debate about the way in which Africa should carry out economic reforms and make structural changes to overcome the present crisis. I think we have the right also to expect from those making those recommendations that they take the reform measures necessary to stabilize the world economic situation, which has seriously affected the development endeavours of the developing countries. Africa’s problems are a tragic example of a situation which also besets most of the countries of Asia and Latin America.
150.	No one can contest that the savings capacity of the African countries is insufficient to enable them to overcome the present situation. This means that the wealthy nations must tackle the financial needs of the countries in which famine has become a constant feature of their populations.
151.	Africa’s agricultural and industrial endeavours need free trade, without any artificial restrictions. The effective participation of those countries in the world economy is a requisite that must be met in the development process which the Assembly has set itself the task of initiating. In this trade liberation effort there will be many actors: the industrialized countries, the developing countries and the African countries themselves.
152.	We in the developing world, who. are well aware of the difficulties and tribulations of economic growth, must also make our contribution to African recovery. Similar geographic and climatic problems and similar objectives among developing countries are an important stimulation for co-operation and the search for solutions based on our own reality, resources and energy. To that end, the recent Agreement relating to the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing Countries— approved at the Ministerial Meeting of the Negotiating Committee on the Global System of Trade Preferences held at Brasilia on 22 and 23 May 1986—is a very important landmark. It is essential that it enter into force soon, since it can be very significant for the countries of the South in general and African countries in particular.
153.	For its part, Chile has entered into technical assistance agreements in the past with some African countries in various fields. We are ready, within the capacity of our . own scarce resources, to co-operate in technical assistance in the mining, forestry, fishing and health sectors, in which we have been sufficiently successful and have acquired experience which we think could be valuable to the African nations.
154.	The challenge facing the international community at this time is daunting, owing to the scale of the problems and the needs of the African peoples. The response of this special session needs to be on a similar scale. This session gives us a unique opportunity to shape the solidarity pact to which I referred earlier between the international community and Africa and to agree on concerted support measures to supplement Africa’s own economic recovery efforts and place that continent once and for all on the path of development and prosperity.
155.	The African world needs our co-operation so that its peoples will be able to feed themselves, have work and develop themselves, thus once again finding hope and confirming Bertrand Russell’s words that poverty is not the inevitable heritage of man.
156.	Mr. THIOUNN (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretation from French): No one is in a better position than Mr. de Pinies to conclude successfully the important work of this special session of the General Assembly devoted to meeting the challenge to all mankind raised by the grave economic crisis on the African continent. We are especially pleased to address to him our sincerest congratulations on his unanimous election.
157.	The holding of this special session on the critical economic situation in Africa is vivid testimony to international solidarity, to our solidarity with our fellow human beings the world over, and to our determination to fulfil a humanitarian and political duty implicit in the Charter of the United Nations. It shows that, whatever their differences of political opinion, Governments and States can work together to come to grips with critical situations in a common and joint effort to solve tragic problems posed by famine, dire poverty and natural disasters which cause despair and threaten the peace and stability of our world.
158.	We should like to pay a stirring tribute to the OAU and its Chairman, Mr. Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal, for taking the initiative to have this special session convened. We should also commend most warmly Mr. Pisani, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, for his outstanding contribution.
159.	Two years ago the Secretary-General, whose tireless efforts and dedication to the ideals of the Charter we hail, alerted the international community to the alarming economic situation in Africa and appealed for international solidarity. Peoples and countries wedded to
peace and justice, especially those of the developed world, responded both generously and effectively to that appeal and saved millions of human lives and alleviated the sufferings of millions of others.
160.	Nevertheless, while the current situation is no longer so alarming, many serious problems are still far from being solved. On the one hand, drought and desertification continue in certain parts of the continent, threatening the lives of millions of people and hindering the process of national development. The continuation of substantial humanitarian emergency assistance in order to prevent the spread of famine, malnutrition, widespread disease and poverty remains a vital necessity.
161.	On the other hand, these natural disasters exacerbate the many internal structural problems of African countries. Africa is the continent where the standard of living of the people has diminished over the past 10 years, and this downward trend will continue if adequate steps are not urgently taken. Over the past decade, the continent has no longer been able to ensure food self-sufficiency.
162.	The development crisis of African countries most surely results from endogenous factors. The African ministers, during the fifteenth extraordinary session of the OAU Council of Ministers, held at Addis Ababa in March, attentively considered and lucidly analysed the nature of the problem. They acknowledged that “lack of structural transformation and the widespread low level productivity of the African economies are the fundamental causes of their continued underdevelopment and persistent economic crisis”.8
163.	Nevertheless, the plummeting prices of primary goods, the increase in protectionism, monetary instability and fluctuations in rates of exchange and the drop in real value of official development assistance have exerted strong pressures on Africa. These critical economic variables which characterize today’s world economy have been reflected in human and social terms by excessive costs, which considerably compromise the development efforts of the African countries.
164.	Finally, the increased indebtedness and the steadily growing burden of servicing that debt have exerted disastrous pressures on African economies. Although, admittedly, in absolute value the indebtedness of African countries is low compared with that of certain countries on other continents, we must emphasize that continuing natural disasters have exacerbated it beyond their payment capacity. According to the World Bank, the annual debt servicing for sub-Saharan African countries will rise to $11.6 billion for the years 1985, 1986 and 1987.
165.	It is a matter of urgency that we find a lasting solution to the problem of external indebtedness, which weighs heavily on the African countries. The rescheduling of the debt is only a palliative. In order to try to put an end to this problem, many countries have adopted adjustment programmes and have been trying hard to increase their exports while reducing imports. Nevertheless, these measures too often have the result of compromising development prospects, with harmful consequences for people’s living conditions.
166.	It is equally urgent and necessary for debtors and creditors to work together and find equitable solutions. The General Assembly has already made a commitment in this regard by adopting at its thirty-ninth session resolution 39/29, to which was annexed the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa. Paragraph 17 of that Declaration recommends, among other things, the total or partial conversion of official development assistance debts into grants. This can be carried out only if
we take concerted measures in close consultation and cooperation with all interested parties. Furthermore, on account of the convolutions and complexity of the problem, which requires determination on the part of both debtors and creditors, appropriate measures at the international level must be undertaken to solve the problem of the African external debt so as to enable Africa to carry out successfully its economic recovery programme. In this connection, my delegation endorses the African proposal to make thorough preparations for an international conference on the foreign indebtedness of African countries with a view to arriving together at comprehensive and lasting solutions.
167.	In addition to natural disasters, the lack or insufficiency of the necessary structural changes in the economy and an unfavourable economic environment, Africa must cope with another major obstacle which drains a major portion of its energy. Indeed, to make matters worse, many African countries have become victims of repeated and barbarous aggressions committed by the racist minority régime of South Africa, as evidenced by the recent attacks carried out against Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana. The human losses and material damage and the increased cost of defending their national sovereignty constitute an enormous burden upon the economies of the front-line States. Being themselves victims of a similar war of invasion and occupation, as everyone knows, and suffering comparable crimes committed by a régime no less cruel and arrogant than the enemy of the Namibian and South African peoples, the Kampuchean people and their Coalition Government indignantly condemn the policy of apartheid and aggression pursued by the Pretoria racist régime. Only the eradication of that régime and the establishment of an egalitarian and democratic multiracial society, safeguarding freedom for all in South Africa and independence for Namibia, will enable the peoples and Governments of southern Africa to come to grips with the problem of economic and social development.
168.	In spite of these current human tragedies and social disasters, Africa remains a continent of the future, with enormous mining and agricultural potential. The African peoples have shown in difficult times that they have a great capacity for adaptation and survival. Although today one of the weakest and most vulnerable links in the chain of the interdependence of the world economy, Africa, we are certain, is capable of being a sound part of the international community and of playing its full role. Once it has overcome its crisis and its current difficulties—which are not insurmountable—Africa will surely be able to begin a true process of economic and social development.
169.	During its twenty-first session, in July 1985, the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity adopted a programme entitled “Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990”1 in order to lay the groundwork for sustained economic growth and self-sustaining development, thanks to far-reaching structural changes. This programme gives priority to the development of agriculture and to substantial reforms in the system of economic management. We fully support this programme, which shows the courage and firm determination of Africa to take its own destiny in hand with the foresight, the spirit of responsibility and the dignity which have always characterized it.
170.	In Order to attain these objectives, Africa has actually committed itself to making all the necessary sacrifices. It has repeatedly reiterated its commitment to
mobilizing all its human and financial resources. Last July, African leaders reaffirmed that the development of the African continent is incumbent, first and foremost, on their Governments and peoples. They decided to take more effective steps to overcome the current food crisis and, above all, to prevent its recurrence by going to its root causes.
171.	Nevertheless, the current crisis in Africa is so serious that, even if all the local resources, both financial and human, are employed, African countries will not be in a position to carry out successfully their struggle for survival and development without substantial external assistance. The international community has already responded satisfactorily and effectively by coming to the assistance of stricken African populations. It must, however, support the praiseworthy efforts of the peoples and Governments of Africa by providing them with additional economic and financial resources and by ensuring a more propitious international economic environment. By helping to establish a new stable and just economic era, the international community, especially the developed countries, would without doubt help to facilitate the arduous and painstaking tasks of our African brothers and sisters to set up the basis for recovery and lasting economic development. Indeed, economic interdependence means that the world economy cannot sustain regular development unless the African economy has been put on the right track. The prosperity of Africa will benefit not only Africans, but also the development of the world economy. Furthermore, many bitter political and economic experiences have shown us that there cannot be prosperity, stability or national security if we do not take into account the interests of others. The interdependence of interests is currently an undeniable reality. Africa in a state of crisis is a constant threat to world peace and security. .
172.	Kampuchea has been linked to Africa for many years by bonds of friendship and fraternal solidarity, based on sincere mutual respect and the sharing of the ideals enshrined in the Charter and in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. These bonds stem from the quiet and peaceful nature of our peoples and from a common determination to defend our independence and freedom in honour and national dignity. They have been made manifest and enhanced in the past, as well as in the present, by mutual aid and support in the most difficult times of our history, especially when those difficulties have called into question the survival of our nations and peoples. The people of Kampuchea and the peoples of Africa have been close friends at all times, and in adversity they have become brothers.
173.	Even though they may now have to face a difficult struggle for national survival, of which we are all aware, the people of Kampuchea and the Coalition Government have always responded positively, within our modest means, to the appeals by the international community to come to the assistance of our African brothers and sisters. Once again today, in speaking here, we should like to make our modest contribution so that the act of faith so movingly proclaimed by Mr. Diouf might become a living and vibrant reality to mark the point of departure for the recovery of Africa and the strengthening of its important and necessary role in the maintenance of international peace, security and stability.
174.	Mr. HERRENBERG (Suriname): The convening of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly to consider one of the pressing concerns of the Organization—the critical economic situation in Africa—is undoubtedly one of the most significant decisions taken
by the United Nations. To discuss among the nations of the world problems related to one of the continents is a decision which underscores the very raison d’etre of the United Nations system: to contribute in a comprehensive and peaceful manner to the development of mankind.
175.	I should like, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Suriname and on my own behalf, to extend to Mr. de Pinies our heartiest congratulations on his election as President of this special session. My delegation is convinced that under his experienced leadership this historic session will arrive at solutions that will satisfy the expectations of the peoples of Africa and the rest of the world.
176.	The crisis in Africa concerns all of us, and finding solutions to it will actually result in the creation by the international community of a new mechanism to deal effectively in this interdependent world with problems of underdevelopment, which, if left unsolved, will pose a serious threat to peace and stability in the world. For this reason, it is essential that the United Nations be strengthened in order to create the necessary conditions for international co-operation for development between States and regions.
177.	We all share the opinion that the situation in Africa is serious and that it poses a threat not only to the peoples of Africa but also to the peace and security of the entire world. We cannot ignore the fact that both internal and external factors in the past have contributed to the present situation. It is evident that the international community can and must react favourably to the endeavours of the African peoples in order to prevent a recurrence of tragic scenes of hunger and famine. Many unpredictable disasters in the form of persistent drought, desertification and other natural calamities have considerably exacerbated their already precarious pattern of life.
178.	We deeply sympathize with the plight of our brothers in Africa. As members know, an important part of our population has its roots in Western Africa. After our independence in 1975, but in particular after the start of the revolution in February 1980, relations between Suriname and many countries of the African continent became closer and closer and have now blossomed.
179.	One of the many reasons for our presence here is that the issues we have to deal with also have relevance for our continent, the Caribbean and Latin America.
180.	Our country, Suriname, is part of the developing world with a colonial past. We are therefore in a position to appreciate and fully concur with the views of the African leaders that coping with the present crisis in their continent in fact means to transform their respective societies from a dependent import-oriented economy with a small productive basis into a diversified nationally controlled export-oriented economy.
181.	My delegation is of the opinion that the solution of world problems and the improvement in the standards of living of the unfortunate should and could be achieved through international co-operation. This has been proposed by the leaders of the African continent in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.1 My delegation has carefully studied the Priority Programme. We fully support the plan of action suggested by the Governments of Africa and call upon the international community to fill the gap in resources needed to finance the Priority Programme. It undoubtedly reflects the commitment of the African Governments to solve the crisis when they stress their willingness to contribute 64.4 per cent, or $82.5 billion, to the financing of the recovery programme. This emphasizes their position that the African peoples themselves will be primarily
responsible for the social and economic changes of their continent.
182.	What Africa expects from the world community was eloquently stated by President Diouf of the Republic of Senegal, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity:
“Lastly, it is an act of faith by the whole international community in the spirit of solidarity, interdependence and international co-operation which remains the solid foundation of the United Nations. . . . From the very outset I would express the fervent hope that the results of our work will translate this act of faith into well-defined, concrete and manageable measures.” [to meeting, para. 35.]*
183.	We fully agree with the leaders of the African continent that development should have its base in the agricultural sector and an industrialization based thereupon. In that respect, I may point out the philosophy of the head of Government of my country, Commander Desire Bouterse, which is persistently emphasized and incorporated in the economic paragraph of our policy programme. It is that our economy should be diversified and the agricultural sector developed in order to enable us to feed ourselves and transform our economy from an import-oriented to an export-oriented one.
184.	It is our opinion that merely contributing to the financial resources of the Priority Programme will not solve Africa’s economic crisis. It is clear that the international community has to deal with the problems of international recession, the collapse of commodity prices, adverse terms of trade, the decline of official development aid, increased protectionism, high interest rates and, most importantly, the heavy burden of debt and the debtservicing obligations of African countries. We therefore fully agreed with Mr. Narayanan, Minister of State for External Affairs of the Republic of India, when he said on behalf of his Government and the Movement of NonAligned Countries in his statement on Tuesday, “Improvement of the external environment and structural changes in the global economic system are, therefore, essential for tackling the critical economic situation in Africa”. [See 1st meeting, para. 115.]
185.	Turning to Africa’s debt problem, I may state that many African countries are simply unable to repay their debts. The debtor countries are trying to appear solvent by rescheduling or refinancing their debt, but in fact some of the current debts of the developing countries should be regarded as in default. Debtor countries themselves are anxious to meet their commitments. The preservation of credit-worthiness is central to continued capital inflows. However, no country enjoys having to undergo the close and detailed scrutiny required as part of debt rescheduling. This system often threatens to paralyse economic growth, erode democratization, upset social peace and destabilize the international financial system. It is obvious that the responsibility lies equally with the debtor countries, the creditor countries, private banking and international institutions.
186.	If the problem of debt and debt-servicing is not solved satisfactorily, it will be impossible for the African countries to accumulate the financial resources needed for their contribution to the Priority Programme. In this context, we welcome the statements by the representatives of Canada and the Nordic countries, which have proposed measures to alleviate the debt burden of the African countries.
♦Quoted in French by the speaker.
187.	The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has adopted a Plan of Action to meet the critical economic situation in Africa,9 focused on the food and agricultural sector, which is designed to supplement other international programmes operating in the same field.
188.	We consider it to be of the greatest importance to support the activities which have been undertaken by the developing countries to promote South-South co-operation. Trade possibilities on regional and subregional levels can contribute to lessening dependence on the industrialized countries.
189.	Although the Government of Suriname is not in a position to make financial contributions at this time, for reasons well known to everyone here, we have every intention of making an important contribution to the extent possible within the context of South-South cooperation. There are areas, for instance in agriculture, where we have expertise and stand ready to co-operate. In addition, the Government of Suriname has scheduled an international conference of non-aligned countries in July 1986 which will focus on the conditions necessary as a basis for development in the developing countries. This conference will be preceded by a national conference in June, which will discuss the same topic.
190.	The problems of Africa have much in common with the problems of the rest of the developing world. Therefore, the international community, in dealing with the critical economic situation in Africa, faces the challenge of finding structural solutions to the questions of the growth and development of the developing world. By the taking of the necessary measures to overcome the problems of Africa, a mechanism will be created to deal effectively with underdevelopment. It is now up to the international community to demonstrate that the ideals of equitable international development and human solidarity are not a mere facade but essential elements in creating a more equitable world.
191.	We all know that there are certain regions in the world where food production is excessive and others where food production falls unacceptably short—the latter resulting in malnutrition and even famine. Yet we are all convinced that the world community has the capacity and technology to solve the food problems of the entire world. Let us therefore act now in the spirit of co-operation to ban this scourge for ever from the face of the earth.
192.	In our opinion, an international economic order that would assure the African States better prices for their commodities would contribute significantly to the improvement of their economic situation. Therefore, my delegation believes that the establishment of the new international economic order is also necessary for the maximum success of the international community’s efforts.
193.	One cannot discuss the economic crisis in Africa without mentioning the apartheid system and the destabilizing activities by the South African racist régime against neighbouring States. In this connection, my Government strongly condemns the recent acts of aggression by South Africa against Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, in which alleged illegal activities of the African National Congress in those countries were used as a pretext. Those brutal attacks on the three independent front-line States are a threat to peace and a blatant violation of international law. My delegation once more expresses its full support for and solidarity with the liberation movements in southern Africa. In the light of those wanton acts we call upon the international
community not to delay further the application of sanctions against the racist régime of Pretoria.
194.	In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for the Governments and peoples of Africa in the implementation of the Priority Programme.
195.	Mr. TALALLA. (Malaysia): Africa is a major crucible of life—the root of many ancient civilizations and cultures and the origin and home of many proud peoples, whose prominent sons and daughters are well represented today in this Assembly. Africa has had its share of proud moments in the pages of history, from ancient times to the more recent past. Africa has also had its share of tragedies—witness the calamity of recent years when severe drought conditions affected many countries in the Sudano-Sahelian region, causing widespread famine and death.
196.	It was, in part, the tremendous outpouring of help by fellow human beings from all parts of the world that helped provide relief from hunger and disease. But, more important, as evidenced in many of the affected countries, it was the hard work and resilience of the African people themselves that helped those countries through a most difficult period.
197.	Perhaps, in retrospect, the thousands who died of starvation did not die in vain, for their death helped to jolt the world and the international community into focusing on the severe structural deficiencies afflicting the economies of many of the African countries. The repeated warnings of the approaching calamity, which had been ignored, finally caught the world’s attention with vivid images of the sick and dying—victims of a world grown complacent and people preoccupied with the seemingly more urgent pressures of a world in recession. The painful visions of dying infants and under-nourished mothers and elders flashed to living rooms throughout the world effectively reminded us of the cost of neglect and complacency.
198.	It was at the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly that the international community renewed its focus on the many serious problems in Africa by adopting the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa [resolution 39/29, annex]. And at the Assembly’s fortieth session the international community agreed to convene this special session to focus on the rehabilitation and restoration of the African economies and to examine their medium- and long-term development problems. My delegation therefore regards the convening of this session as having particular significance. It is an acknowledgement that whatever happens on the African continent cannot be isolated or ignored by the international community, that the welfare and well-being of the African peoples are inextricably tied to the total well-being of the rest of the world. This session must be an expression of the solidarity of the international community, showing that in times of crisis Member States can set aside their many differences to address the immediate and basic problems confronting Africa.
199.	Much hard work has been done, particularly by the African countries themselves, in preparing for this session. We commend the OAU for providing the leadership and crystallizing a common view of what besets the economies on the continent and for its ability to galvanize the collective will of its many member States to produce the Lagos Plan of Action10 in 1980, the Declaration by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at Addis Ababa in 19855 and agreement on Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 also adopted in 1985.
200.	The African countries have reaffirmed that, while requiring help from friends, they will depend primarily upon themselves for the basic and important task of rehabilitation and recovery. They have acknowledged that failures in implementing economic programmes in the past may have been a result of trying to transpose an alien system not compatible with the realities and requirements of Africa—an experience many of us, as developing countries, have had, to our cost. We therefore commend the spirit and intention of the Lagos Plan of Action and the heads of State and Government of the OAU for their determination to realize common objectives in seeking a path to recovery.
201.	My Government fully supports the Priority Programme annexed to the OAU Assembly’s Declaration. Malaysia supports the accelerated implementation of the Lagos Plan of Action and the priority given to the improvement of the food and agricultural situation in Africa and the relief of the external debt burden, the proposal to work on a common platform for action at the subregional, regional, continental and international levels and the reference to the need for action against the effects of South Africa’s destabilization policy on the economies of the States of southern Africa. Malaysia also reiterates its support for the OAU’s call for an international conference on the foreign debts of African countries and an international conference on sanctions against South Africa.
202.	Malaysia has assisted its friends on the continent to the extent of its capability. Assistance has been channelled through the Malaysian Technical Co-operation Programme, as a small contribution to Africa’s development efforts. Although Malaysia’s assistance has been modest, Malaysia will continue to give it, through bilateral channels and within the context of South-South cooperation, believing that co-operation between developing countries is essential. So far, Malaysia’s co-operation with our friends in Africa has been in the areas of agriculture and in human resources development, two of the six priority areas requiring action, as identified by the Secretary-General in his report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.11
203.	In a note on some issues in international economic co-operation dated 2 April 1986, the Secretariat pointed out that, if the African countries are to achieve adjustment with growth and prevent the recurrence of such emergency situations as the recent famine, they will have to focus on the rehabilitation of their agricultural sectors. There are areas in which our experiences, particularly in the field of agriculture, can usefully be shared. Co-operation in agricultural research and training in agricultural extension services are therefore areas that can be expanded further.
204.	Malaysia would also be able to share its experiences in the development of small- and medium-scale industries that might be of relevance in the rehabilitation of the industrial sectors of the countries affected.
205.	If the African countries are to achieve adjustment with growth, increased resource flows, particularly at concessional rates, will have to be made available. These can only come from donor countries and from such multilateral financial institutions as the World Bank and IMF.
206.	At the fortieth session of the General Assembly last autumn, my delegation voiced its support for the OAU proposal to convene an international conference on African debt. We share the view that many of the sub-Saharan countries cannot possibly repay their existing debts as scheduled. The massive debt repayments cannot be effected
when export earnings are depleted as a result of severely depressed commodity prices. The proposed international conference could contribute to a solution regarding the interrelationship between debt repayments and export earnings. .
207.	The tremendous response of many countries to the appeals for emergency assistance to the African countries recently affected by drought and famine is perhaps a precursor of what the members of the international community, acting together with co-operation and determination, can achieve. We commend the Office of Emergency Operations for Africa for its success in the monumental task of channelling humanitarian assistance to the countries affected, thus contributing to the saving of thousands of lives.
208.	Equally important are the quiet actors, the experts and technicians in the specialized agencies, in UNEP, UNICEF, WHO and FAO, as well as others, who have worked and are working without fanfare to fight the threat of ecological imbalance, to provide sufficient food for the people on the continent and to maintain the health care needed to sustain the old and to nurture the young in order to ensure that Africa can overcome its many adversities.
209.	Special mention must be made of the ongoing battle to contain the creeping desert, a battle that is of major importance in the efforts to rehabilitate and develop a viable agricultural sector in the countries affected. Although much has been done to combat desertification and fight drought, more needs to be done and can be done in this area.
210.	The response of donor countries, large and small, of non-governmental organizations and of private citizens during the recent crisis has reminded us of what real international co-operation can achieve in overcoming a calamity or tragedy. Perhaps the most significant thing to emerge from recent experience is that spirit of oneness, the realization that we share this world, that the plight of Africa should be a shared plight, that underdevelopment and an inadequate infrastructure perpetuate the cycle of economic dependency, which must be broken, and that poverty and undernourishment are an affront to the affluence and progress made thus far. These are problems that should rightly be shared and addressed by the international community in order that a large number of our fellow inhabitants of the earth can be helped to overcome their plight.
211.	This, to me, is the most important expectation of the special session. The international community with this opportunity is being provided to show its solidarity, to epitomize the spirit of what the United Nations really means. We are confident that with this awareness the special session will conclude successfully with a decision on an action programme to secure the develpment process needed to enable the African countries to contribute their share to the total development process of the international community.
212.	, Mr. MOHAMMED (Trinidad and Tobago): The delegation of Trinidad and Tobago is pleased that Mr. de Pinies is presiding over this special session of the General Assembly convened to address the critical economic situation in Africa. We are sure that, with the experience, skill and wisdom he so amply demonstrated in the course of the fortieth session of the Assembly, he will guide our work to a successful conclusion.
213.	The General Assembly has agreed to meet in special session to address for the first time the economic problems of a particular continent, Africa. Africa, rich in history and culture and well endowed with resources,
has been beset by an amalgam of climatic and ecological, as well as domestic and external, forces that have left it largely impoverished and has nullified more than a generation of development.
214.	The focus on Africa at this time is a response to a situation that has reached crisis proportions, a situation that demands immediate action in addressing three important facets of the problem: first, the alleviation of the starvation and suffering facing so many of our fellow men in that continent; secondly, the formulation of a strategy for long-term development in which international action supplements domestic policies; and, thirdly, the learning process in which the experiences of Africa serve to reinforce the principles of development as they apply to developing countries elsewhere.
215.	The situation in Africa provides a unique opportunity for the international community to demonstrate its solidarity with fellow inhabitants of our planet by tackling the various problems in a concerted manner. It should be recognized that an economically weak and vulnerable Africa is in the interest of no one, and that the suffering of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa is our suffering also. This special session should demonstrate in a concrete way the validity and relevance of the United Nations as it acts in unison as the conscience and voice of humanity in time of crisis. My delegation would recall that the Organization was founded to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples.
216.	My delegation has listened to the statements of representatives of African countries, including that of the President of the Republic of Senegal; and we are convinced that Africa has not lost hope, nor has its resolve to attain self-sustaining growth and development been shaken by this crisis. My delegation commends the efforts of the OAU and Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,1 which establishes a framework for Africa’s development to the year 1990. This is a more-than-commendable effort, and we support the thrust of the document.
217.	We have noted that African Governments have assumed responsibility for their situation and for their future development. Trinidad and Tobago agrees that in the final analysis it is the African Governments themselves which must determine their own priorities, economic strategy and pace of growth.
218.	My delegation also supports the document’s focus on the key sectors of food and agriculture. We are of the view that Africa’s ability to feed itself is crucial to that continent, which is generally regarded as having tremendous agricultural potential. The revitalization of the food and agriculture sectors in Africa will not only terminate the continent’s dependence on imported food, but will also assist in reversing the decline of nutritional standards in several sub-Saharan African countries. We believe that this focus should also support efforts which would accelerate the industrial capacity of Africa, especially in areas related to the development of agriculture. Other programmes of action have already addressed those concerns, and they too should be given adequate support and attention.
219.	While African Governments have assumed the responsibility of mobilizing a substantial portion of their resources to alleviate the critical situation, the responsibility of the international community, and in particular the donor countries, is clear. There is need for a greater and more timely flow of better quality resources. The donor community and the multilateral financial institutions
should, in keeping with their stated aims, closely coordinate their assistance to avoid competition, overlap and wastage. Many sub-Saharan African Governments have demonstrated a willingness to undertake the necessary structural and sectoral reforms and institutional measures to revitalize their economic processes and make them more dynamic. These efforts need to be strengthened and reinforced by adequate external financial resources and technical assistance.
220.	Africa, for all its travail, will remain in a vicious circle of underdevelopment unless there are efforts at the international level to solve the problem of the external debt of developing countries, to address low commodity prices and declining real official development assistance and to stem the rising tide of protectionism. It is the conviction of Africa, as indeed it is the conviction of all developing countries, that an equitable international environment should be created in which opportunities exist for all participants. -
221.	It is incontrovertible that the problem of development is inextricably linked to the attainment of peace. The continued unbridled attacks by South Africa against neighbouring States in its attempt to destabilize the economies and political stability of those States amply demonstrate that fact. It is therefore imperative that the economic well-being of Africa, and southern Africa in particular, be viewed in the context of the need to terminate the illegal plunder of Namibia’s human and natural resources and the illegal occupation of that territory, to eradicate completely the odious system of apartheid and to establish a truly democratic, non-racial society in South Africa. At this time in its history, Africa must be allowed to channel all its energies into the dual task of survival and development; it must not be diverted by the existence and machinations of the odious system of apartheid.
222.	The African crisis is still with us, and it is imperative that we find a long-term solution. The international community, which has responded in an unprecedented way to the spectre of starving millions, must ensure that the seeds of crisis are not sown again. In a world that is becoming increasingly interdependent every day, the misfortunes of Africa are bound to affect the rest of humanity. For make no mistake: the rest of the developing world stands perilously close to the threshold of the situation which has befallen Africa. Unless we take heed, other regions of the world will soon face similar—if not worse—crises. It is imperative, therefore, that we devise a solution which stops the immediate suffering and offers real hope for significant development in Africa as well as throughout the developing world.
223.	Trinidad and Tobago, for its part, has long and enduring ties of consanguinity with Africa, and we stand ready, as in the past, within the limits of our resources, to render both material and moral support. My delegation also looks forward to a successful outcome of this special session, an outcome that is both action-oriented and concrete and will return Africa to the path of growth and development. Trinidad and Tobago remains optimistic that goodwill will prevail, since, like many other members of the international community, we believe that development is another name for peace.
224.	Mr. CHARLES (Haiti) (interpretation from French)'. The convening of this special session bears witness to the interest of the international community in Africa, which is passing through one of the most critical times in its history. Today the Organization is engaging in a comprehensive examination of the various problems confronting African countries and has an opportunity to reaffirm its solidarity with them and to show that the
world is one and that whatever affects one part of the world has repercussions throughout the planet.
225.	It is also an opportunity to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, whose humanist vision of the world’s problems has always inspired action. We are grateful to him for having shown once again that he is equal to carrying out his mission and has spared no effort to make the international community fully aware of the scope of the tragedy which, with the haunting spectre of famine, shook the conscience of the world.
226.	The many and complex elements of this tragedy have been indentified and clearly highlighted, ranging from vestiges from the colonial past to the low level of savings and national investment. With a few exceptions, the overall balance is negative. The list of causes is well known: drought, desertification, famine, inadequate economic policies, the drop in commodity prices, exchange rate fluctuations, foreign indebtedness and high interest rates, not to mention acts of destabilization in southern Africa perpetrated by the apartheid régime.
227.	In some cases, the urgent situation has somewhat relaxed. Nevertheless, there are still structural weaknesses throughout the continent, and any long-term solution must deal with them. It is comforting in this respect to stress that Africa has itself realized the dimension of its problems and has demonstrated, without reservation, a political intention and collective will to contribute within its means to the solution of these problems.
228.	During their summit meeting last July the heads of State and Government of the OAU solemnly stated, in paragraph 6 of their Declaration,5 that they were “determined to take concrete actions and measures individually and collectively for the achievement of the economic development of our continent in unity and solidarity of African peoples and member States”. It was this spirit which guided the African Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Ministers responsible for Economic Development and Planning, subsequent to a very frank analysis of the economic situation, to draw up a five-year economic development plan entitled “Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990”,1 which calls for the integration of African economies and which, once implemented, will lead to a considerable increase in trade between the various regions and subregions of the continent.
229.	The statements we have heard so far have clearly shown that the international community, which has already manifested its solidarity with Africa, will contribute fully to the implementation of the Priority Programme. This is both a challenge and an opportunity. It is a challenge because supporting a continent-wide development programme implies the transfer of tremendous resources. But it is also an opportunity precisely because rapidly developing African economies would provide assured stable markets and contribute to expanding international trade. Moreover, this would make an excellent contribution to international peace and security. 230. A satisfactory arrangement with regard to the debt problem would without doubt make an equally important contribution to the Priority Programme. In this connection we hail the decision of the Canadian Government to grant a moratorium on the repayment of loans to African countries for a period of five years, a moratorium which could be renewed in five-year periods up until the year 2000. We fervently hope that this example will be followed by others. Similarly, we support the proposal for convening an international conference on the debt problem.
231.	Lastly, it is also desirable for the international community, particularly the developed countries, to agree
on exerting pressure on South Africa to eliminate apartheid completely and achieve independence for Namibia. If the Priority Programme is to succeed in southern Africa, it is vital for the countries of that region to be able to devote all their efforts to development and not to their own defence.
232.	The Republic of Haiti feels too close to Africa to remain indifferent, let alone insensitive to anything affecting Africa and of concern to Africa. Our visceral links with the Alma Mater defy time and space. By one of those coincidences only history can explain, the same symptoms of crisis which can be seen in Africa are also reflected in the conditions in Haiti. Thus, it is with the deepest interest that Haiti is following this new experience in international co-operation, which is almost impossible to believe.
233.	lam firmly convinced that this effort will be successful if the mobilization of all this goodwill on the part of all does not come up against current frustrating obstacles. The dialogue must be frank and full and the parties concerned must, in the implementation of the Programme, work together in pooling their expertise and resources so that they can avoid duplication and unjustified preferences in the choice of experts or implementing agents—in other words, any wasting of energy or loss of interest. Any false step could be very costly. The golden rule must be the profitability of a project and its ramifications throughout the economy. The rate of reimbursement of debt should be decided in such a way that it does not impede development. .
234.	Under these circumstances, the prompt action of the international community through multilateral institutions and development assistance will support or perhaps even accelerate the priorities and trends the Governments of the continent have already chosen. That is the price of success. We fervently hope for success for Africa and for mankind as a whole.
235.	Mr. KNIPPING-VICTORIA (Dominican Republic) (interpretation from Spanish)-. This historic special session of the General Assembly began on a very auspicious note indeed because of the President we have elected to preside over our work. There can be no doubt that his well-known commitment to co-operation amongst nations will guide our deliberations in the direction of a concerted approach in solidarity on behalf of our African brothers.
236.	This is the first time the United Nations has devoted itself to an in-depth examination of the economic situation of an entire region of the planet; hence the historic dimension being attributed to this special session. It is only natural for the full attention of the international community now to be focused on what we do here; it is obvious that the good name of the Organization will in large measure depend on the manner and efficacy with which it handles this issue.
237.	The economic situation prevailing in Africa is truly alarming. Such is the magnitude of the crisis that it is a true imperative of our time that we devise appropriate and timely policies of co-operation that encourage development efforts designed by African countries themselves. 238. The roots of the current crisis are varied. Some, indeed, are domestic; others originate abroad. Similarly, there are natural factors and others that derive from the present international economic order. There are the disastrous effects of persistent drought, which has led to degradation and loss of soil for agriculture, destruction of ground cover, desertification of pasture land, depletion of subterranean waters, deforestation, massive displacement of people and disruption of the continent’s
ecology. To all those problems must be added the decline in the prices of basic exports, growing protectionism in industrialized countries, the enormous weight of external indebtedness and the rise in interest rates. The combination of natural disasters and an adverse international economic situation has deepened Africa’s crisis, rendering more acute social problems concerning food, agriculture, transportation, energy, nutrition, water and other matters equally fundamental for the survival of the human race.
239.	As we said at the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly [52nd meeting], in November 1984, when the critical economic situation in Africa was being considered, it pains us to note that at the very time that we are examining that situation mankind sees progress that might be called stupendous being made in the realms of science and technology, transportation and communications, industry and space research, medicine and health, and so forth. It is a very troubling situation, since international life presents us a series of contradictions very difficult to grasp and assimilate. Those contradictions are manifest in all areas and most obvious in the ever-widening gap separating the rich countries from the poor developing countries and in the threat looming over millions who face hunger, despite all the scientific and material progress. Oh, the sad paradox of our times. This disturbing reality should prompt us to stop and think about the moral and sociological foundations upon which the current structure of international life rests. .
240.	Turning now to the critical economic situation in Africa, we should like to emphasize the shining example our African brothers have presented in co-ordinating actions throughout an entire region to surmount the crisis. With regard to these concerted efforts to come to grips with matters of common interest, we should stress the realism with which African Governments have faced the full dimensions of the crisis and envisaged means of overcoming it. The willingness to engage in self-criticism that has governed their analysis has convinced them of the absolute necessity of fundamental substantive reforms in basic institutional structures throughout the economic and social order. Equally admirable is their recognition of their inability to cope with their current problems by themselves. The need for change and the need to reorient the way of setting priorities is perceived in all sectors in Africa.
241.	During the course of the debate we have been able to see how the international community has been offering its co-operation to the African countries. Most countries have announced generous and valuable contributions aimed at easing the want and suffering of millions of human beings. A variety of multilateral organizations— private, non-governmental, governmental and international—have also manifested their willingness to help, including international organizations within the United Nations system. This entire splendid crusade of international assistance clearly shows the profound sense of solidarity inherent in the human race.
242.	My delegation considers that this special session, which has served to demonstrate to the world the extraordinary sense of solidarity present among our peoples, should give rise to renewed impetus for multilateral mobilization to solve the problems afflicting humanity. The United Nations, the proudest embodiment of the organized international community, should play a fundamental role. This would revitalize the purposes and principles that inspired the founders of the Organization as they established international machinery designed to promote the economic and social progress of all peoples through
international co-operation to resolve international problems in the economic, social, cultural and humanitarian spheres.
243.	In other words, the United Nations should coordinate and supervise implementation of the Programme of Action, which we hope and expect will be adopted at this special session {A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V], and Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery— without, of course, giving short shrift to the sovereign rights and freedoms of African countries, who in the final analysis are the only ones that can decide their own destiny.
244.	The Dominican Republic, identifying fully with the yearnings of our African brothers, will enthusiastically back any initiative the Organization might adopt for the benefit of the African continent. In this ever more interdependent world in which we live, solidarity with Africa in turn means solidarity with the future of mankind. By the same token, Africa’s economic recovery will make an inestimable contribution to world peace, inasmuch as there can be no peace without development and social justice. .
245.	Mr. ALBORNOZ (Ecuador) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, I should like to congratulate the President on his well-deserved election to the presidency of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly. 246. Ecuador has come to the world rostrum to voice its solidarity with our brother peoples of Africa on this occasion when, in the light of the critical situation of that continent, their most authoritative spokesmen have come before the appropriate forum, the United Nations, not only to raise a grave problem but also to call attention to its ramifications for the entire international community. 247. Above and beyond its frightful connotations of human tragedy, sacrifice and suffering, the problem deserves a quantification of effort and support in terms of world-wide co-operation, which in turn would open the door to an assessment of the other dimensions of inadequacies and their solutions in other parts of the developing world. We are thus updating, for the period beyond this crisis, the prospects for North-South action, which must necessarily begin where the need is most urgent, that is, Africa.
248.	In this respect, we should recall the ILO maxim to the effect that want anywhere in the world is a threat to prosperity everywhere else in the world.
249.	As has quite rightly been said by representatives from various parts of the world, the solution lies in paying urgent attention to the critical situation and to promoting development. The primary goal of the United Nations and a concept that has arisen in the multilateral world in the past 40 years, development must be achieved with full national and international justice. For this purpose the machinery of the United Nations system, to which the Secretary-General referred in his opening remarks, should be made to identify—something it is indeed already doing —situations and areas where action is required. All this makes more obvious the link between disarmament and development. The United Nations must make progress in this area and finally bring about the financing with dignity of the better life to which peoples the world over are entitled. Hence all that is required at this time— particularly in the case of Africa—is responsible political determination by the major countries that have the capacity to play a leading role in these trying times, a role which must not fail to include a dimension of historical balance and reparation in the advent in our day of universal values of freedom, democracy and the interdependence of peoples. The voice of experience and analysis of the President
of the General Assembly has been a beacon for us along these lines.
250.	As the President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, Mr. Diouf, pointed out, this grave situation calls for a new proposal for Africa and a more appropriate framework for international co-operation. This special session, the first clearly to come to grips with an economic crisis in an important part of the planet, has before it the report submitted by the OAU12 specifically underscoring the need to initiate as soon as possible a fundamental structural reform pinpointing the priorities required in the development process of the African countries. Who better than the African countries themselves could know and duly interpret their own reality and the ways for resolving the serious problems facing them?
251.	With realism and validity, the main conclusions of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19901 point in the same direction. My delegation joins those who have spoken words of encouragement and incentive, particularly with regard to the imperative need to attend to the progress, and modernization of agriculture and substantially to increase output and productivity in order to meet urgent nutritional needs and to rehabilitate the rural areas of this vast continent.
252.	The fundamental problems have been diagnosed. But the agricultural sector has been identified and recognized as the emergent priority aspect of the African tragedy that must be addressed within its development process, in order to help Africa help itself—something that has been repeatedly stated in this Hall. The extensive programmes of technology transfers and technical assistance efficiently co-ordinated by UNDP, and those promoting development through United Nations bodies specialized in granting loans and revolving credit, such as the World Bank, IMF, IDA and IFC, must furnish significant contributions towards this vast collective undertaking of the international community on behalf of Africa and should channel and co-ordinate the international aid effort.
253.	A strong appeal should also be made for the lifting at the bilateral level of the series of restrictions and limitations that are hamstringing international trade and that stand in the way of just prices for raw materials. Free flow and broad latitude for trade amongst nations, together with international co-operation, are the best tools for promoting the development of peoples, since it is necessary to deal with the very roots of the problem they share with other parts of the world.
254.	With a spirit of frankness, solidarity and understanding with regard to the grave crisis the countries of Africa are facing, Ecuador resolutely backs this great endeavour of the international community on behalf of Africa and those steps the world Organization will take
to promote development in Africa. In this context Ecuador’s categoric repudiation of racism, colonialism and the loathsome policy of apartheid—which have so undermined the necessary peaceful and orderly process of development—is well known. A few days ago Ecuador became one of the first 43 countries to sign the International Convention against Apartheid in Sports [resolution 40/64G, annex].
255.	There is a general sense at this historic session that the time has come to attend to the pressing need to promote Africa’s development, to the paramount role the African countries themselves ascribe to food and agriculture, to the struggle against erosion and soil deterioration, to afforestation, preserving the ecology and a variety of other factors—all of which represent commitments to self-sustaining action where the peoples, first and foremost, want to help themselves. That is why it is the responsibility of the other members of the international community to help them in this undertaking, thus adopting a stance truly in keeping with this, the hour of the peoples of the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.
Notes
■A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI), annex.
2See A/40/519, para. 337.
3	Lome Declaration on Security, Disarmament and Development in Africa (see Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1985, document S/17573, annex, part A).
4	Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.I.8), part one, sect. A.
sA/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI).
6	Cartagena Consensus signed by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Ministers of Finance of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela at Cartagena, Colombia, on 22 June 1984.
’Adopted at the High Level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981.
8	See A/AC.229/2, para. 20.
^Adopted at the extraordinary ministerial meeting on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985 (A/41/341, annex I).
10	Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
13A/40/372.
12A	frica’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC.229/2).
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
7th
PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 30 May 1986, at 10.30 a.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIES (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (continued)
1.	Mr. SAMUDIO (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly. The fact that you, a son of the mother country, Spain, today our sister country, the land of ancient Europe which bequeathed to us its language, race, culture, religion and proud bearing, have been unanimously elected to guide the debate on Africa and its critical economic situation is a clear demonstration of the high level of international relations achieved in this contemporary world, in which countries of the old and new worlds alike can join together under a single common denominator: the well-being of all countries without distinction.
2.	To the Secretary-General we express our appreciation for a basic document of this special session, in which he has set out the work done by the organizations of the United Nations system and by the Secretariat under his guidance [A/S-13/3].
3.	Our delegation, which has followed with special attention the statements of the various delegations that have preceded it, expresses its unreserved and complete support of the statement made by Mr. Diouf, President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [/si meeting}, as we consider it to have been enlightening, profound and sincere. He brought to the general debate a feeling of confidence that the proposed goals could be achieved, stressing the positive aspects of the problems involved without falling into a simple rhetorical presentation of traditional or historic positions, which might have negatively affected the atmosphere necessary to attain agreement. We agree with his vision that it is necessary to begin the debate with open minds and not to lose sight of the goal to be achieved, which is the prompt and total recovery of the African continent, avoiding if possible ideological confrontations that only stress possible differences and would hinder the programming necessary for us to commence implementation of this session’s plan of action.
4.	This unprecedented session, this week of Africa in the United Nations, began with vivid expressions by representatives of the peoples of Africa, whose artists, poets, singers and musicians presented in the popular language of dance, song, and rhythm and language of their bodies the simple aspirations of those peoples, who
want only to live in peace and freedom, with security for their families and a future for their children and nations.
5.	In spite of the presentation of a traditional dance devoted to a good harvest, the songs of the lovely black South African singer Letta Mbubu and the poems of the bard Duma Nolovu, wo could not fail to see the present reality experienced by those peoples, their pain and resentment at the subjugation imposed on the black majority by the racism created by the infamous policy of apartheid and the criminal repression of which they are the victims.
6.	The artistic expressions that we observe here today in the public lobby, and the music, dance and poetry that gave life to this Hall last Monday night, are powerful demonstrations of a superior culture which has not been able to flourish without fear thus far, since it has been repressed, punished and accused of being “primitive” by those who have not understood it and have tried to destroy it.
7.	If today, as we meet to study the African economic crisis, we are to understand the real origins of the problems of those peoples, all we need do is consider what has happened to their culture, the plunder and ignorance, to understand their expressions, and without need for further quest we will know the blunt answer. We should also be able to know that answer if we wanted to study the origins of the problems now afflicting any field of human activity in Africa—agriculture, housing construction, education, trade and various social activities. We should then know about the humiliation, the attempts to eliminate their customs and traditions because they were not considered to be in keeping with Western culture or technology. Those who supposedly were bringing civilization did not take the trouble to study those peoples and the history of their civilizations, some of which existed before European civilization itself.
8.	The contributions made by the world of music as , popular artistic expression are enormous. The Live Aid concert alone managed to obtain more than $100 million in donations for the victims of drought in Africa, especially in Ethiopia. Because a young artist was familiar with advances in satellite communications technology, it was possible for a musical programme to reach an audience of over 1.5 billion persons around the world, who saw and contributed and identified with the appeal of those young people to help meet the immediate needs of the victims of the greatest natural disaster recorded by mankind. A subsequent programme produced in the United States obtained donations of over $50 million, and continuing the spirit of world-wide participation, last week 30 million runners around the world participated in a programme of aid for Africa, a programme which received United Nations support.
9.	Those programmes were possible only because of technological advances in television, the medium that transmitted live images directly to hundreds of millions of homes around the world, thus raising the general awareness of the crisis in Africa and the need to support the appeal for help. Those recent gigantic programmes have awakened the world’s conscience to the need for help
with the problems of drought, desertification, refugee camps and the dangerous malnutrition of children. Images transmitted by television in living colour immediately awakened the humanitarian spirit, resulting in donations such as the millions already received.
10.	None the less, we must be careful, since those images could give an erroneous idea of the African reality and convey the impression of an entire continent that is hungry and unable to feed itself. Television is a marvellous means of communication, but, since it is a medium that transmits images, in the case of Africa there is a risk that only the image of malnourished, dying children will remain in people’s memory and that a distorted opinion of reality will prevail, that only primitive persons are involved who cannot help themselves but must depend on the charity and generosity of the entire world for their survival. The problems of Africa are more profound than those images can convey. It is impossible to find simplistic solutions to serious problems.
11.	Although Africa is the cradle of mankind, according to anthropological theory, and its history dates back thousands of years before Christ, it is also a young continent composed of countries of age-old traditions and cultures that have just attained their independence and entered the community of free and sovereign nations less than 25 years ago. How can we hold the countries of Africa responsible for their misfortunes when it was only in the 1960s, through the resolute action of the United Nations and its Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, that they were able to achieve their independence and distance themselves from their colonial past, which was hampering their potential?
12.	There is no better proof of this irrefutable affirmation than the list of signatories to the Charter of the United Nations, whose fortieth anniversary was celebrated last year. It contains the names of only two subSaharan countries, Liberia and Ethiopia, excluding, of course, South Africa and its minority government. Today 50 African countries are represented in the United Nations —a clear demonstration of their peoples’ will for freedom. Only Namibia remains to free itself of illegal occupation and enter the community of nations, master of its own destiny, to the joy of all those of us who support its independence.
13.	These past 25 years have been difficult for those countries, some of which obtained their freedom after long years of liberation struggle and enormous sacrifices by their populations. But they soon became aware that their dependence on exports of raw materials was not a sufficient economic basis to sustain their economies and make the needed investments to rescue their peoples from the poverty and the underdevelopment they faced at the time of their independence.
14.	While many mistakes have been made, they are recognized in the official document submitted by the Organization of African Unity [OAU] to this special session for its consideration.1
15.	Those 25 years of struggle for the survival of their peoples—their achievements and failures, the actions taken to overcome underdevelopment, the construction of the necessary infrastructure, both material and human —have been included in the sincere and open presentation contained in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 where it is recognized that, in spite of the time that has elapsed, the foundations of the old inherited economic structures have not changed and
that only a change in direction and policy can guarantee the beginning of recovery.
16.	The significance of the OAU document is that, before requesting resources and international support for the recovery programme, the countries concerned pledge with their own resources to finance a large part of the total cost. But in order to be able to generate those resources to finance their national programmes, their economies must be in the process of recovery. This can be achieved only if the enormous resources allocated in their budgets for debt servicing can instead be invested in building the new economic infrastructures necessary in the medium and short term. These concessions on the part of the donor countries would form the foundations of a “new relationship” between the countries of Africa and the international community. In turn the African countries would be committing themselves to investing 45 per cent of the total Programme in agriculture, offering appropriate incentives to encourage production and improve and liberalize the framework in which private initiative can act.
17.	Our delegation was pleased to hear statements along these lines by donor countries, such as that made by the representative of Canada [2nd meeting], which is offering a 15-year moratorium on development loans to the subSaharan countries, representing assistance in paying the debt amounting to $250 million, and that made by the representative of the Netherlands [/st meeting] expressing her Government’s decision to cancel interest and principal payments on loans for development, a savings of $80 million, and inviting other donor countries to take similar actions.
18.	These statements we have noted among the many other suggestions made by the participating delegations are commendable, but it is possible to resolve the problem of Africa only if these actions are undertaken jointly and are supported by all donor countries. The countries of Latin America also want to make their contribution, in addition to their support for the various United Nations programmes on the African continent.
19.	We must broaden South-South co-operation so that our countries can contribute with the experiences they have acquired in solving similar problems, many by means of simple, uncomplicated methodologies using local materials and technology and popular customs and traditions, such as promoting projects based on human resources for financial support, precious experience that, were it given material value, could make a significant economic contribution to African recovery.
20.	In the Group of Latin American States our delegation has put forward the idea of holding a meeting jointly with the Group of African States in which some concrete ideas could be submitted about that non-traditional type of aid. This would make it possible for some countries, like Panama, to make contributions such as scholarships and technical assistance in the field of development and exchanges of experts, students and university professors. Our not being able to make significant financial contributions does not mean that we are not participating together with all other nations to the recovery of our brother peoples in Africa.
21.	Latin America has always been convinced that the African peoples’ freedom was the best contribution the United Nations could make towards world peace; hence it has always acted firmly towards achieving that end ever since the inception of this Organization 40 years ago. Latin America gave its total and resolute support to the
African countries’ yearnings for freedom and independence and welcomed the emergence of the African continent and its peoples in the United Nations.
22.	Today, at this significant time in its history, Africa has by its side the Latin American countries, which, like the African countries, fought for their freedom in their own historic moment and are today also struggling to obtain their economic freedom for the benefit of their peoples and the pride of their nation.
23.	Mr. HUPPER (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish)’. The delegation of Nicaragua wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your having been entrusted with the great task of presiding over this special session on the critical economic situation in Africa. We are sure that your experience and diplomatic skills will help guide us to achieve the goals we have set ourselves.
24.	Just a few months after the celebration of the twentyfifth anniversary of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)], we are meeting in this historic special session to analyse the critical economic situation in Africa. The United Nations, which played a very important role in helping the African peoples to achieve their political independence, now has a greater challenge, that of helping the African peoples to do away with the existing neo-colonial structures and of raising the support of the international community on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and independence of all States without discrimination or conditions of any sort.
25.	We are meeting in this forum as a political response to the appeal made by the General Assembly in resolution 40/40 on the critical economic situation in Africa. But primarily we are meeting in order to come up with a different response to the critical economic situation in Africa. I say “a different response” because there is a real need for a coherent, suitable and concrete response properly geared to the needs that have been clearly stated by Africa.
26.	We observe with deep concern that the underlying causes of the critical situation of the African countries continue and that today more than ever their solution requires the concerted action of the international community.
27.	The adverse effects of the present international economic situation—the deterioration in the terms of trade, the sharp drop in prices of export commodities, the implementation of protectionist policies by the developed countries, the growing trend towards the net transfer of financial resources to the developed countries and the heavy, indeed crushing, burden of external debt—are the determining factors in the problems of international economic development.
28.	Africa is confronting a very broad range of problems that demand our attention. Drought, desertification and the subsequent food shortages are the principal elements aggravating the effects of the economic crisis. As a result of all this, the African continent is a mosaic of peoples and nations which face hunger, destitution and anguish. That situation is a clear example of the international economic reality, which is characterized by injustice and inequity in the relations between the developed and the developing countries. Latin America is also a victim of these unjust relationships, and it fully understands the problems and proposed solutions set forth by the African countries.
29.	Nicaragua firmly believes that world peace and security are indissolubly linked to the eradication of poverty, hunger and the present unjust economic relations. This affirmation obliges us to acknowledge that
the problem we are now considering requires new historic relations and effective implementation of the new international economic order. The history of the African nations is similar to that of many of our countries, marked as it is by colonial exploitation.
30.	A substantive solution requires the decisive and responsible support of the international community as a whole. In the General Assembly we have read and heard about the unswerving determination of the African peoples and Governments to achieve such a solution. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 reflects, in the most concrete form, the firm will of the African countries to break out of this acute, critical economic situation confronting their continent.
31.	We acknowledge the determination and fortitude shown by the African countries, which in the midst of such difficulties are taking a unified, unitary approach imbued with African solidarity and a sense of the dominant realities of the region, with concrete methods and solutions that would result in the approval of the draft United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery, 1986-1990 [A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, annex V]. Hence, it is vital for the international community to give its full support to the national efforts and the regional tasks identified in that document.
32.	The United Nations has been playing a very important role in the orchestration of the machinery that has helped to relieve, in part, the difficult situation in Africa. Nicaragua acknowledges and welcomes those efforts and the efforts of all the financial institutions and governmental and non-governmental agencies involved in this task. None the less, this special session demonstrates the need for an extraordinary shared effort that will pull together in an integrated approach the programme policies to be followed over the next few years. What is needed is broad and sustained measures of support for the efforts that Africa is now making and will make in the medium and long term, through clear and concrete commitments by the international community.
33.	The situation in southern Africa demands particular attention, since it must be overcome if the countries of that region are to press ahead with their process of transformation of their political, economic and social structures in order to eliminate the historical inequalities prevailing in the region.
34.	Certain States that advocate concrete solutions to the critical economic situation in Africa must now more than ever put an end to the so-called policy of constructive engagement, designed to perpetuate Pretoria’s racist regime. They must abandon the use of destabilizing, terrorist policies which finance mercenary forces and provide them with sophisticated armaments in order to destabilize and overthrow the legitimate Governments of the front-line States, which actions limit the economic growth of those countries and violate the principles of international law. The Pretoria regime’s aggressive policies and constant destabilization directed against some front-line States have forced those countries to devote a large share of their budgets to defence, thus undermining their development programmes.
35.	Nicaragua is a victirri of the same kind of policies. Nicaragua has also felt the economic and social effects of foreign aggression and is well aware of the high cost of defending freedom, sovereignty and independence. That is why we believe that peace is the basic condition for development and progress.
36.	In conclusion, we express our solidarity with the African peoples and Our hope that the international
community will respond maturely and pragmatically to their difficult political, economic and social situation, guided by the continent’s collective efforts towards unity, since the African countries themselves can best show the way forward and contribute to the search for the appropriate solutions required by what is happening in Africa, in order to preserve international peace and security.
37.	Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): The General Assembly is meeting in its thirteenth special session, after many months of painstaking preparations, to provide a high-level, serious forum to consider the critical economic situation in Africa and adopt concrete measures to achieve a comprehensive solution to the problems that have led to that situation.
38.	While Africa and all who warmly sympathize with it were preparing for this special session, some others in the imperialist camp were not only washing their hands of all blame, but were also arrogant enough to prescribe simplistic, erroneous and deeply rooted ideological approaches to solving the problems. They claim that policy mistakes at the national levels were mainly responsible for the present appalling conditions. Emphasis on the public sector, they say, shackled the private sector and prevented the free and unhindered interaction of market forces. They allege that mistaken priorities led to a substantial waste of the available resources, and that mismanagement and corruption were the main drains on the potential for development.
39.	Given the opportunity, imperialist circles would undoubtedly go so far as to blame the African countries themselves for having caused the continent’s present economic difficulties by, inter alia, opting for independence, adopting a socio-economic system of their own choice, or allowing high birth rates and preventing high mortality. That is indeed absurd. ,
40.	No amount of orchestrated effort by imperialism could distort some well-established historic facts that lie at the root of the miseries stifling Africa today. It cannot seriously be disputed that most of what are now accepted as barriers to well-paced development in Africa were inherited from the colonial era. The infrastructure left behind by thè ex-colonial Powers was such that they could use it as a means of continuing the extremely unjust and exploitative economic intercourse between the markets of the newly liberated countries and those of the so-called metropolitan Powers.
41.	Having robbed their colonies of the readily available human and material riches, the colonialist Powers left behind a shameful legacy of a completely shattered traditional economy, underdevelopment and total economic dependence. As colonialism walked out the door, neocolonialism came in through the window. Banking on the destitution and misery of the newly independent countries, neo-colonialism managed to strengthen the bonds of dependence that tied their national economies to the markets of the ex-colonial Powers.
42.	Brutal exploitation thus continued, while the efforts of the young African countries to complement their political freedom with economic independence were seriously hampered by a lack of qualified national cadres, a diversified economy, sufficient financial resources and advanced technology and know-how. Capitalist transnational corporations gained tight control over the most important spheres of their economies. According to carefully gathered statistics, those capitalist monopolies have made a 350 per cent profit from their overall investment in Africa. That figure, which means an outflow of more than $10 billion annually, is higher than the average for all other developing countries taken together. The outflow
of financial resources from Africa in the 1970s was more than 80 per cent higher than the inflow of those resources. Between 1980 and 1983 that trend drastically worsened, resulting in an outflow four times greater than the inflow. The enormity of such exploitation would be seen to be much greater if we were to add to it the policy sacrifices that were made because of the lack of interest by transnational corporations in certain other fields of fundamental importance to the national economies of the developing African countries.
43.	The extended overall crisis in the world capitalist system, the virtual collapse of the export commodity prices of the developing countries, the unfavourable and adverse terms of trade, the continuing decline in real terms in official development assistance, the increased barriers put up through protectionism, excessively high interest rates and sharp currency fluctuations and the increasingly heavy burden of debt and debt-servicing have further aggravated the crisis in the African economy.
44.	To these underlying causes should be added the imperialist policy of interference, militarism and aggression. The use of economic assistance as a means of political pressure, economic blockades, the instigation of political and economic instability, military intimidation, including the use of mercenary bands, the provocation of bilateral, subregional and regional hostilities and armed conflicts and outright aggression by imperialism—primarily United States imperialism—have compelled Africa unwillingly to engage in an arms race that has squandered a significant portion of its scarce resources and greatly reduced its potential for socio-economic development.
45.	It is therefore falsifying the facts to put the blame for the present critical economic conditions in the African countries squarely on the shoulders of their national Governments. There is no doubt that the developed capitalist countries have a direct responsibility for the factors that have plunged Africa into hunger, disease, poverty, illiteracy and underdevelopment. It is, therefore, the responsibility of those capitalist countries to help undo what they have themselves done in Africa.
46.	The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan appreciates the well-considered approach adopted in July 1985 at Addis Ababa by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first session. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 which has made a sober analysis of the causes underlying the present situation, proposes a balanced and comprehensive medium- and long-term strategy for overcoming the fundamental problems. We fully support the demands of the African countries which are, in our opinion, modest and realistic. We wish, however, to point out that problems of such gravity and magnitude should be tackled in a global manner through identification and the complete eradication of the main causes behind them. The establishment of a new international economic order is, in our view, the most comprehensive, appropriate and lasting response to Africa’s economic crisis and, indeed, to that of the rest of the world.
47.	We also believe that it is immoral, and indeed criminal, to spend almost a trillion dollars annually on the production of the most sophisticated means of war and destruction while millions of human beings die or are exposed to the threat of death through lack of food, shelter and medicine. The adoption of concrete measures for stopping the arms race on Earth and preventing it in space and for general and complete disarmament will release more than the funds necessary for accelerating the economic development of all developing countries,
including, of course, African countries. In this connection we strongly condemn the decision of the United States not to participate in the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development.
48.	In compliance with the obligations deriving from the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)], the international community in general and the developed capitalist countries in particular are expected to contribute to the genuine efforts of the African countries to achieve their objectives. Such a contribution should be considered as a moral responsibility, the fulfilment of which should not be related to any conditions whatsoever. In the exercise of their sovereign rights the African nations are and must remain the sole authority to decide on their own political and socio-economic systems. Their need for international assistance must not be allowed to be used as a means of dictating to them an alien pattern of development.
49.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next speaker is the observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I call in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and the decision adopted by the Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting of this session [decision S-13/21].
50.	Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization): It is an honour for me, on behalf of the Palestinian people and their representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLOL to participate in the current deliberations of the special session on the critical economic situation in Africa. Sir, we are confident that under your presidency and wise guidance this session will achieve its purpose.
51.	The Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, brother Yasser Arafat, wishes to convey his respects and gratitude to the Assembly and, in particular, to President Diouf, who favoured us with a most illuminating analysis of the current critical economic situation in Africa. As members know, Chairman Arafat recently visited a number of friendly States in Africa, accompanied by his advisor on economic matters, with a view to furthering our co-operation in the field of economic development in Africa.
52.	At the turn of the century, history books tell us, European colonial Powers sent missions, garbed in priesthood, followed by others, garbed in military uniforms, to the “dark continent of Africa”. Stanley and Livingstone, as well as Cecil Rhodes, were among the better known leaders of such missions. Africa was the breadbasket. Colonial Powers confronted one another but, like the guards who shared the “cloth” of the crucified Christ, those Powers parcelled out the continent into zones of interest. For decades they sucked the natural and human resources of the continent of Africa. It was a feast for them: African gems, African ivory, African food and, more significantly, African cannon fodder for their armies. We all remember the foreign legionnaires of the French armies, and I personally remember the Basuto units that were deployed during the British Mandate in Palestine against our people in our uprising against that Mandate.
53.	However, the awakening of the African peoples resulted in the inevitable historic event of the achievement of political independence. Our brothers in the so-called dark continent realized that the colonialists had already pillaged the natural resources to the extent of near depletion. The colonialists had not helped in the development of the human resources, and thus there was an absence of adequate cadres to take over and assume the respon. sibilities of the new politically independent countries.
Very often such cadres are sucked away from their homes in the operation commonly known as the brain-drain. Thus, the struggle for independence and freedom was aggravated by the need to achieve economic liberation. Loans, apparently innocent, were granted and so-called help was offered by Governments and transnational corporations. The newly independent countries awakened to realize that they were in a much more tragic situation than ever before. The Assembly has been informed by a number of speakers that the situation now is worse and more tragic than it was 20 years ago, particularly south of the Sahara. One is led to believe that independence was self-defeating and counter-productive. Debts were mounting and the servicing of those debts became the issue to the extent that those debtor States had to appeal for more loans to pay part of the accruing interest, and the issue then became rescheduling.
54.	On the other hand, acts of aggression, particularly against countries that adopted progressive socio-economic structures and planning, forced those States to allocate a large portion of their national budgets to the purchase of arms in order to defend themselves, at the cost of diverting attention from and forgoing economic development. The issue became self-defence. The acts of aggression by the United States against Libya and the act of aggression against Tunisia—a joint venture by Israel and the United States—are some examples.
55.	The colonial base in South Africa became a vestige of racist ideology and practices in addition to being a springboard for acts of aggression against the front-line States. South Africa continues its brutal suppression of the aspiration of the people of South Africa to be seen as human and that of the people of Namibia to be independent politically and economically. But clearly, the uranium and other such valuable natural resources have not as yet been totally depleted. The racist apartheid régime maintains a firm grip on the area. It also provides a testing ground for South Africa’s joint adventures in the nuclear field with the other racist régime, that of the Zionists in occupied Palestine. The issue for the peoples of Africa has thus regressed to survival, not development.
56.	We cannot deny that Mother Nature is sometimes cruel. The drought has had a devastating effect. Sadly, our afflicted brothers have had to extend their hand, asking for some immediate help: a few loaves of bread, a number of tents, some blankets, immediate medical care. Some donors did not let their left hand know what their right hand was donating; they honoured their duty and adhered to moral values. Others capitalized on what they claimed they had donated and attempted to gain political dividends. Yet others responded to some inherent ideology and saw an opportunity to kindle the hateful fires of racial discrimination; they extended help especially and specifically to those of their own race, further proof of the nature of their ideology, which aims at dehumanizing the “others”. We admire and appreciate the fact that the peoples—as distinct from the Governments—of many countries donated with no big fuss or any expectation of receiving recognition or rewards.
57.	This is probably the first time the General Assembly has been convened to consider one of the four purposes of the United Nations, as set out in Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Charter:
“To achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for al!without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion”.
58.	We wish at this point to thank the OAU for having taken the initiative of addressing the economic crisis in the developing countries.
59.	What the continent of Africa needs—and immediately—is the following: peace and non-intervention. The OAU has presented its proposals in the form of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990.2 We must recognize that the Africans know better, and we must respect their wishes and respond to their calls and aspirations. Their analysis and diagnosis of the critical situation in Africa and their prescription for remedies provide the international community with insights and assign responsibilities. But a prerequisite is peace and the total elimination of the threat or use of force against Africa and the African States. Each State in Africa knows best what it needs.
60.	The historic march of development in other countries—countries that have become super-industrialized— must be taken into consideration, but it cannot and should not become the pattern imposed. We are here to share and benefit from the experiences and efforts of one another, and not merely to emulate. The tractor and the use of mechanized tools and modern technology in agriculture and other fields are already there; the developing countries should be enabled to use those tools effectively, the industrialized countries making them accessible but not using them as exploitative and lucrative investments or as shackles or attaching strings. The industrialized countries should not offer such help through third parties with the intention of furthering and promoting the interests and expansionist aims of such third parties—as is the case with the so-called Israeli help to some countries in Africa, which is based on United States funding of Israel. 61. The United States would be more sincere to participate directly and not through channels in technical and other forms of aid to developing countries, particularly in Africa. Israel receives $4 billion from the United States, and I wonder how much Africa would be receiving at the same per capita rate if the aid were sincere. But of course, Africa does not share in plans of aggression and expansion and military adventurism.
62.	■ Much has been said about individual or private initiative, but at the same time the proponents of such ideas have also suggested that the Africans must decide on their own priorities. That is rather confusing, to say the least. It is in the nature of human individuality that people tend to make the most out of the least in the shortest possible time. But national priorities are within the purview of those who assume responsibilities of a national or even regional dimension; by necessity centralized planning and implementation are the individual or joint responsibility of Governments. That is all the more compelling in the case of developing countries. It is true that some mishandling and inadequate or even corrupt management or mismanagement can result in flaws. But I wonder if any developing or super-industrialized State can safely proclaim itself free of corruption. We watch television and read the press here: I need comment no further.
63.	What the PLO believes it can contribute within its limited resources is primarily the deployment of human resources. The PLO is in fact engaged currently in a number of joint ventures in a number of African States. We are proud that we have one of the highest percentages of university graduates and experts in the fields of agriculture, farming and husbandry and developed cottage industries, as well as expertise in other fields. By providing such experts we are helping, on a joint-venture basis, in the developing countries and learning at the same time
about the distinct peculiarities and developments on the ground. As a result of the injustices and suffering that afflict our people, we are conscious of our duties towards our brethren. To express our solidarity we share our know-how and experience in the common struggle for liberation and independence, both political and economic. 64. Long before the Zionist invasion, Palestine was the land of milk and honey. The orange blossoms spread their fragrance for scores of miles. We Palestinians reclaimed our lands to meet our needs. I hate to say it, but the Jaffa orange is still the best, and Jaffa is a Palestinian city. 65. Palestinians co-operating in the fields of develop^ ment do not advocate or encourage the excessive production of one particular element; we do not provide false hopes and fictitious futuristic studies and prospects, then, through a pre-planned glut, manipulating the collapse not only of hope but of economic development already’ in progress. The developing world does not need hands reaching out; it does not need Marshall Plans. It needs understanding and co-operation. It needs a fair and equitable price for the raw materials it produces. The developing countries need peace and security and an end to the use or threat of use of force, whether military or economic, including any form of State terrorism.
66.	Our appeal to the international community, particularly to the industrialized and developed countries, is to honour the purposes of this Organization and work together towards the achievement of international cooperation in solving international economic problems. Last Sunday marked two significant events: the “Race Against Time” and “Hands Across America”. What we need is “Hands Across the Universe”—hands that extend in both directions, the vertical and the horizontal, NorthSouth and, simultaneously, North-North and South-South.
67.	Inflation and deflation, rates of interest and debts are but figures on paper that might delay and obstruct development, but the struggle of humanity for human relationships, understanding and co-operation will definitely be victorious.
. AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly (concluded):
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
68.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 20 of its report [A/S-13/12) was adopted without a vote in the Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-13/lf 69. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak on this item.
70.	Mr. VONGSAY (Lao People’s Democratic Republic) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and on behalf of the other delegations that have not recognized the existence of the so-called democratic Coalition Government of Kampuchea, my delegation would like to express our reservations as to the decision adopted by the Credentials Committee. We recognize the Government of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea, which, as everyone knows, is the legitimate representative of the suffering Kampuchean people, victim of the Pol Pot holocaust and massacre.
71.	Mr. TEP (Democratic Kampuchea): The Assembly has just listened to yet another effort by the representative of Laos, repeating the voice of its master, Viet Nam, to deceive world public opinion. It is known to all that this country continues its established practice of the “Big Lie”, hoping that the more frequently an untruth is repeated, the greater the chance it will be accepted. My delegation cannot allow such lies to pass unchallenged. 72. The delegation of Democratic Kampuchea is taking part in the deliberations of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly, on the critical economic situation in Africa, in a spirit of solidarity and great hope, trying to do its utmost, through its modest means, to contribute to the well-being of the African peoples and Governments. Therefore, it is with great regret that my delegation is obliged to spend the precious time of this special session—which should be used to find ways and means for the benefit of Africa—to tell the truth about the situation in my country, Kampuchea.
73.	The reservations expressed by some delegations once again demonstrate their ill will and remind the Assembly —indeed, ! have to thank them for doing so—that Viet Nam is the aggressor, still occupying Kampuchea and causing tremendous suffering to the people of Kampuchea, and that the continued Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea is the root cause of the tension in the region of South-East Asia. These reservations also clearly reflect the persistence of the invader of my country in its policy of aggression against and expansion in Kampuchea, after Laos, and in South-East Asia.
74.	The recent barbarous attacks carried out by the minority racist régime in Pretoria against the capitals of Zimbabwe, Botswana and Zambia remind one of the cruel onslaught by the Vietnamese aggressor against the defenceless people of Kampuchea along the Thai-Kampuchean border and against the Thai people. I should like to inform the Assembly that just two days ago the Vietnamese aggressor pounded the refugee camp in Thailand, causing the deaths of several Kampucheans. There is no difference between the pretexts used by the Pretoria régime and those used by the Hanoi régime. In fact, Hanoi has legitimized Pretoria in its wanton attack against the front-line States in southern Africa. However, in the case of South Africa, or Namibia or Kampuchea, we must heed the message of history: the aggressors are doomed to failure. The victory of the peoples in their struggle is now a certainty.
75.	It is in this spirit, and in seeking to find a wise solution to the problem of Kampuchea, that the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea put forward recently an eight-point peace proposal,3 which is comprehensive and reasonable and which has received worldwide support, except for having been flatly rejected by Viet Nam.
76.	Those who follow the course of the Vietnamese expansionist policy are not surprised at this rejection. In fact, despite the protracted stalemate in the military field in Kampuchea in the face of the valiant struggle of the people of Kampuchea, and the Hanoi authorities’ isolation in the international arena and their predicament in Viet Nam itself, these authorities will hardly renounce their well-established strategy of forming an Indo-China federation under Viet Nam’s domination. To illustrate that, allow me to quote Ho Chi Minh, the leader of the
Communist Party of Viet Nam in 1951, “We are soon going to realize the great union of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia.” More recently, in December 1984, General Le Duc Anh, Commander-in-Chief of the occupying armed forces in Kampuchea, wrote in the Vietnamese People’s Army magazine that “Indochina is a single battlefield. That is the strategic viewpoint, a major lesson and a long governing existence in the development of the three fraternal countries.”
77.	That is the reality; that is the fact; and that is the root cause of the problem of Kampuchea, and it cannot be denied by lies and tricks, however monstrous they may be.
78.	Mr. LIANG (China) (interpretation from Chinese): I should like to state our position on the question of the credentials of Democratic Kampuchea. Kampuchea is an independent, peaceful, neutral and non-aligned country and has been a Member of the United Nations for a long time. The Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, with Prince Sihanouk as its President, is effectively leading the Kampuchean people in their struggle to defend the independence and sovereignty of their motherland. This Coalition Government is Kampuchea’s legitimate régime, the genuine representative of the Kampuchean people.
79.	The so-called People’s Republic of Kampuchea, which was created by force by foreign aggressors, is an out-and-out agent of the foreign authorities and has no right to represent the Kampuchean people. The resolutions adopted at previous sessions of the General Assembly have also refused to recognize that puppet régime.
80.	At the same time, the Chinese delegation would like to reiterate that the fact that the representatives of Afghanistan have been allowed to take part in the special session should not in any way be interpreted as acquiescing in the situation created by the foreign armed invasion and occupation of Afghanistan.
81.	Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): A totally irrelevant remark has just been made by the representative of the People’s Republic of China, which was in fact a reiteration of the comments they had made in the Credentials Committee in the course of its work. The remarks of the representative of China, as reflected in paragraph 9 of the report of the Credentials Committee, as well as the remarks just made, are totally irrelevant and out of order. We strongly object to those remarks, which have been both reflected in the report of the Credentials Committee and made in the Assembly. We reiterate our position which wé have stated repeatedly in various forms, including in the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
Notes
■Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social crisis, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth extraordinary session, held at Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 March 1986 (A/AC;229/2).	.
2A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/DecI. 1 (XXI), annex.
3A/41/225, annex II.
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
8th PLENARY MEETING
Sunday, 1 June 1986, at 8.30 p.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Jaime de PINIES (Spain).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures (concluded)
AGENDA ITEM 7
Adoption, in an appropriate format, of the document or documents of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly
1.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As members are aware, all delegations have been working extremely hard during the past few days both in formal and informal meetings to finalize the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. Unfortunately, this indispensable process of consultations and meetings took longer than origiTially envisaged. Therefore, the closure of the thirteenth special session had to be delayed. I assume that the Assembly realizes that the postponement was essential and that it agrees that the delay in the closure of the special session was necessary.
2.	I remind representatives that the debate on item 6 was concluded in the morning of Friday, 30 May.
3.	The Assembly will now consider the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session of the General Assembly [A/S-13/15], For the time being, the text of this report may be found in document A/S-13/AC.1/L.3 and Corr.l in French only, as orally revised by the Rapporteur.
4.	Mr. NGAIZA (United Republic of Tanzania), Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session: I have the honour to present to the General Assembly the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session, on the critical economic situation in Africa.
5.	I regret that owing to time constraints the Committee’s report could not be submitted to the plenary meeting in final form. That is why it is necessary to refer to the text of the draft report [A/S-I3/AC.I/L.3], However, I shall give an oral account of the action taken by the Ad Hoc Committee at its last meeting, which has just concluded.
6.	I am happy to inform you, Mr. President, that the Ad Hoc Committee adopted without a vote the draft resolution entitled “United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 19861990”, the text of which appears in paragraph 8 of the draft report.
7.	I wish to make the following revision to the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for adoption. A new operative paragraph should be inserted before the present paragraph 2. The new paragraph 2 reads as follows:
“2. Emphasizes the need to intensify economic and technical co-operation with African countries during and beyond the period of the Programme of Action;”. The remaining paragraphs will be renumbered accordingly.
Pursuant to rule 66 of the rules of procedure, it was decided not to discuss the report of the Ad Hoc Committee.
8.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Statements will be limited to explanations of vote or position.
9.	The positions of delegations regarding the recommendation of the Ad Hoc Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind members that in paragraph 7 of its decision 34/401, the General Assembly decided that when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.
10.	May I also remind members that, also in accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of votes should be limited to 10 minutes and be made by delegations from their seats.
11.	In this connection, may I suggest that the Assembly proceed immediately to the report of the Ad Hoc Committee and the recommendation contained therein, on the understanding that any delegation wishing to do so would be free to explain its vote or make statements of position on the subject after its approval.
12.	I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to follow that procedure.
It was so decided.
13.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I invite representatives to turn to paragraph 8 of the draft report of the Ad Hoc Committee, as orally revised by the Rapporteur, which contains a draft resolution entitled “United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990”, which the Ad Hoc Committee adopted without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly also wishes to adopt this draft resolution, as orally revised?
The draft resolution, as orally revised, was adopted (resolution S-I3/2).
14.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to thank Mr. Lewis and all the officers, the Secretariat staff and all those who have tirelessly worked and contributed to ensuring the success of this special session. It is indeed a milestone, as this is the first time that the General Assembly has considered an item of the magnitude and importance of economic aid to Africa. The achievement of such an important consensus augurs well
for the future of the United Nations and of the African continent.
15.	I call upon the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a statement.
16.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It is a great source of satisfaction that this special session is concluding on such a positive note. In my opening statement, I described the session as an opportunity for a new beginning in cooperation between African countries and their development partners. This opportunity has been seized. It is clear from the statements in the plenary meetings, from the parallel activities of non-governmental organizations and, most important, from the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, just adopted, that the international community has joined together in a common effort to provide the basis for self-reliant and selfsustained growth in Africa.
17.	We could do no less, for we are gathered here as representatives of the peoples of the world, and they have clearly expressed their human solidarity with their brothers and sisters in Africa. In lighting the pillar of flame at United Nations Headquarters a week ago, Omar Khalifa indeed launched a “Race Against Time” in which peoples all over the world have joined.
18.	But the race has just begun. If we are to succeed, it will take a determined and continued effort over time. The presence at this session of Abdou Diouf, President of Senegal and current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, and other senior representatives from all regions, is evidence of the seriousness of purpose with which Governments approach this challenge. I speak for all my colleagues in the United Nations system in assuring members of our commitment to play our part.
19.	The image of Africa as a dependent continent must disappear. Africa is a continent rich in physical and human resources. The realization of its potential will not only fulfil the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of Africa, but will also contribute immeasurably to the economic and social well-being of all the world.
20.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I shall now call on those representatives who have placed their names on the list to speak in explanation of vote or to make statements in explanation of their positions.
21. Mr. McPHERSON (United States of America): Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, this has been a successful week. You and your colleagues deserve special congratulations. We particularly would like to thank President Diouf and Foreign Minister Fall of Senegal, and Mr. Pisani, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee. We have been able to come together here and reaffirm those priorities necessary for stimulating economic recovery and renewed growth in Africa. We have accomplished this knowing that Africa’s problems are complex and that there are no easy solutions.
22.	We are now at a crossroads. We shall leave this Hall having charted a new course this week, one that concentrates resources on high priorities and is based on a partnership of mutual understanding.
23.	During the past few days a lot of good will has been generated. Obviously, some problems have been encountered, but that was inevitable, given the importance of this subject. Nevertheless, we come out of this with the political will to implement the United Nations Programme of Action adopted here.
24.	I would like to outline how the United States will support economic recovery of Africa. We will focus our
assistance on four of the highest priorities: economic restructuring, agricultural growth, human resources development and, finally, famine preparation. To do so, we will concentrate our efforts on finding the most effective and efficient ways to implement these priorities with the resources at hand. Let us take them one at a time.
25.	Economic restructuring is the number-one priority for Africa. Nothing short of this will spark renewed growth. The United States strongly supports the bold steps for policy reform called for in the Programme of Action. We know that austerity alone is not enough. Economic stabilization, yes, is absolutely necessary, but it must be accompanied by reforms which produce jobs and growth. Each country will employ different means to achieve these goals, but an increased role for prices, markets and individual initiative clearly is fundamental.
26.	The results of policy changes are already being felt throughout Africa. Dramatic increases in food production have occurred in a number of countries as the result of the increased prices paid to farmers and the greater reliance on the free market. For example, in Malawi an 85 per cent increase in maize prices to farmers resulted in more than a 200 per cent increase in market output.
27.	Donors can support the innovative and courageous efforts of committed countries in a number of ways. For example, the United States has developed the African Economic Policy Reform Program which, along with the Baker initiative, is directed at accelerating policy reforms. We are also supporting the World Bank Special Facility for sub-Saharan Africa.
28.	However, as our African colleagues have said, growth will not come from foreign assistance alone. Leadership by African nations is critical to manage the resources and to carry out the essential reform programmes.
29.	Our second priority for Africa is agriculture, a principal engine of growth. The United Nations Programme of Action and previous documents of the Organization of African Unity [O^U] and ECA should be commended for their renewed commitment to agriculture. 30. Progress in key areas is vital for agricultural growth. The most important area is a favourable policy framework to support production and marketing by small-scale farmers. Next, farmers need appropriate technologies. Much progress has been made. However, to bring about a breakthrough in research, to bring a green revolution to Africa, will require a long-term effort and very substantial funding. As Secretary Shultz stated on Wednesday [3rd meeting], the United States plans to give $1 billion for agricultural research for Africa over the next 15 years. The fact is that there simply has not been enough spent on research on crops grown and consumed by the people of Africa. We plan to make a major contribution. Also, we believe that a system of agricultural universities to support research extension and education will be needed. Here too we shall contribute to that effort.
31.	Another area needing support is agricultural marketing. The surplus of grains—and I stress “surplus”— in many areas of Africa this year underlines the necessity of expanding trade among African neighbours. There is an enormous need to develop closer rural and urban ties for the marketing of agricultural goods. We need to find the best means for processing and marketing local foods and to move away from reliance on food aid.
32.	Finally, for agricultural growth we are supporting better management of the natural resources of Africa. The advance of the desert, the destruction of the forests and the depletion of soils undermine agricultural production and increase the chances of famine. Desertification
is real. I remember last year, when I was in Niger with Vice-President Bush, when we could not take an incountry plane trip because there was too much sand in the air.
33.	Environmental degradation is increasing due to misuse and over-use of land by people and livestock. Population pressure is pushing people into marginal lands, often causing further loss of productive land and forests.
34.	These conditions, made worse by man, can also be changed by man. In this regard, tree planting works best when local families and communities are given the responsibility for trees that protect their own land. It is human nature that people protect their own trees and chop down other trees, especially if no one clearly owns those trees. I have seen this time after time, all over the world. We try to build on this concept of human nature. For example, in Niger, working with the CARE organization, the United States has helped local people plant over 500 kilometres of windbreaks, which now produce fuelwood and valuable wood products and which have increased millet yields by 20 per cent in the area protected.
35.	This type of community-based forestry activity can be promoted and organized by non-governmental organizations and can serve as a model for other parts of Africa. In fact, four new forestry projects of the Agency for International Development with United States nongovernmental organizations are now under way in Senegal, Mali, Sudan and Somalia. We applaud the Canadian forestry initiative, which builds on the concept of working with the non-governmental organizations in local communities, and we shall follow that initiative very closely.
36.	Development of Africa’s human resources is our third priority. To make economic policy reforms and agricultural development really work, we must never lose sight of the most important resource of any country: its people. Accordingly, the United States is putting substantial resources into training African men and women, and we think this will pay off.
37.	Also, child survival is a key area for us. Here we have seen great success in the development and distribution of appropriate low-cost technologies such as immunization and oral rehydration therapy. We are already saving thousands of African babies, and the job has only begun. For example, oral rehydration therapy is almost magical in the way it can bring a child back from near death from diarrhoea and dehydration in a matter of a few hours. It is a simple mixture of a pinch of salt, a handful of sugar and water fed spoonful by spoonful to a child. I have seen this all over Africa, and I can tell those who have not seen it that it is really something.
38.	Working in partnership with non-governmental organizations has been a very effective approach in implementing our child survival programmes, and we shall continue this work. We are not working only with international non-governmental organizations, but with local ones as well. For example, local churches in Zaire have developed a primary health care system which has resulted in healthier children and adults in many villages.
39.	Of course, population growth rates are a factor in the African development equation. Many leaders of African countries are heeding the Kilimanjaro Programme of Action1 in its call for increased attention to this issue, including strong Government support for the provision of family planning services. I have watched this question of family planning closely over the almost six years I have headed the Agency for International Development, and I can say that there is a much deeper commitment to family planning in Africa than ever before. Accordingly,
the United States will continue to support and encourage the availability of family planning services in Africa and elsewhere.
40.	Also, the development of women’s capabilities is essential in Africa. We must recognize that attention to women’s roles in development is critical, particularly in agriculture. In addition to their daily domestic tasks, women farmers in many parts of Africa produce as much as 80 or 90 per cent of the food. I think all of us have seen the sign to that effect in the lobby. Therefore, as we allocate our scarce resources, women must be integrated into economic assistance activities through training and development programmes.
41.	Finally, a fourth priority is an African drought early-warning capacity. Famine is a slow-moving disaster which, I firmly believe, can be detected by monitoring various physical and social factors. We learned a great deal from last year’s drought, and we must build upon that experience. The monitoring capability must be put in place on a continuous-effort basis. It should combine first-hand knowledge of local conditions with high technology, such as remote sensing data from satellites.
42.	Such a system will have to be inexpensive and relatively simple to operate and maintain. If it is not inexpensive, if it is not simple, it will not be kept in place for the next time we need it. It should be fully professional and should be demonstrably free of political manipulation. We have such a professional, apolitical system to determine when there is an epidemic. That system produces conclusions upon which decision-makers the world over rely. We need such a system for famine determinations.
43.	The report of the Economic Summit Meeting held at Bonn in May 1985 recognized that an early-warning system cannot be successful without the development of national and regional capabilities. Organizations such as the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel, the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development, and the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference should strengthen their co-ordination with FAO and donors with early-warning systems. The regional remote sensing centres in East and West Africa and the Regional Training Centre for Agrometeorology and Operational Hydrology and their Applications in Niamey are key organizations in the development of early-warning systems.
44.	We are not proposing a new bureaucracy, but the United States wants to work with African countries and other donors to draw upon our combined experience, which has been very considerable in the last year or so, and technical strength to support this effort. We know that there will be another drought. The question we must ask is whether we will take the steps to avoid another widespread famine. I firmly believe that such famines can be avoided in the future. We have the technology. The question is whether we will work together to put in place an effective professional, apolitical early-warning system.
45.	To carry out the four priorities I have outlined, we must mobilize all available resources. For example, the potential for unleashing the energies and resources of the African private sector is enormous. Clearly, they have not yet been fully marshalled. Also, support from nongovernmental organizations the world over has been massive. They continue to be extremely important as a source of direct assistance, and they can mobilize additional financial aid from public and private sources. We believe the African people have the energies and the desires to realize the promise of a productive, self-reliant life—if the African people can get the tools; if the African
people are given the chance; and if the African people and Governments take the lead.
46.	African Governments are working to create the environment in which their citizens can prosper. The United States and the international community are pledging here to deepen and broaden the partnership we have with you—the Governments, the people of Africa—to help make these goals a reality.
47.	This special session has aroused public interest in the development problems of Africa. It has focused the attention of donor decision-makers. We must now move forward with a determination to tailor development programmes which focus on the priorities of individual countries. We have confidence that the people of Africa will make it a success.
48.	Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): I have asked to speak on behalf of the Group of 77. First of all, I should like to express our deep appreciation to all those who contributed to the elaboration and adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action for Africa’s Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
49.	Let me recall here that a few years ago the SecretaryGeneral drew the attention of the world to the emerging crisis in Africa and induced the international community to start immediate supportive action.
50.	I have to refer here with respect, and indeed with awe, to the inspiring statement made by the President of Senegal, Mr. Diouf [1st meeting], who inspired us all with his words of sagacity and with his insight into the problems of the continent and into their possible solutions.
51.	We have been deeply impressed by Mr. Fall, the Foreign Minister of Senegal. He has invested his enormous wisdom and energy in this project. In the best tradition of Africa, he and his team have done this with dignity, commanding nothing but respect and support. They have effectively displayed the dedication of the developing countries to self-determination, to the inalienable right of every country to choose its own way of development and the modalities of its social system.
52.	Our appreciation goes as well to Mr. Pisani of France, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, for his hard work and widely acknowledged dedication to the cause of Africa. We maintain high esteem for Mr. Lewis of Canada and for the knowledge and competence that he so amply displayed and used while he guided the proceedings of the Ad Hoc Committee. In his work he was ably and most impressively assisted by Mr. Qazi Shaukat Fareed of Pakistan, who is known here for his diplomatic skill and for his really deep knowledge of the issues involved. .
53.	The international community now has a comprehensive instrument. It has now strongly, politically committed itself to assist countries of Africa to help themselves to overcome the present hardships and to move towards a steady and speedy economic and social development. The document just adopted is above all a realistic step forward. Therefore, there is every reason to expect that it will be fully and timely implemented.
54.	The African countries have once again demonstrated their political wisdom and their dignity. Throughout the negotiating process they affirmed the readiness of their peoples and their Governments to shoulder all tasks and to spare no effort to pull their countries out of the present malaise, and they made it clear that they intended to make full use of their own vast potential, both human and material.
55.	The General Assembly has acknowledged this commitment with high esteem and has responded positively
to the expectations for co-operation and for assistance. We believe that in the course of the past five days, the case of Africa has become better known and better understood, and we expect that this will be adequately reflected. This session of the General Assembly should bring about assistance to and support for Africa, thereby allowing it to play the role the world expects and needs.
56.	The Group of 77 has supported African efforts throughout the preparatory stage and will continue to do so in a spirit of full solidarity in the process that will follow this special session of the General Assembly. Let me state as well that Africa’s measure of success and achievement at this General Assembly is our own measure, The value of global multilateralism as expressed and reflected in the General Assembly has been confirmed again this past week. This is particularly valuable since these are times of adversity for the Organization.
57.	Finally, permit me to state again that the progress and stability of Africa and its contribution to the progress and stability of the world require the eradication of apartheid and the remnants of colonialism. They require the independence of Namibia, and they require full respect for freedom, independence and self-determination.
58.	Mr. NOWORYTA (Poland) (interpretation from Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People’s Republic, the Mongolian People’s Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Polish People’s Republic.
59.	The position of the socialist countries on the problem of the critical economic situation in Africa was stated in detail during the special session. That position was reaffirmed in the joint statement of the socialist countries [A/S-J3/14]. The socialist countries took an active and constructive part in the session in an attempt to promote the elaboration of an effective and integrated programme to resolve the economic problems of the continent and to eliminate the real reasons for the crisis and to improve the political and economic situation in Africa and in the world as a whole. Based on the foregoing positions, we should like to make some remarks with regard to the final document adopted by the Assembly.
60.	The socialist countries have great sympathy for the aspirations of the African countries to ensure the implementation of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 adopted by the OAU. A sine qua non for the implementation of that Programme is the central role of the State in overall administration of the economy and in ensuring a balanced development of its basic areas. In the document adopted at the special session the important role of the public sector is correctly noted.
61.	We also understand the particular attention the African countries give to the task of raising agricultural and food production. However, a genuine solution to the problem of overcoming backwardness requires an integrated approach to socio-economic development, including the promotion of industrialization as the basis for an independent national economy. That is the approach approved by the African countries in the Lagos Plan of Action3 and in the Industrial Development Decade for Africa. One serious omission is the fact that the framework for economic development established in the document has turned out to be separate from the continent’s social problems, and the aggravation of those problems
has had an adverse impact on the living conditions of millions of Africans.
62.	The document has not analysed with sufficient clarity the external factors hindering African development, nor does it provide for the working out of recommendations for effectively overcoming the continent’s unequal status in the world economy as a result of imperialist and neo-colonialist exploitation.
63.	In our view, because of those and a number of other weaknesses the document is, on the whole, one-sided and fails to take into account many extremely important United Nations decisions regarding the establishment of a new international economic order or the objectives and tasks of the socio-economic development of developing countries. Hence it can hardly be said that the special session was fully equal to its assigned task, which was, as set out in the agenda, to examine, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, the medium-term and long-term development problems of Africa.
64.	Everyone understands that the African countries and peoples are not to blame for their plight. The outcome of the session is first of all the result of the position of the leading Western States, which continue to block the economic liberation of Africa, and not only of Africa, to thwart balanced international economic co-operation and to split the unity of African and other developing countries. That policy was also manifested in some of the statements made at plenary meetings in the form of proposals for the final document which the West attempted to impose on the rest of the United Nations membership.
65.	The socialist countries condemn attempts to take advantage of the critical economic situation of the African countries in order to interfere in their domestic and foreign policies. The United Nations should not and will not be an accomplice to that policy.
66.	The approach of the socialist countries to relations with the African countries is based on various principles: genuine equality, full respect for national sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs and mutual benefit. We shall continue to develop trade and economic, scientific and technical co-operation with the African States and to render them multilateral assistance aimed at achieving a genuine solution to their problems, taking into account the fundamental, long-term interests of the African peoples.
67.	In developing such co-operation, we shall take into account the development goals of the African countries and the objectives set forth in the Lagos Plan of Action and Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990. The socialist countries believe that a solution to the economic problems of Africa requires radical measures to eradicate their causes, inherited from colonialism and neo-colonialism. Such measures must be closely linked to the problem of disarmament, which would lead to the release of resources to overcome backwardness in African and other countries.
68.	The resolution of Africa’s complex economic problems requires the participation of all States, regardless of ideological differences, economic potential, the size of their territory or the size of their population. Therefore, all countries, without exception, must fully abide by the progressive provisions of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States [resolution 3281 (XXIX)], the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)], the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade [resolution 35/56, annex] and other United Nations decisions dealing with the restructuring
of international economic relations on a just and equal basis. Obviously, in carrying out its part in the solution of the problems of the African continent the international community must pay full respect to the sovereignty of the African States and the paths of national development chosen by their peoples. This must be assured by the future activities of the United Nations in promoting the solution of the critical economic situation in Africa.
69.	Mr. HE KANG (China) (interpretation from Chinese)-. We are most happy that the special session has adopted its final document on the basis of the African submission, following the concerted efforts and friendly consultations among the participating delegations, and has achieved positive results. The Chinese delegation wishes to express its warm congratulations on all this.
70.	The convening of the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa is in itself an achievement of great significance, a reflection of the attention and concern of the whole world to African economic problems. Now the session has been crowned with postive results, thus opening new prospects for African countries and the international community in their joint endeavours for revitalizing the African economy.
71.	The session’s proceedings have shown that economic problems of Africa should ultimately be decided by African Governments and peoples themselves, and all other countries should respect the choice made by the African countries through full consultations.
72.	In order to facilitate the implementation of the Programme of Action, I wish to reiterate what I said in my statement during the general debate [3rd meeting]— that is, the Chinese Government will contribute to the best of its ability to Africa in such aspects as increasing its economic assistance—agricultural aid in particular. —continuing to provide long-term preferential loans, strengthening personnel training and exchanging experience in policy making.
73.	I wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, to the Preparatory Committee and the Ad Hoc Committee of the Special Session and to the Secretariat and the related organs of the United Nations for the great amount of work they have done for this session. I sincerely wish the United Nations continuous and new successes in its efforts for the maintenance of peace and the promotion of development.
74.	Mrs. SCHOO (Netherlands): Mr. President, speaking on behalf of the European Community and its member States, let me state at the outset that I shall not take too much of your time and of this session at this late stage. We have all worked very hard and with great dedication. Nevertheless, I should like to make a few remarks before you formally close the session.
75.	The resolution we have just adopted was arrived at after long and strenuous negotiations. The process of negotiations started a few months ago and reached its peak during the special session itself. Achieving consensus was not an easy process. It required a substantial amount of energy, flexibility and willingness to take into account the views of all parties concerned. The reason the negotiating process took time lies, in my opinion, in the complexity of the issue under consideration, the critical economic situation in Africa. Trying to devise ways to deal with the medium- and long-term problems those countries are facing is an extremely arduous task, involving numerous and different interests.
76.	But we were heartened to note that at every stage of the debate, all parties involved showed a clear readiness to find a solution, to end the session with a consensus
document that will provide guidance for our further work. We have a right to be satisfied with the results. Of course, we did not manage to insert in this text all the views of our respective Governments; texts could have been phrased in a different and perhaps a more effective manner here and there. Nevertheless, we have adopted a text that is clear proof of our firm determination, African countries and the international community alike, to do our utmost to give a new impetus to the development process in Africa. Both actors have their role to play in the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 that we just approved. The African countries have reiterated their willingness to take concrete measures to enhance their economic prospects. The international community will, for its part, contribute to this endeavour with strong supportive measures. This common course of action will, we all hope, stimulate the African continent towards selfsustaining development and economic growth. But the adoption itself of this Programme of Action is only a first step. It is clear that the next step, the implementation of the Programme, will be even more important.
77.	The positive result we achieved today would not have been possible without the strong input of the African countries themselves. Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery I986-19902 provided us with an effective basis for our work. I already had an opportunity, speaking in the general debate on behalf of the European Community and its member States [1st meeting], to highlight the important role President Diouf of Senegal played in the African preparations. I should like to repeat this at the closure of this session; his very presence here gave an inspiration to the conference. When the President left, his Foreign Minister, Mr. Fall, stayed with us. I should like to take this occasion to express my sincere gratitude for his actions and interventions; his presence in discussions and in negotiations proved to be a crucial element for reaching solutions.
78.	Mr. President, I will not take up more of your time by expressing my appreciation for all those involved in the success of this special session: delegations, individuals and the Secretariat services which deserve a special mention in this respect. But I should like to make three exceptions: first, a special word of thanks is appropriate for Mr. Lewis, whose dedicated leadership proved to be very important in reaching the result we have on the table; secondly, to Mr. Fareed for his untiring work in the Committee. Finally, a special salute goes to you, Mr. President. The way you presided over our proceedings contributed substantially to creating the right atmosphere that made it possible to conclude our work in such a positive way.
79.	Mr. YOSHINO (Japan): I wish wholeheartedly to welcome the adoption by consensus of the resolution to which the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 is attached. Its adoption is the outcome of the sincere efforts of all those present after long hours of laborious work extending over several months. I believe that such strenuous efforts and hard work have been fully rewarded with the agreement on the well-balanced document that certainly establishes an important common point of reference for the joint actions and measures to be taken by the African countries and the international community for. years to come.
80.	Let me take this opportunity to express my delegation’s deep appreciation to Mr. Lewis of Canada, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, for his tireless efforts to reach a consensus on the resolution. It was only with the able and dynamic leadership he showed
during the difficult negotiations that we have succeeded in adopting this resolution. We have also been very much impressed by the statesmanship and leadership of the Foreign Minister of Senegal, who acted as the principal negotiator of the Group of African States. His dedication, integrity and determination have contributed enormously to the success of these difficult but fruitful negotiations. I also wish to thank the other officers of the Committee for their valuable contributions to the successful conduct of the meetings. Special appreciation goes to Mr. Fareed, Vice-Chairman of the Committee and chairman of the drafting group of the Preparatory Committee. When the Ad Hoc Committee started its work it benefited greatly from his contributions to the paper on which we initiated negotiations.
81.	I should like to make a few observations on some of the basic points.
82.	First, as far as Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 is concerned, Japan appreciates the general thrust of the document, particularly its emphasis on the self-reliant efforts of the African people themselves and on the importance of agriculture and food production. These are precisely the areas the Japanese people themselves have emphasized as they work for the economic and social development of their own country. I strongly believe that it is incumbent upon the developed and donor countries to support this new orientation, and I wish to assure the Assembly that Japan, for its part, is resolved to respond positively.
83.	Secondly, on Japan’s relations with African countries, I am glad to state that on our part there is a growing awareness of the need for increased co-operation with and assistance to Africa. In recent years, my Government has strengthened its assistance to Africa. I especially wish to refer to the medium-term plan to double official development assistance within seven years that my Government recently adopted. I am glad to say that Japan stands prepared to increase substantially its co-operation in the form of grant aid, technical assistance and loans to Africa. Japan is deeply aware of its responsibilities in this regard.
84.	Lastly, Africa has undeniable economic potential. With the newly agreed United Nations Programme of Action for Africa, we are on the threshold of the long process of solving the problems with which the African people are faced. In other words, transforming their continent into a place of hope, and prosperity is an enterprise for which the international community should jointly exert every effort.
85.	Japan regards this special session as an excellent opportunity not only to commit both the African countries and the international community to the cause of the economic recovery and development of Africa, but also to impart fresh momentum and prospects for further realistic and constructive North-South dialogue.
86.	Mr. LABERGE (Canada) (interpretation from French): I do not intend to revert here today to the statement made by Ms. Vezina, Minister for External Relations of Canada, when she addressed the Assembly ¡2nd meeting] on my country’s bilateral response to Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990,2 but rather to take note of the important step which the General Assembly’s adoption of document A/S-13/AC. 1/L.3 represents.
87.	The United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 marks an historic watershed by setting up a new pattern for co-operation between Africa and the international community as a whole. This Programme bears the seeds
of a new take-off for Africa in its quest for self-sustaining development, especially development that is genuinely African. The countries of Africa have reaffirmed their determination and commitment individually and collectively to adopt measures and to take steps that are essential, indeed even painful, to attain that goal. For its part, the international community commits itself to support the will and determination of the Africans.
88.	Although the Programme is innovative, it is of cqurse no more than a starting-point. The results will be commensurate with the perseverance, determination and resoluteness of the commitments undertaken by the two partners in this Herculean enterprise. We in the international community have not only met the hopes and aspirations of the African peoples, but have carried out the duty of the United Nations to promote the economic and social advancement of all peoples.
89< Mr. PAPAJORGJI (Albania): The Albanian delegation has already made dear its position on the critical economic situation in Africa in its statement [6th meeting] and, hence, there is no need to repeat it now. We join in the consensus in keeping with the position of the Albanian. Government and. people, in support of the brother peoples of Africa. At the same times our delegation would like to point, out that it has reservations on the resolution.
90.	Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): Following upon the statement delivered at the opening of this special session by Mr. Diouf, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, my country has once again the signal honour of addressing the Assembly bn behalf of our continent. However, before I discharge that pleasant duty I should like, with your permission, personally to thank all the speakers who have kindly paid tribute to the Senegalese head of State, as well as to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal for his contributions during the preparations for and the holding of this special session, which is now drawing to a close. On their behalf, and on my own behalf and that of the entire delegation of my country, I wish simply but from the bottom of my heart, to thank one and all.
91.	As spokesman for Africa, I should like first to voice its profound gratitude to the Preparatory Committee of the Whole and its Chairman, Mr. Pisani, for the quality of their contribution, and, in respect of Mr. Pisani personally, for his commitment and dedication to the cause of the session; to the drafting group and its co-ordinator, Mr. Fareed, for their dedication and efficiency; to the international governmental and non-governmental organizations, for their noteworthy contributions, of which we have indeed taken note; and, finally, to the States and regional groups for their goodwill, open-mindedness and support, all of which have contributed greatly to making a success of this special session—a session from which we should like to see emerge a resumed North-South dialogue and strengthened South-South co-operation.
92.	Allow me also once again, on behalf of the continent, to express our deep appreciation for the dedication, competence and commitment of Mr. Lewis, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, and all those who assisted him in helping us to achieve in our work something satisfactory and realistic, in a spirit of solidarity, understanding and interdependence.
93.	The positive results of our work—with which we Africans are very pleased—have been possible thanks to the discreet efficacy and high calibre of the contribution of the Secretary-General and all the staff members of the United Nations system, who deserve our tribute. .
94.	Last but not least, I wish to pay a tribute to all persons of goodwill: sportsmen, musicians, artists of all kinds, persons of culture, policy-makers, leaders of nongovernmental organizations, journalists of the written press and of radio and television from around the world, but especially journalists of the United Nations press and information services, who spared neither their time nor their energy to sensitize public opinion everywhere, nationally and internationally, to the critical economic situation in Africa, with sympathy and eommitment that does honour to all of mankind.
95.	To Africa’s language of truth, moderation and responsibility throughout the preparations for and holding of this special session, the international community has given a positive response by committing itself with our continent to a new era of co-operation based on a spirit of genuine partnership. The international community’s decision to lend us its support and backing by translating into reality Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery is even now taking shape in commitments regarding a tangible increase in the level of official development assistance to Africa, notably for the five-year period 1986-1990; commitments regarding the priority given to ¡grants rather than to loans and the cancellation or suspension of debts in favour of some or all African countries; and commitments regarding the replenishment of the funds of assistance organizations such as IDA, IFAD, the African Development Fund, UNDP, the World Bank and others, raising their funds to levels equal to the importance and orientation of their development actions favouring African States and intra-African development organizations. .
96.	Similarly, many States, of the North as well as of the South, have announced their determination to establish special programmes for various sectors of the Priority Programme. The struggle against drought and desertifica-1 tion has especially attracted the attention of several States, which have decided to earmark significant funds to that end. The same applies to utilization of human resources and, in particular, to increasing the role of women and education. Agriculture and food have marshalled the attention of many countries which have decided to Channel aid in those areas to Africa during the period of the Priority Programme to bring about food self-sufficiency.
97.	Africa, which is grateful to the international community for having rallied to its side in response to its appeal, places great hope in the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 just adopted. The realistic, tangible and specifically oriented decisions we have just taken in an exemplary atmosphere of mutual confidence can and will be carried out by both Africa and the international community. In so far as it is concerned, Africa has no choice but to act in accordance with its commitments, since its very survival and that of its peo-pies is at stake.
98.	The most daunting challenge has thus been posed to the international community. It must successfully carry out the joint commitments it has undertaken with Africa so that when the time comes to take stock we shall all be able to respond positively to the expectations of the African peoples torn between doubt and hope. In this connection, Africa attaches the highest priority to the . follow-up and evaluation machinery just adopted; it hopes that that framework will enable us to translate into concrete action the determination shown on all sides to co-operate for a genuine partnership.
99. Although I have spoken at length, I am convinced	Closure of the thirteenth special session
that I have given but partial expression to the message
of satisfaction, friendship and hope of the Group of African States. I have had the honour to voice that message on behalf of our whole continent. But the hour is late and duty calls us to action. AGENDA ITEM 2 Minute of silent prayer or meditation	. 100. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation. The representatives observed a minute of silence.	101. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I declare closed the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly. The meeting rose at 9.55 p.m. Notes ,	1 Kilimanjaro Programme of Action for African Population and Self-Reliant Development, adopted by the Second African Population Conference, held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 9 to 13 January 1984. 2A/40/666, annex I, declaration AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI), annex. 3 Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
Part Two
ANNEXES
Agenda items 3, 5 and 6*
♦No fascicles were issued for agenda items 1, 2, 4 and 7.
ANNEXES
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Agenda item 3:* Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly:
(a)	Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;
(6)	Report of the Credentials Committee
CONTENTS
Psge
Document A/S-13/12: Report of the Credentials Committee...............................................................................   169
Action taken by the General Assembly .....................................................................................   ...........	171
•For the records of the relevant meetings, see part one of this volume, 1st and 7th meetings.
DOCUMENT A/S-13/12
Report of the Credentials Committee
[Original: EnglisM [29 May 198^
1.	At its 1st plenary meeting, on 27 May 1986, the General Assembly, in accordance with rule 28 of its rules of procedure, appointed a Credentials Committee for its thirteenth special session with the same composition as that of the Credentials Committee at the fortieth session, namely: Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Canada, China, Papua New Guinea, Suriname, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and United States of America.
2.	The Credentials Committee held one meeting, on 29 May 1986.
3.	On the proposal of the representative of Brazil, Mr. Henri A. M. Guda (Suriname) was unanimously elected Chairman.
4.	The Committee had before it a memorandum by the Secretary-General, dated 28 May 1986, on the status of credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session. The Deputy to the Legal Counsel updated the information contained in the memorandum. The memorandum as updated during the meeting indicated that as at 29 May 1986:
(a)	Formal credentials issued by head of State or Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, as provided for in rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, had been submitted by the following 77 Member States: Afghanistan, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Bukina Faso, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Finland, Gabon, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Somalia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Togo, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire and Zimbabwe.
(b)	The appointment of the representatives of the following 19 Member States had been communicated to the Secretary-General in the form of a cable from the head of State or Government or Minister for Foreign Affairs concerned: Albania, Burundi, Chad, Chiles Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, India, Malaysia, Mauritania, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal and Venezuela.
(c)	The appointment of the representatives of the following 27 Member States had been communicated to the Secretary-General by letters or notes verbales from the Permanent Representatives or Permanent Missions concerned: Bahamas, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Burma, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Japan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malawi, Nicaragua, Qatar, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, United States of America and Zambia.
(d)	Of the Member States participating in the session not already mentioned, the following 31 had empowered their Permanent Representatives to represent their respective States in the General Assembly without limitation as to session: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Djibouti, Dominica, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mozambique, New Zealand, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Vanuatu and Yemen.
(e)	Four Member States had not yet communicated to the Secretary-General any information regarding their representatives to the thirteenth special session: Honduras, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Philippines and Saint Christopher and Nevis. .
5.	Statements concerning the credentials of the representatives of Member States referred to the Committee for its consideration were made by the representatives of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, China, the United States of America, Canada and Brazil.
6.	The representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics stated that the Soviet delegation strongly -opposed the acceptance of the credentials of the representatives of the so-called “Democratic Kampuchea”. It was an irrefutable fact that “Democratic Kampuchea” was only a political ghost, which certain circles were attempting to help to acquire some semblance of material existence through representation at the United Nations. The representatives of the so-called “Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea” acted only on behalf of a small group of renegades driven out of their country, including representatives of the Pol Pot clique, which had committed bloody crimes against the Kampuchean people. Since 1979, a State existed on the political map of the world—the People’s Republic of Kampuchea—reflecting the interests of the Kampuchean people. The Government of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea, formed as a result of general elections, was exercising effective control over the whole territory of the country, enjoyed the support of friendly States, was rapidly rehabilitating the national economy which had been brought to a state of collapse by the Pol Pot clique and was striving to strengthen the democratic system. In the international arena, the People’s Republic of Kampuchea consistently conducted a policy of peace and co-operation and actively advocated the normalization of the situation in South-East Asia. The Soviet delegation was in favour of the immediate restoration of the legitimate rights of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea in the United Nations. The only just decision, in keeping with the spirit and letter of the Charter of the United Nations, would be to grant the delegates of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea the legitimate right tó represent their country and the Kampuchean people in the Organization.
7.	The same representative added that the Soviet delegation wished to reaffirm its non-acceptance of the credentials of the delegation of the Fascist regime in Chile and also of the representatives of the puppet regime established by the Americans in Grenada.
8.	The representative of China stated that the General Assembly at previous sessions had taken correct decisions on the legitimacy of the credentials of the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea. The validity of the credentials of the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea should naturally be reaffirmed by the General Assembly at the current special session. However, in view of the reservations expressed on this matter by a certain delegation, the Chinese delegation had to state its position once again. The Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea with Prince Norodom Sihanouk as its President was the sole legitimate Government of Kampuchea. It was gaining ever broader support in the world as evidenced by the result of the vote on the resolution on the situation in Kampuchea at the fortieth session of the General Assembly. According to the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international law, foreign aggression against Kampuchea should in no way change the legal status of that country. The puppet régime headed by Heng Samrin was installed through Vietnamese aggression and was therefore illegal. It in no way represented the Kampuchean people. In view of these facts the Chinese delegation reaffirmed its acceptance of the credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea.
9.	The same representative reiterated the Chinese delegation’s position with regard to the credentials of the representatives of Afghanistan. The fact that the representatives of Afghanistan had been allowed to participate
in the current special session should not in any way be interpreted as an acquiescence in the situation created by the foreign armed invasion and occupation of Afghanistan.
10.	The representative of the United States of America stated that his delegation wished to associate itself with the statement made by the representative of China regarding the credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea. Those credentials were in order,'they fulfilled the requirements of the rules of procedure, they had been accepted at previous sessions of the General Assembly and should be accepted at the current special session. The substance of the situation in the country would be debated at a later stage in an appropriate forum.
11.	The same representative stated that it was regrettable that the Soviet delegation had felt compelled to challenge the credentials of the delegation of Chile. Those credentials were obviously in order and there was no basis whatsoever for questioning their validity. The statement made by the representative of the Soviet Union merely reflected the Soviet Union’s dislike of the Government of Chile. That was not a responsible approach to the conduct of international relations. The same representative added that as in the past the United States delegation had not raised any objection to the credentials of the representatives of Afghanistan but that in order not to delay the work of the Committee was not to be interpreted as acquiescence in the situation that existed as a result of the foreign aggression from the Soviet Union.
12.	The representative of the United States stated further that the credentials of the delegation of Grenada were completely in order and there was no basis in fact or in law for the objection raised by the Soviet delegation regarding those credentials.
13.	The representative of Canada stated that his delegation’s guiding principle was that the Credentials Committee should concern itself with the technical aspects of the credentials referred to the Committee. On the basis of information provided to the Committee the credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea appeared to be in order. Canada accepted the credentials of delegations for technical reasons and not for foreign policy considerations. The credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea had been accepted at previous sessions of the General Assembly and there was no basis for a departure from past practice. The same representative added that the credentials of the delegations of Chile and Grenada also appeared to be in order and there were thus no grounds for adopting a different approach at the current special session than at previous sessions. The Canadian delegation also had no objection to the credentials of the delegation of Afghanistan for the same reason. Acceptance of these credentials and of others before the Committee by the Canadian delegation was not intended to imply any foreign policy position.
14.	The representative of Brazil stated that in the view of his delegation all credentials submitted by delegations and referred to the Committee were in order and should be accepted.
15.	The representative of the Soviet Union stated that the statements made by certain representatives regarding Afghanistan was an attempt to distort historical and political reality. Those assertions could not alter the fact that the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan existed, acted in the international arena as a sovereign, non-aligned State and was a full and equal Member of the United Nations. The ill-intentioned remarks made in the Committee represented an inadmissible attempt to interfere in the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. Such action was contrary to the Charter
of the United Nations and to the interests of normalizing the situation in South-West Asia and to ensuring favourable conditions for the talks being held through the intermediary of the personal representative of the Secretary-General.
16.	The Chairman proposed that, taking into account the statements that had been made by members of the Committee which would be reflected in the Committee’s report, the Committee should adopt the following draft resolution: >
“The Credentials Committee, .
“Having examined the credentials of the representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly of the Member States referred to in paragraph ,4 (a) to (d) of its report,
“Taking into account the reservations expressed by delegations during the debate,
“Accepts these credentials, it being understood that credentials in proper form for representatives of all Member States participating in the special session and for whom formal credentials have not been submitted
will be communicated to the Secretary-General as soon as possible.” ■
17.	The draft resolution proposed by the Chairman was adopted without a vote.
18.	The Chairman then proposed that the Committee recommend to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution (see para. 20 below). The proposal was adopted without a vote.
19.	In the light of the foregoing, the present report is submitted to the General Assembly. '	' ;
Recommendation of the Credentials Committee
20.	The Credentials Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution:
Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth
SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
At its 7th plenary meeting, on 30 May 1986, the General Assembly adopted the draft resolution submitted by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 20 of its report (resolution S-13/1).
ANNEXES
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Agenda item 5:* Adoption of the agenda and organization of work
.	DOCUMENT A/S-13/1
Provisional agenda of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly
[Original: English] [15 May 1986]
1.	Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Spain.
2.	Minute of silent prayer or meditation.
3.	Credentials of representatives to the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly:
(a)	Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;
(b)	Report of the Credentials Committee.
4.	Election of the President of the General Assembly.
5.	Adoption of the agenda and organization of work.
6.	Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and mediumterm and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures.
7.	Adoption, in an appropriate format, of the document or documents of the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
At its 1st plenary meeting, on 27 May 1986, the General Assembly adopted the agenda of its thirteenth special session contained in document A/S-13/1 (see decision S-13/231).
♦For the records of the relevant meetings, see part one of this volume, 1st and 2nd meetings.
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Special Session, Supplement No, 2.
ANNEXES
THIRTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Agenda item 6:* Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented arid concerted measures.
CONTENTS
Page
Document A/S-13/15: Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session.......................... 175
Action taken by the General Assembly....................................................................................    182
•For the records of the relevant meetings, see part one of this volume, 1st to 8th meetings.
DOCUMENT A/S-13/15
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session
1.	The General Assembly, at its 1st plenary meeting, on 27 May 1986, allocated to the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Thirteenth Special Session the consideration of item 6, entitled “Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and mediumterm and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries with a view to promoting and adopting action-oriented and concerted measures”.
2.	The Ad Hoc Committee held three meetings, on 27 and 29 May and 1 June 1986. An account of the Ad Hoc Committee’s discussions is contained in the relevant summary records (A/S-13/AC.1/SR.1-3). A number of informal meetings were also held.
3.	At its 1st meeting, the Committee elected Mr. Peter Dietze (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Adhemar Gabriel Bahadian (Brazil) and Mr. Qazi Shaukat Fareed (Pakistan) as its Vice-Chairmen. At the same meeting, Mr. Pastor Ngaiza (United Republic of Tanzania) was elected Rapporteur.
4.	The Committee had before it documents A/S-13/ 1-14 and A/S-13/AC.1/L.1-L.3 [see the Check List of Documents at the beginning of the present volume].
5.	In addition, the following official documents submitted to the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa were available:
(a)	A letter dated 18 April 1986 from the representative of Uganda to the Secretary-General transmitting an official document of the Organization of African Unity entitled “Africa’s submission to the special session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa’s economic and social crisis” (A/AC.229/2);
(b)	A letter dated 9 May 1986 from the representative of Morocco to the Secretary-General transmitting a monograph submitted by the Government of Morocco to the special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa (A/AC.229/3).
6.	At the 1st meeting, on 27 May, the representative of Pakistan, Mr. Fareed, co-ordinator of informal consultations, made a statement in which he informed the
■ [Original: English]
[4 June ¡986]
Committee of the outcome of the consultations held under his chairmanship, pursuant to a request made by the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session, at its 14th meeting, on 23 May.
7.	At its 2nd meeting, on 29 May, the Committee heard a statement by the Vice-President of the International Council of Voluntary Agencies, who spoke on behalf of the Contact Group of non-governmental organizations for the special session on Africa, in accordance with decision S-13/21 taken by the General Assembly at its 1st plenary meeting, on the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole.1
8.	At the 3rd meeting, on 1 June, the representative of Mexico introduced a draft resolutipn (A/S-13/AC.1/ L.2) entitled “The 1986-1990 Quinquennium for International Economic and Technical Co-operation with Africa”, which read as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Convinced of the urgency of adopting effective measures for promoting the broadest co-operation among nations with a view to supporting and accelerating the economic recovery of African countries so that they may resume their development,
“Reaffirming the role of the United Nations system in promoting and strengthening international economic and technical co-operation as a key factor in reaching peace and fostering development,
“Duly taking into consideration all proposals and measures contemplated in the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, which require the broadest support from all States Members of the United Nations,
“ 1. Proclaims the five-year period of 1986 to 1990 as the ‘Quinquennium for International Economic and Technical Co-operation with Africa’;
“2. Urges all Member States, the United Nations system and the international community to make all
■See A/S-13/4 and Corr.l, sect. IV, para. 26, subsect. 6.
possible efforts to co-operate with all African countries in overcoming the problems which have their origin in the critical economic situation of the region;
“3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly as indicated in the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 on the progress made in this respect.”
9.	Statements were made by the representatives of the Netherlands, on behalf of members of the European Community; Senegal, on behalf of the members of the Group of African States; and Mexico.
10.	Mr. Fareed, Vice-Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, informed the Committee that, as a result of informal consultations held on draft resolution A/S-13/AC.1/ L.2, it had been agreed to insert a new operative paragraph as paragraph 2 in the draft resolution submitted by the Chairman and entitled “United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990” (A/S-13/AC.1/L.3, para. 8). The new paragraph read as follows:
“2. Emphasizes the need to intensify economic and technical co-operation with African countries during and beyond the period of the Programme of Action;”. The remaining paragraphs would be renumbered accordingly.
11.	In light of the new paragraph 2, the representative of Mexico withdrew draft resolution A/S-13/AC.1/L.2.
12.	At the same meeting the Ad Hoc Committee had before it the draft resolution submitted by the Chairman as a result of informal consultations, as orally revised.
13.	At that meeting the A d Hoc Committee adopted the draft resolution, as orally revised (see para. 14 below).
Recommendation of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole
14.	The Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution:
United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/29 of 3 December 1984 and the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa annexed thereto, as well as its resolution 40/40 of 2 December 1985, in which it decided to convene a special session to focus, in a comprehensive and integrated manner, on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term development problems and challenges facing African countries,
Welcoming the efforts of African countries towards their economic recovery and development, as evidenced in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-19902 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985, in which the Governments of Africa reaffirmed their primary responsibility for the economic and social development of their countries, identified areas for priority action, and undertook to mobilize and utilize domestic resources for the achievement of these priorities,	.
2A/40/666, annex 1, declaration AHG/Decl.l (XXI), annex.
Convinced of the need for concerted action by the international community in support of the efforts of African Governments to achieve economic recovery and development,
Emphasizing that the African development crisis is one that concerns the international community as a whole and that greater realization of the rich physical and human potential of the continent is an integral part of a common strategy to promote the economic and social advancement of all people,
Noting with appreciation the strong expression of support and commitment made by the international community during the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly,
1.	Adopts the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 19861990 set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
2.	Emphasizes the need to intensify economic and technical co-operation with African countries during and beyond the period of the Programme of Action;
3.	Urges all Governments to take effective action for the rapid and full implementation of the Programme of Action;
4.	Requests the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to participate fully in and support the implementation of the Programme of Action;
5.	Calls upon all concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, in view of their significant contribution to economic and social development in Africa, to support and contribute to the implementation of the Programme of Action;
6.	Decides to conduct a review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action at its forty-third session, in accordance with paragraph 24 (a) of the Programme of Action;
7.	Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the process of implementation of the Programme of Action and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-second and forty-third sessions, as outlined in paragraph 24 (c) of the Programme of Action.
ANNEX
United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1WMW
I
ANALYSIS OF AFRICA’S CRITICAL ECONOMIC SITUATION
1.	Africa’s economic and social crisis has been a cause of grave concern to Africa and the international community alike. The crisis has' not only jeopardized the development process of the African economies, but has also threatened the very survival of millions of Africans. The persistent economic crisis in Africa, exacerbated by drought and desertification, and the more recent tragic famine and hunger have strengthened the resolve of the African countries, individually and collectively, to take immediate and concerted actions to achieve sustained economic and social development of their countries in the medium-term and long-term.
2.	The international community fully recognizes the pervasive and structural economic problems of the African continent. Some of these lie in the colonial past; some of these flow from the post-independence era; others are a combination of economic, political and endemic factors. The vulnerability and the fragile nature of the African socio-economic structures have now become fully apparent as a consequence of the dramatic effects of drought. The African Governments have initiated actions aiming at long-term structural transformation of their economies which is vital for breaking the vicious cycle of poverty and underdevelopment and for paving the way for self-reliant economic development. Notwithstanding past efforts, it is imperative that the international
community intensify its co-operation and substantially increase its support for the African efforts.
3.	The persistent economic crisis in Africa has been aggravated by a combination of exogenous and endogenous factors. The endogenous aggravating factors include deficiencies in institutional and physical infrastructures, economic strategies and policies that have fallen short, in some cases, of achieving their objectives, disparities in urban and rural development and income distribution, insufficient managerial/ administrative capacities, inadequate human resource development, and lack of financial resources, the demographic factors and political instability manifested, inter alia, in a large and growing population of refugees. In addition to these factors, many African countries have to contend with severely adverse consequences of the policy of economic destabilization perpetrated by the racist minority régime in South Africa and by its illegal occupation of Namibia. The serious aggravating exogenous factors include the recent international economic recession, the decline in commodity prices, adverse terms of trade, the decline in financial flows, increased protectionism and high interest rates. The heavy burden of debt and debt-servicing obligations also constrains Africa’s prospects for economic growth.
4.	Urgent, far-reaching and imaginative economic policies are required to avert further deterioration in the economic conditions in Africa and to launch the continent on the path of dynamic self-reliant and self-sustained economic development in a favourable external environment. One immediate task of such efforts should be to increase substantially productivity in all sectors, particularly in the central sectors of food and agriculture. Achieving such a task would be extremely difficult without the amelioration of the external and internal factors that have aggravated the structural crisis and without simultaneously enhanced supportive measures by the international community.
5.	Africa has taken the main responsibility for its own development. It has organized itself to undertake the necessary measures to overcome the current economic crisis on the basis of Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985. The Programme aims at identifying areas for priority action for the rehabilitation and recovery of the African economies and mobilizing and fully utilizing domestic resources for the achievement of those priorities. However, given the dimensions of internal and external problems now facing the continent, it is obvious that in order to accomplish this complex task Africa must receive the full support of the international community.
6.	The African development crisis is not an exclusive African problem but one that concerns mankind as a whole. Interdependence is today a living reality. A stagnant or perpetually economically backward Africa is not in the interest of the world community. Without durable and sustained economic development in the world’s poor regions, of which Africa is a notable example, there is a real danger to international peace and security and an impediment to world economic growth and development. The international community recognizes the importance of genuine peace and security, as well as the strengthening of international co-operation, to African economic development.
7.	It is consequently essential urgently to develop and implement an international strategy to complement the exceptional efforts that the African countries have themselves initiated to put their economies on course. In developing such a strategy, it is necessary to take full cognizance of the special problems and needs—not only those common to Africa as a whole, but also those of subregions and individual African countries—in order to ensure balanced and equitable development. The international community must respond positively to the African call for a new era of co-operation based on a spirit of genuine and equal partnership, which is an essential element for harmonious and mutually beneficial economic co-operation in an interdependent world. Africa is convinced that, given the necessary support from the international community, it will be capable, in the not-too-distant future, of establishing national, subregional and regional structures which would ensure self-reliant sustainable economic development.
II
UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR AFRICAN ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT 1986-1990
8.	The United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, based on mutual commitment and co-operation, consists of two central elements:
(a)	The determination and commitment of the African countries to launch both national and regional programmes of economic development as reflected in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990, adopted by the African Heads of State and Government in July 1985;	.
(b)	The response of the international community and its commitment to support and complement the African development efforts.
A. AFRICA’S PRIORITY PROGRAMME FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY 1986-1990
9.	The African countries have fully committed themselves to the implementation of a sharply focused, practical and operational set of activities, priorities and policies, as elaborated in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990. The successful implementation of the Priority Programme wiU lay the foundation for durable structural changes, improve levels of productivity and ensure the rapid recovery of the African economies while at the same time enhancing long-term development prospects.
10.	The implementation of the Priority Programme should contribute to the realization of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa,3 the Industrial Development Decade for Africa, proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 35/66 B of 5 December 1980, the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa, proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution 32/160 of 19 December 1977, and the Harare Declaration on the food crisis in Africa, adopted on 25 July 1984 by the Thirteenth FAO Regional Conference for Africa.
11.	The Priority Programme stipulates the following priorities at the national, subregional and regional levels:
1.	At the national level	■
(a)	Agricultural development '
The Priority Programme lays considerable emphasis on the food and agricultural sector. The Priority Programme seeks to revitalize the more dynamic and internally generated forces for growth and development. Primary focus will be on women farmers who contribute significantly to agricultural production.
(i)	Immediate measures to combat food emergencies
■	The immediate objective will be to cope with future emergencies and catastrophes through the following measures:
—	To create and sustain national emergency preparedness;
—	To institute effective early-warning systems;
—	To establish flexible and efficient regional networks of crop protection agencies;
—	To establish national food security arrangements.
(ii)	Medium-term measures
The main objective will be to give a new impetus to agricultural development in order to achieve increasing levels of productivity and production through: .
—	Raising substantially the level of investment in agriculture;
—	Increased food production;
—	Restoring, protecting and developing arable land and rendering it more productive;
—	Establishment of remunerative produce pricing policies, establishment and strengthening of incentive schemes, eliminating pricing policies that have tended to discourage production and providing effective agriculture credit programmes;
—	Development of livestock and livestock products through the utilization of agricultural by-products, improved management, and attention to animal diseases;
—	Development of mechanization and the use of modern farm and processing machinery; increased use of fertilizers, improved seeds and pesticides;	■
—	Improving and expanding the storage capacity, distribution and the marketing system;	'
3 Adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980.
—	Development of agricultural research and extension through the creation of a network of agronomical research stations and extension for the design and diffusion of appropriate agricultural technologies;
—	Placing at the disposal of small farmers necessary inputs for increased yields; better utilization and improvement in management of water resources and the establishment of low-cost irrigation schemes;
—	Establishment of reafforestation, drought and desertification control programmes, including firewood schemes; and improvement of agricultural implement maintenance capacity;
—	Establishment of assistance programmes for small farmers, especially women food producers and rural youth;
—	Improvement of the distribution of agricultural products.
The above measures should be applied in a suitable combination to achieve the expected results, taking into account the particular situation in each country. Other subregional and regional measures, are also envisaged in the Priority Programme to complement national measures.
The total investment required for the implementation of this programme is estimated at $US 57.4 billion which is 44.8 per cent of the total cost of implementing the Priority Programme.
(b)	Other sectors in support of agriculture
The success of Africa’s effort in achieving the stated objectives for the development and growth of the agricultural sector will depend on the parallel development of the following agriculture support sectors:
(i)	Rehabilitation and development of agro-related industries
Given the high dependency of Africa on imports of almost all industrial goods in general and agriculture-related goods in particular and the urgent need to increase Africa’s capacity to increase food production, the following specific measures are to be taken, among others:
—	Development of industries for production of agricultural tools and equipment, small-scale irrigation equipment and agricultural inputs;	.
—	Processing of raw materials and intermediate inputs;
—	Rehabilitation and upgrading of existing plants;
—	Development of capacity for utilization of renewable sources of energy, especially bio-mass and solar energy;
—	Establishment of engineering capacity for the production of spare parts and components;	.
—	Provision of training in the above areas and the development of local capacity for project design and preparation.
(ii)	Development of transport and communications
In this field the objectives are to improve access to production areas, facilitate the development of intra-African trade in agriculture, industrial raw materials and other goods and services in a complementary manner.
Action in this area will consist of:
—	Maintenance and development of feeder, access and service roads, small bridges and desert roads;
—	Identification of obstacles and rehabilitation and maintenance of existing modes of transport and communication;
—	Utilization of labour-intensive techniques in the construction and maintenance of transport infrastructure;
—	Production of spare parts for the overhaul repair and maintenance of public vehicles, machinery and equipment;
—	Participation in the development of multinational and intermodal transport networks.
Africa, in co-operation with the international community, will intensify its efforts in financing and implementing the Transport and Communication Decade in Africa.	,
(iii)	Trade and finance
In the field of trade the objective is to improve the distribution channels for domestic trade, by improving market arrangements and reversing the present consumption pattern in favour of domestically produced goods through:
—	Adoption of price incentives for agricultural products;
—	Improvement of internal distribution channels;
—	Identification and elimination of obstacles hindering trade expansion.
In the field of financial co-operation the following measures are envisaged:
—	Increased utilization of existing clearing arrangements;
—	Adoption of co-ordinated measures to establish financial markets at the national, subregional and regional levels;
—	Intensification of efforts for the establishment of an African Monetary Fund.
The total cost for the implementation of the measures envisaged under the other sectors in support of agriculture is estimated at $60.1 billion.
(c)	Drought and desertification
Although drought and desertification require a long-term approach, there is need for immediate action by the African countries at national, subregional and regional levels to implement a comprehensive programme for drought and desertification and to stem and control the effects of drought and desertification on both the ecological environment and the development process. African Governments are, therefore, committed to undertaking as soon as possible the following measures:
—	Massive afforestation and reafforestation;
—	Better management of water resources, including river basins and irrigation;
—	Protection of common eco-systems;
—	Development of alternative sources of energy to replace wood fuel;
—	Stabilization of sand dunes;
—	Measures to stop soil erosion;
—	Measures against salination;
—	Improvement of drainage in irrigated areas;
—	Integrating measures for the protection of the environment in national development programmes and according them high . priority;
— Full implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification4 approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 32/172 of 19 December 1977.
The total cost of measures envisaged for the implementation of the programme to combat drought and desertification is estimated at $3.41 billion.
(d)	Human resources development, planning and utilization
African Governments fully recognize that central to the successful implementation of the proposed actions is the efficient development, planning and utilization of human resources and the full and effective participation of the people in the development process. In this regard, African Governments are adopting the following comprehensive policies for human resource planning, development and utilization with a view to integrating them in their overall national development policies and plans:
—	Radically changing the educational systems at all levels to ensure that the skills, knowledge and attitudes that are relevant to Africa’s developmental needs are generated;
—	Intensifying efforts to promote mass literacy and adult learning programmes;
—	Efficiently utilizing manpower resources, including measures to reverse the brain drain and ensure the guarantee of human rights;
—	Reducing the present high level of dependence of most African countries on foreign experts to reduce foreign exchange leakage;
—	Ensuring good working conditions;
—	Encouraging the role and participation of women and youth, particularly those living in the rural areas, in the development process.
The total cost of measures envisaged in the human resources development sector is estimated at $7 billion.	-
(e) Policy reforms	•
In order to achieve the objectives of the Priority Programme, African Governments are undertaking a number of major policy measures while focusing attention on the need for policy reorientation. African countries are determined to undertake, individually and collectively, all measures
^Report of the United Nations Conference on Desertification, Nairobi, 29 August-9 September 1977 fA/CONF.74/36), chap. I.
and policy reforms that are necessary for the recovery of their economies and the revitalization of genuine development, particularly in the following areas at the national level:
(i)	Improving management of the economy
African Governments recognize that genuine efforts must be made to improve the management of the African economies and to rationalize public investment policies, particularly since the public sector will have to continue to play an important role in the development of thé region. Such efforts would require, inter alia, improvement of public management systems, institutions and practices; improvement of the performance of public enterprises; reforming the public services to make them more development-oriented services; greater mobilization of domestic savings; improvement of financial management, including debt and development aid, fiscal administration and control of public expenditure with a view to promoting the efficient use of resources and cutting wastage and resource misallocation; reduction of foreign exchange leakages. The positive role of the private sector is also to be encouraged through well-defined and consistent policies.
(ii)	Other policy measures .
. In accordance with their respective policies and priorities, African Governments have demonstrated their determination to tackle their social and economic problems through, among others, appropriate adjustment measures that have been undertaken when needed. These measures have involved, inter alia, exchange rate adjustments, debtrelief arrangements, wage and salary reduction and public employment freeze. Though the tasks involved here have often been difficult and painful, African countries have recognized the need to bear the burden and have made the necessary sacrifices to the extent possible. In the coming years short-term adjustment measures should give way to the medium-term and long-term structural transformation. Restructuring measures will be continued with prudence through appropriate monetary and fiscal reforms.
. (iii) Population policy
Special importance will need to be accorded by each African country to a population policy that, on the basis of the Kilimanjaro Programme of Action for African Population and Self-Reliant Development, adopted by the Second African Population Conference held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 9 to 13 January 1984, will, inter alia, address issues of high fertility and mortality, rapid urbanization, rural-urban and rural-rural migration, the problems of children and youth and the protection of the environment in a manner that would ensure compatibility between demographic trends, appropriate land utilization and settlement patterns and the desired pace of economic growth and development. African countries should also push for the attainment, within the shortest possible time, of an agro-food production growth rate at least equal to the population growth rate.
(iv)	Participation of the people in development
Special attention will be accorded to the role played by human resources. Policies will need to be pursued to ensure the effective development and utilization of human resources in all fields and sectors through:
— Ensuring the effective participation of the people in ah dimensions of development;
— Developing indigenous entrepreneurial capabilities, both private and public;
— Establishing sound bases for political, economic and social justice. ' In the food and agricultural sector, the focus of attention must be the peasant farmer with special reference to female farmers who dominate food production in most countries.
(v)	Women and development	'
The role of women in development must be taken seriously into account in development planning and in the disbursement of resources, both as contributors to and beneficiaries of development efforts as recommended by the Arusha Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of African Women Beyond the United Nations Decade for Women, adopted by the regional intergovernmental preparatory meeting organized by the Economic Commission for Africa and held at Arusha, United • Republic of Tanzania, from 8 to 12 October 1984. ■
In view of the importance accorded to food self-sufficiency and the acknowledged role of women in food production in the continent, the pivotal role of women in this sector must be recognized and encouraged.
2. Subregional concerns	. .	'
. In order to deal with the divergence and differentiations among African subregions and countries the following actions are necessary, bearing in mind the unique problems which the groups of countries concerned face in their efforts to accelerate their economic growth rata:
(a)	The areas most seriously affected by drought and desertification have diminishing opportunities of raising domestic resources for implementation of the Priority Programme. They also face problems in instituting recovery programmes because of the limited economic options available in the wake of severe climatic conditions.Tn fact,* for some of these countries, especially those in the Sahel and the members of the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development and the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference, the road to self-sufficiency in food production is paved with particular difficulties especially as they are not in a position to mobilize from domestic resources more than 4.21 per cent of their requirements, depending on external sources for the balance. Therefore, in order to tackle the environmental, development and human problems, in these countries, programmes for afforestation and reafforestation, as well as for the development and utilization of water resources will have to be put in, place while special investments should be made to develop alternative sources of energy to wood fuel and charcoal in order to protect the ecology. This should include research and development of small gas, coal or oil stoves suitable for rural communities. In addition, drought resistant crop varieties will have to be developed. ,
(b)	With regard to the African island nations, these countries are virtually isolated from the mainland both in terms of-transport and communications as well as trade and other factors, unlike their counterparts in the Caribbean which have access to the strong economies of North America. A special programme will need to be devised for these countries to develop trade and transport linkages with the African mainland as well as with thé rest of the world. Additional resources are needed for programmes aimed at protecting them against the devastating effects of cyclones, typhoons and floods. ’
(c)	Many countries in Africa are faced, inter alia, with the serious problems of being land-locked or semi-land-locked, and among the least developed countries; furthermore, countries in southern Africa are subjected to externally-engineered destabilization. These countries require special assistance in tropical and sub-tropical agriculture research. Hitherto, limited locally-based agricultural research has been conducted in crop diversification, high-yield seeds and the control of pests. These countries also urgently need intensive research in methods to combat widespread animal and livestock diseases such as rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease as well as to control the tsetse fly. At the same time, the problems of storage, transport and transit, equally acute, also require large investments.
(d)	Some of the countries of the North African subregion face substantial balance-of-payments deficits demonstrated by increasing debt-service burden. Agricultural development in some countries of the subregion has been slowing down owing to drought, water shortage, mounting desertification and soil erosion. The widening food gap in the subregion is among the highest gaps in Africa.
(f) Refugees and displaced persons
(I)	The plight of 5 million refugees and returnees together with the adverse effects which thé refugee burden continues to have on the frail economies of host countries are matters of high priority for many African States.
(ii)	The Second International Conference of Assistance to Refugees in Africa, in its Declaration and Programme of Action,5 has confirmed the spirit of burden-sharing on a strategy for solving the problems of refugees in Africa, that the refugee problem in Africa is a matter of global responsibility, and that refugee aid and development aid must be regarded as complementary for any realistic solution to Africa’s refugee problem. On their part, African Governments have clearly reaffirmed their commitment to do everything within their power to promote lasting solutions to the problem. The international community, for its part, has undertaken to join hands with African countries in the support of such lasting solutions and in meeting and promoting technical and capital assistance designed to strengthen the social and economic infrastructure of the affected countries.
5 See A/39/402, annex.
(üi) Concrete measures should be undertaken at national, regional and international levels with a view to preventing a new massive
. population exodus. In this connection, there is a need to accelerate implementation of the recommendations of the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa.
3.	At the regional level
(a)	Strengthening the institutional framework
Proper social and economic management will only materialize if African countries urgently strengthen their social and economic institutions at all, levels. To this end, African national and multinational institutions will be made more responsive to the challenges of development through the improvement of their management systems, rationalization of their activities and elimination of duplication of efforts.
(b)	Consolidating African co-operation
Existing subregional organizations should be strengthened with a view to consolidating African co-operation in accordance with the objectives of the Lagos Plan of Action. Likewise, the establishment, whenever deemed necessary, of subregional organizations based on economic criteria, including natural resource criteria, should be encouraged with a view to attaining the above objectives.
4.	Financial estimates for Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990
12.	The full implementation of Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990 would require SUS 128.1 billion during the period. In spite of severe constraints, the African countries commit themselves to provide $82.5 billion or 64.4 per cent of the total cost of financing the Priority Programme through the mobilization of domestic resources. There is a difference of approximately $46 billion between the total financial requirements for the implementation of the Priority Programme and the resources to be made available through domestic efforts. Accordingly, effective implementation of the Priority Programme will require $9 billion annually, on the average, through external resources.
Commitment to a common point of reference
13.	Africa is committed to providing the necessary framework to launch long-term programmes for self-sustaining socio-economic development and growth. The international community is committed to assist Africa in achieving this objective. Such a framework of understanding will include, inter alia: .
(a)	Necessary economic reform and structural adjustment as mentioned in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 19861990 as à basis for broad-based, sustained economic, development;
(b)	Priority attention and increased resources commitment to the rehabilitation and development of agriculture based on durable structural changes as indicated in the Priority Programme.
(c)	Appropriate policies that promote development of sectors supportive of agriculture and rural development, namely, agro-related industry as well as essential consumption products, trade, transportation, health, education, environment and other social and commercial services;
(d)	Fundamental measures to address the problems of drought and desertification as an integral part of agriculture and rural development, with the active involvement of village and community groups, wherever applicable; • •
(e)	Efficient development and utilization of human resources with particular reference to the full and equal participation of women in order to maximize the benefit for and the contribution to national development;
(f)	Undertaking reforms in such a manner as to encourage the broadest possible participation in development and the productive use of scarce resources.
B. RESPONSE AND COMMITMENT OF THE INTERNA TIONAL . COMMUNITY .
14.	The,international community has noted with admiration, the comprehensive and dynamic resolve of the African countries that are
embarking upon an unparalleled action to break away from the clutches of underdevelopment and poverty as is reflected in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990. It notes with particular appreciation that in the face of enormous difficulties the African countries, reaffirming their primary responsibility for the development of their continent, are fully mobilizing their domestic resources in order to implement successfully all measures and policy reforms required for the continent’s economic rehabilitation, recovery and long-term development.
15.	The international community is aware that the process of development being initiated by the African countries, as reflected in the Priority Programme, has to be.supplemented by complementary actions of the international community through intensified co-operation and substantially increased support. In this context, it is also realized that lasting solutions to the serious exogenous constraints, over which , Africa has no control, will have to be found since their persistence will impede the efforts of the African countries.	' !
16.	The African countries estimate that the full implementation of the Priority Programme would require total financial resources of $128.1 billion, of which the African countries intend to proride $82.5 billion through the mobilization of domestic resources, leaving the approximately $46 billion remaining to be met through'external resources. The international community recognizes that the African countries need additional external resources. In this context, it commits itself to making every effort to provide sufficient resources to support and supplement the African development effort; it also appreciates that the realization of Africa’s development efforts would be greatly facilitated if thè flows of external resources were predictable and assured;	■
17.	The international community recognizes the magnitude of Africa's debt and the severe and restrictive burden which this has placed on many African countries. It realizes that measures have to be taken to alleviate this burden and to enable those countries to concentrate on the full implementation of priorities. In addressing problems arising from such debt, existing mechanisms should respond flexibly and be improved as appropriate.	.
(a) Improving the quality and modality of external assistance and co-operation ,
While it is recognized that each bilateral or multilateral donor as well as recipient has its own rules and procedures, there are some general areas in which changes can be usefully made. For an effective support of Africa’s efforts, it is realized that the quality and modality of external assistance and co-operation need to be improved along the following lines:	'
(i)	Greater emphasis on programme support in the priority areas of the recipient African countries, with a view to giving an indication of medium-term support;
(ii)	Evolution of procurement policies and administrative procedures which would improve delivery of production inputs;
(iii)	Speedier disbursement of funds;
- (iv) Increase the concessionality, particularly the grant element of development assistance to African countries, with the purpose of improving the quality of aid to those countries;
(v)	In planning and implementing programmes of assistance, special consideration shall be given to the indigenous competence, expertise, experience, local conditions, particularly loeal techniques and equipment as well as to the training of qualified national personnel;
(ri)	Develop more effective and efficient co-ordination methods in order to ensure a greater impact of aid policies;
(vii)	Improve the effectiveness of technical assistance and make it more responsive to the needs and priorities of the African countries;	.
(viii)	Donor countries and agencies should consider, as appropriate, measures to assist African countries in meeting recurrent and local costs of programmes and projects; -
(ix)	Donor countries, international institutions and recipients should take into account the recurrent and local costs of new programmes and projects to ensure their viability.
(b).. Improvement in the external environment ,	,
Many of the issues concerning the external factors that aggravate the African situation need to be addressed and examined in the competent
forums. In the present context, there is a need for the international community:	'
(i)	. To evolve and implement policies,conducive to sustained, equitable and non-inflationary growth, including the expansion of , trade through, inter alia, the elimination of protectionism, , particularly non-tariff barriers, in accordance with existing commitments, the adoption of measures which encourage African exports and diversification programmes, and improved . market access, especially for tropical products, within the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade;
(ii)	To deal urgently with commodity issues, taking into account . the special interests of the African countries, in the framework , ; of an overall approach, embracing commodity agreements/ arrangements and adequate compensatory financing, and also . to increase the capacity of African countries to process, market, distribute and transport their exports; and in this context to stress the importance of sufficient ratifications of the Agreement . Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities,6 for it quickly to become operational.,	,	.
’	(c) Supporting Africa’s policy reform
There is need for extensive international support for the priorities and polities that Africa has identified as necessary and on which many African countries, have already embarked. African countries need assistance to enable them to achieve a speedier recovery and long-term development. In this regard, the international community, particularly the donor countries, keeping in mind the interests of all developing countries, agree on the importance of increasing official development assistance to Africa, its improved quality and effectiveness. They also agree to:	.	-	'
.	(i) Placing greater emphasis on non-project aid, including balancc-of-payments support, to African countries during the period 1986-1990;
(ii)	Evolving aid policies based on technical considerations and specific aid requirements of recipient countries;
(iii)	Enabling multilateral development institutions to increase their concessional assistance to African countries;
(iv)	In the case of countries concerned, work towards the rapid implementation of the International Monetary Fund Structural Adjustment Facility which provides longer term concessional resources in support of adjustment efforts, including overall development objectives at the national level;
(v)	Urge the speedy eighth replenishment of the International Development Association and the fifth African Development Fund at levels which should take into account the need to support fully African recovery and development;
(vi)	Strive to ensure that no individual bilateral donor, during the period 1986-1990, becomes a net recipient of official capital flows from African countries that undertake adjustment ' programmes;
(vii)	Increase support, whenever possible, to the International Fund for Agricultural Development Special Programme for Sub-Saharan African Countries Affected by Drought and Desertification;
(viii)	Give special attention to financial and technical assistance requirements of countries affected by drought and desertification and in this context utilize the existing subregional organizations such as the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel, the Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development and the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference;
(ix)	Special efforts need also be made to increase resource flows to the least developed countries with a view to enabling them to achieve the objectives of their country programmes within the framework of the Substantial New Programme of Action . for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries7 and also to allow the African countries to solve the critical problems arising from negative or insufficient flows of resources;
6United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.II.D.8 and corrigendum.
1 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No; E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
, (x) Firmly invite those countries that have not done so to give priority consideration to the implementation of Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11 March 1978*
■ and note with satisfaction that a number of donor countries have responded favourably to that resolution.
(d) Economic recovery and debt constraints
The international community recognizes that the continued improvement of the'external environment and a strong economic adjustment effort may not be sufficient to allow many African States to service their debt while establishing the basis for sustainable economic growth. In these cases, the international community is determined to assist African countries in their efforts to deal with their financial constraints.
South-South co-operation
18.	The international community reaffirms its belief in the strategy for collective self-reliance among developing countries and reiterates its conviction that economic and technical co-operation among these countries should constitute a key element in the economic recovery of Africa and be of mutual benefit to developing countries, with due regard to the Caracas Programme of Action on economic co-operation among developing countries’ and to the Plan of Action to meet the critical economic situation in Africa, adopted by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.10
19.	In this connection, there is an urgent need for African countries, together with other developing countries, to strengthen more vigorously than ever before South-South co-operation and make greater efforts, through action-oriented measures, particularly in the priority areas of food and agricultural production.Technical co-operation at the bilateral, subregional and interregional levels in the following specific areas could contribute towards helping Africa tackle its food production, storage and marketing problems:	.
(a)	Water management and small-scale irrigation technology;
(b)	Dry-land farming;
(c)	Training in agricultural support services, including extension services for animal husbandry;
(d)	Institution building, development and management in the area of farm co-operatives;	■
(e)	Small-scale rural industrial development;
(?) Rural energy production, including the development of new and renewable sources of energy; . .	•
. te) Agricultural research;	.
(h)	Exchange of seed germplasm and assistance in seed production technology and in the production of fertilizers, pesticides and farm equipment;	.
(r)	Development of poultry, fisheries and other non-farm produce;
0)	Exchange of information and experience on appropriate agricultural policies and strategies.
20.	' In addition to the above, South-South co-operation should focus on other development priorities, with particular reference to the following areas mentioned in Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990:
(a)	Exchange of information, technology and techniques for combating drought and desertification and protecting the environment;
(b)	Exchange of information on and co-operation in the production of equipment and other inputs for agriculture, industry and transport and communication;
(c)	Co-operation in the development of human resources;
(d)	Joint participation in the implementation of self-sustaining, selfgenerating and self-financing development projects;
(e)	Trade expansion.
s Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Supplement No, 15, vol. I, part two, annex I.
’ Adopted at the.High Level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981.
1»A/4O/341, annex I.
1,1	■
FOLLOW-UP AND EVALUATION MACHINERY
21.	The effective implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 will require a continuous process of follow-up, evaluation and co-ordination at the national, subregional, regional and international levels. Such a process, based on joint efforts and co-operation, would enable the follow-up, evaluation and co-ordination of the actions of both the national Governments and the international donor community. The general principles underlying the establishment of any follow-up and evaluation mechanism are:
(a)	The sovereign right of each Government to formulate and implement its own programmes and development plans, and to determine appropriate follow-up mechanisms best suited to implementing the Programme of Action;
(b)	The need for such mechanisms to be simple, operational and not involving substantial additional expenditure;
(c)	The need for emphasis, as far as possible, on the utilization of existing mechanisms;	.	.
(d)	The need for donor countries and international organizations to enhance co-ordination of their activities and assistance with the recipient countries.
National level
22.	Governments would, as appropriate, establish follow-up mechanisms, involving joint action with their development partners, within the framework of existing aid co-ordination machinery, such as round tables and consultative group meetings, as well as within the framework of intergovernmental agreements for economic co-operation. The terms of reference and other details pertaining to such mechanisms, which could take the form of Joint Committees or joint bilateral commissions, would be to be agreed upon among the parties concerned, keeping in mind the following elements:	'
(i)	Comprehensive and simultaneous consideration of all issues, ! pertaining to the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;
(ii)	Review and evaluation of the process of implementation of the ■ jointly agreed upon commitments, on the part of both national Governments and their development partners in the context of the Programme of Action;
(iii)	Implementation of the Programme of Action in the context of the long-term development needs and policies of African countries.
Regional level
23.	For a cohesive and balanced implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, systematic follow-up action is necessary at the subregional and regional levels. This process, which could be facilitated by the existing mechanisms at the regional level, would assist the African Governments in evaluating and assessing the progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action, at the subregional and continental levels, and in taking appropriate action.
Global level
24.	At the global level, the following actions are envisaged:
(«) A review and appraisal of the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 by the General Assembly at its forty-third session in 1988. For that purpose, the General Assembly, at its forty-second session in 1987, shall consider and establish such preparatory mechanisms as may be necessary;	.
(b)	The Secretary-General shall co-ordinate the assistance and support of the organizations and agencies of the United Nations system for the effective implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990;
(c)	The Secretary-General shall monitor the process of the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 and report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-second and forty-third sessions.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
At its 8th plenary meeting, on 1 June 1986, the General Assembly adopted the draft resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole in its draft report (A/S-13/AC.1/L.3, paragraph 8), as orally revised, without a vote. For the final text, see resolution S-13/2.11 ■
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2.
ail ^ Ip ^1 . fJUI .Lji ^ j fjjdl J,:, ùtail ^ IxJI ^1 Obj—U > J^l ¿Jíi
í«flfi®«éaih®ft
KéBaRftííBff^tefiífitóíMibiílfiSM. i^MiílHígfsHafiíHffiÉi «âisæmâo
HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dépositaires du monde entier. Informez-vous auprès de votre libraire ou adressez-vous à : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genève.
KAK nOJIYHHTb H34AHMJI OPrAHM3ALIMK OEtEAHHEHHblX HAUMM
Htaanaa Oprannaannn OéieannenHux Hamtñ Momo KynuTb b khhjkhbix Maraaanax h areHTCTBax bo Bcex pañCHax Mapa. HasoaHTe cnpaBKH 06 ttaaaHHsx b BameM khhjkhom MaraaHHe min omit me no anpecy: OpraHnaanns OôieaHneHHbix Hamtñ, CeKiwa no npoaaxe Hanasaii, Heb-Mopk hjih Keaesa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas están en venta en librerías y casas distribuidoras en todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o diríjase a: Naciones Unidas, Sección de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.
Litho in United Nations, New York
02000
64006—August 1988-2,150
United Nations
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
FOURTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
1st
PLENARY MEETING
(Opening meeting)
Wednesday, 17 September 1986, at 10.30 a.m.
NEW YORK
President: Mr. Humayun Rasheed CHOUDHURY (Bangladesh).
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Bangladesh
1.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure, I declare open the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
2.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
Statement by the temporary president
3.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before we commence our work 1 should like to emphasize very strongly the point I made in my statement at the first plenary meeting of the forty-first session about the punctual starting of our meetings. This morning I was at the podium at 10 a.m. sharp to start the day’s proceedings. The President will follow that practice throughout the session. I seek the full co-operation of representatives in beginning meetings on time, thereby contributing to the efficient conduct of our business. This will also help us to avoid unnecessary expenses. I am sure that representatives agree with me and will support me in implementing this procedure.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
4.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that a Credentials Committee shall be appointed at the beginning of each session and that it shall consist of nine mem-
bers, to be appointed by the General Assembly on the proposal of the President. In order to expedite the work of the special session and in accordance with precedents, I propose that the Credentials Co rmit-tee consist of the same members as were appe । ted yesterday for the forty-first session: the Bah. nas, China, Fiji, Ghana, the Netherlands, Rwanda, Venezuela, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. If there is no objection I shall consider the Credentials Committee to be constituted accordingly.
It was so decided (decision S-14/11).
5.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: In view of the fact that the fourteenth special session is taking place within the time-frame of the forty-first session and as the Credentials Committees for the fourteenth special session and the forty-first session are identical in composition, I propose that the Assembly consider at its forty-first session a consolidated report by the Credentials Committee concerning the credentials of representatives to both the fourteenth special session and the forty-first session. That will permit the Assembly to devote all the very limited time available to it at its fourteenth special session to the substantive discussion of the question of Namibia. If there is no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided (decision S-14/21).
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations (A/S-14/2)
6.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before turning to the next item on the agenda, I should like, in keeping with established practice, to call the attention of the General Assembly to document A/S-14/2, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General informing the Assembly that two Member States are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
7.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: 1 call on the representative of Guyana, Mr. Noel Sinclair, in his capacity as Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.
8.	Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana), Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia: In my capacity as Acting President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, I have the honour to propose to this Assembly that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, Mr. Humayun Rasheed Choudhury, be elected President of the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly.
9.	The career of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh is well known to all members of this Assembly; it has been an active one in support of the purposes and principles of the United Nations, consistent with the well-known position of the Government of Bangladesh in support of the Organization. We are all familiar with the very active and dynamic role which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh has played—even before becoming Minister, when he was Foreign Secretary in the Government of Bangladesh—in promoting the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
10.	We consider that the election of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh as President of the General Assembly will ensure that the conduct of the business of this session is in responsible, efficient hands. I believe that such a decisior will do immense credit to the Assembly, not only in the consideration of the agenda item before us but a so in connection with the purposes we have set ourselves in relation to this special session.
11.	1 therefore have the great pleasure and honour of proposing to the Assembly that Mr. Choudhury, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, be elected President by acclamation.
12.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has heard the proposal of the representative of Guyana that the President of the forty-first session be elected by acclamation as President of the General Assembly at its fourteenth special session. May I take it that the proposal is adopted by the Assembly?
It was so decided (decision S-14/12).
Statement by the President
13.	The PRESIDENT: I am deeply honoured to be called upon to preside over the spec al session of the General Assembly on the question of Namibia, convened in accordance with General Assembly resolution 40/97 F. It will be recalled that the resolution expressed grave concern that 20 years after the termination of the Mandate of South Africa and the assumption of direct responsibili :y by the United Nations for Namibia the racist regime of South Africa continues illegally to occupy the Territory.
14.	In recent months the situation in and around Namibia has further deteriorated. Namibia has been subjected to increasing militarization and exploitation by the oppressive forces of the occupation régime. The Namibian people continues to suffer brutal repression under the reign of terror which South Africa has let loose. Thousands continue to flee the Territory to escape the colonial yoke. Namibia’s natural resources are being plundered by South Africa and other foreign economic interests, to the detriment of the interests of the Namibian people. During the past year the racist régime has continued
unashamedly to use the Territory as a springboard for acts of aggression and subversion against the neighbouring African States.
15.	The heroic struggle waged against the racist régime by the Namibian people under the leadership of the South West Africa People’s Organization [ SWAPO], their sole and authentic representative, in its quest for independence, has achieved significant successes in spite of the tremendous odds. We are with them in their just cause and take this opportunity to reiterate our full support.
16.	South Africa’s continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, in utter disregard of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, its plunder of the natural and human resources of the Territory and its flagrant and massive violations of human rights constitute a challenge to the international community, and specifically to the United Nations, which bears unique responsibility for Namibia.
17.	The main obstacle standing in the way of the realization of the Namibian people’s right to self-determination and of the granting of independence to that Territory is South Africa’s refusal to fulfil its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and to co-operate in implementing the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, in particular Council resolution 435 (1978).
18.	South Africa’s attitude towards the United Nations in respect of Namibia’s liberation has been characterized at every turn by contempt, duplicity, bad faith and intransigence. This is clearly established in the history of the negotiations between the two sides for implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). More recently, the proclamation of a so-called interim government in Namibia has served to demonstrate further that South Africa is determined completely to subvert and bypass the United Nations and to institute its own process of change in the Territory of Namibia, a process calculated to ensure its continuing domination of the Territory.
19.	We have a direct and abiding concern about what the attitude of South Africa implies for the authority and prestige of the United Nations and the United Nations Council for Namibia, which is the legal Administering Authority for the Territory. But our concern is wider and deeper because Security Council resolution 435 (1978) represents a framework internationally accepted for Namibia’s peaceful transition to independence. We had hoped that all the participants concerned would take the opportunity, as did SWAPO and the front-line States, to address the problem. We still hope that sanity will prevail and the Pretoria régime will accept the resolution in letter and in spirit. If the opportunity afforded by the resolution is allowed to pass, the alternative could be further bloodshed and instability in southern Africa, which would seriously affect global peace and security.
20.	Eight years after the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 435 (1978), which was accepted by all sides, the situation in Namibia remains critical. New and totally extraneous and unrelated factors and
issues have been introduced to becloud the central question of the right to self-determination and independence of the Namibian people. Meanwhile, the agony and travail of this unfortunate people continues.
21.	The situation has reached a point which the international community can no longer tolerate. I appeal to all concerned to co-operate in a constructive manner to bring an end to this intolerable situation. The International Conference on Namibia which was held at Vienna and the summit meetings of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries have clearly demonstrated once again that the international community is united in the matter. It is our moral and political responsibility to consider a decisive course of action to enable the people of Namibia to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination. I look forward to constructive contributions from everyone here towards achieving this objective.
22.	The Secretary-General of the United Nations wishes to address the General Assembly at this time. I now call on him.
Statement by the Secretary-General
23.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL: This special session is being held at a time when southern Africa and Namibia are at the centre of international attention. The continued stalemate over Namibia not only threatens the peace and stability of the southern Africa region, it also raises fundamental questions about the norms of international behaviour and the rule of law. The central issue in Namibia has always been clear and unambiguous—namely, securing the right to self-determination and independence for the people of Namibia. This right has been denied them for far too long in an age when the self-determination of peoples has become a universally accepted principle.
24.	For many years now there has been unanimity on how this right can be secured for the Namibian people. The United Nations plan for Namibia, embodied in Security Council resolution 435 (1978), has long been accepted on all sides. But there has been an inordinate delay in its implementation. As this delay has been caused by the raising of issues which are extraneous and irrelevant to the question of Namibia, it has evoked growing international concern.
25.	The International Conference on Namibia held this year at Vienna issued a clear call for the immediate and unconditional implementation of the United Nations plan, and urged that efforts be redoubled to that end. Earlier this month the States members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, meeting at the highest level at Harare, called for urgent and comprehensive international action to resolve this pressing problem. The convening of this special session on Namibia is another expression of the broad commitment of the United Nations to support the demand of the Namibian people for freedom and independence. It also reflects a mounting sense of urgency about working out a just and peaceful settlement of the question.
26.	The people of Namibia are suffering under colonial rule at a time when colonialism has become an anachronism. Twenty years after the General Assembly took the historic decision to assume direct responsibility for the Territory they still remain under foreign subjugation. Eight years have passed without the universally accepted Security Council resolution being implemented. The disappointment and deep feelings of frustration of the Namibian people are, therefore, only natural.
27.	It is incumbent upon the international community to make a real and determined effort to end the agony of the Namibian people by setting in motion the speedy implementation of the United Nations plan, without any pre-conditions. That has been the object of my endeavours ever since 1 assumed my present responsibilities.
28.	As a result of consultations, all outstanding issues pertaining to the implementation of the United Nations plan were resolved in November 1985, when agreement was reached on the electoral system. I therefore urged South Africa at that time to establish the earliest possible date for a cease-fire and the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). South Africa’s response was to propose that 1 August 1986 be set as the date for commencement of implementation of the plan, on condition that a firm and satisfactory agreement be reached before that date on the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola. South Africa insisted on that condition, despite the fact that I had repeatedly made it clear that that linkage had been rejected by the Security Council as incompatible with its resolution 435 (1978).
29.	Subsequently, last June, after consultations with the Governments of Zambia and Angola and with other Governments that are in a position to help, as well as with SWAPO, I informed the South African Government that the United Nations was ready to begin the implementation of its plan on 1 August 1986. In that connection I emphasized that all outstanding issues relative to the United Nations plan had already been resolved. I mentioned that the Government of Angola had categorically rejected linkage, and that its position was supported by the front-line States and SWAPO. I also reconfirmed SWAPO’s readiness to proceed to a cease-fire with South Africa in order to commence the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) on 1 August 1986. However, in its letter of 28 July 19862 South Africa, unfortunately, insisted once again on the linkage pre-condition. In the circumstances, it has not been possible to proceed to the implementation of the United Nations plan.
30.	I am deeply concerned that the continued obstruction of the process leading towards independence will not only prolong the suffering of the Namibian people but also aggravate the turmoil and instability in the region as a whole. The South African Government must realize that its policies of apartheid and destabilization and the course it has so far pursued with regard to Namibia will have tragic consequences not only for the Namibian people but for all those who live in that region. There must be immediate and tangible progress towards the goal of justice and human dignity for all if peace and
stability are to be restored to southern Africa. An early settlement of the Namibian question would have a salutary effect in that regaid. I therefore think it is high time the Government of South Africa complied with the will of the international community and made a serious effort to resolve this longstanding problem through the early and unconditional implementation of the Unitec Nations plan.
31.	The deliberations and decisions of this special session can help mobilize international efforts towards the realization of that goal. For my part, 1 assure the Assembly that Namibia remains a priority concern for me, and I shall spare no effort in the search for a just and final settlement that will enable the people of Namibia to take their rightful place in this Assembly as a free and sovereign nation.

32.	The PRESIDENT: On the basis of the practice of previous special sessions, I propose that the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly and the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the forty-first regular session serve in the same capacity at the fourteenth special session. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that proposal?
It was so decided (decisions S-14/13 and 14).
33.	The PRESIDENT: The General Committee for the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly has now been fully constituted. We turn now to the adoption of the agenda. In order to expedite our work, the Assembly may wish to adopt the provisional agenda [A/S-14/1] in plenary meeting without referring it to the General Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.
34.	The PRESIDENT: May I take it that the General Assembly adopts the agenda as it appears in document A/S-14/1?
It was so decided (see decision S-14/22).
35.	The PRESIDENT: We come now to agenda item 6, entitled “Question of Namibia”. It is my understanding that there is general agreement that the item should be considered directly in plenary meeting. May I take it, therefore, that the Assembly decides to consider the question of Namibia directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided (see decision 3-14/22).
AGENDA ITEM 6
Question of Namibia
36.	The PRESIDENT: I propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed tomorrow at 12 noon.
It was so decided.
31.	The PRESIDENT: The first speaker in the debate is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Congo, Mr. Antoine Ndinga-Oba, who will speak on behalf of the OAU.
38.	Mr. NDINGA-OBA (Congo) (interpretation from French): Once again, Africa is occupying a place of honour in this Hall, and it does so only a few months after the memorable thirteenth special session, on the critical economic situation in our continent. It is therefore with deep emotion and gratitude that I am the first speaker today at the beginning of the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly, on the question of the independence of Namibia. It is an honour to Africa and to my own country, and I am extremely grateful, Mr. President.
39.	A few weeks ago, during the commemoration of Namibia Day on 26 August, the international community once again expressed its solidarity with the heroic Namibian people in their just struggle against the continuing illegal colonial occupation of their territory by South Africa. On that solemn occasion, Colonel Denis Sassou-Nguesso, President of the People’s Republic of the Congo and current Chairman of the OAU, on whose behalf I am speaking here today, paid a well-deserved tribute to the international community for its mass mobilization and for the pressures it had brought to bear against the racist régime in South Africa. He also praised the tireless efforts being exerted by the United Nations, and particularly by the United Nations Council for Namibia, to accelerate the process of the accession of Namibia to independence.
40.	I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to offer my delegation’s sincere congratulations and to express the gratitude of the peoples of Africa to the President and members of the Council for Namibia, as well as to the various States, organizations and individuals whose devotion to the just cause of the Namibian people represents an inestimable tribute to the sacrifice that has already been made by many generations of Namibians and by the front-line countries that are bearing the brunt of the struggle forced upon the Namibian people by the neo-Nazi Pretoria régime. All of Africa reiterates its solidarity and sympathy with, as well as its unswerving support for, those countries and their courageous peoples that are victims of the apartheid régime’s deliberate and continuous attacks.
41.	My thanks also go to the Secretary-General for the outstanding work he has done on behalf of Africa under extremely difficult conditions.
42.	The current Chairman of the OAU has instructed me to express sincere thanks to the international community, and in particular to the Members of the Organization, for their solidarity and for all the attention devoted to Africa in recent years through the organization of numerous international meetings relating to its problems. He expresses the hope that the fourteenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to the question of the independence of Namibia, will result in decisions designed to give immediate and lasting effect to Security Council resolution 435 (1978). Indeed, such is the hope of the
entire African continent and of the Namibian people, who await the outcome of our deliberations.
43.	Before turning to the question before us, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your unanimous election to the presidency of this session. Your statesmanlike qualities and the wisdom and effectiveness you have impressed upon the diplomatic policies of your country, Bangladesh, are a sure guarantee of the success of our meetings. I should also like to take this opportunity to convey sincere greetings to Mr. Jaime de Piniés, of Spain, for the praiseworthy way in which he guided the work of the fortieth session at a particularly delicate moment in the history of the Organization.
44.	The illegal occupation of Namibia has already led the Organization to organize seminars, to adopt resolutions and recommendations and to advocate the application of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria régime, all of which should have spared us the need to meet again today to discuss the question of Namibia, with all the concomitant waste of time, energy and material and financial resources, at a moment when we most need them to resolve other, no less important problems in the life of the international community.
45.	The question of Namibia is one of the major problems of our time. It occupies an important place in the Organization’s debates. How many meetings, days, months and years have we not devoted to this problem since the founding of the United Nations? And yet, the question of Namibia is still with us, and its solution is still pending. Repression—which grows more savage and deadly with each day—is still being brought to bear against the peaceable people of Namibia, who ask only to live in peace.
46.	The problem of Namibia’s independence has become a matter of great concern to us as peoples opposed to any kind of domination and exploitation. A retrospective look at the problem’s genesis and development reveals that in 1915, 71 years ago, the pattern of the Namibian people’s suffering was fixed with the conquest of their territory, previously under German influence, by the South African expansionists. In 1920 the League of Nations placed Namibia under the Mandate of the Union of South Africa and its total annexation took place in 1949. This marked the beginning of the major challenge to the international community by the Pretoria régime. It was at that juncture that the international community, through the United Nations, undertook a series of steps designed to lead to the complete restoration of the rights of the heroic Namibian people. Thus, since the first session of the General Assembly, in 1946, the question of Namibia has been a permanent item on the agenda of every subsequent regular session. It has also been the subject of an impressive number of Security Council resolutions and of several advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice, all designed to resolve the problem.
47.	Today, we may legitimately question the results of all the efforts exerted by the international community and its institutions. The truth is that there is a considerable gap between the good intentions expressed by statesmen and orators at international conferences and the situation on the spot. Indeed, it
is embarrassing for the United Nations that, 20 years after the General Assembly put an end to South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory of Namibia and eight years after the adoption of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), the question of Namibia is still being discussed in its original context, because of the intransigence of South Africa, which has made apartheid and its continued colonial and illegal occupation of Namibia the conditions of its survival. There was a time when we thought we had reached the end of our struggle. That was in the period following the Security Council’s adoption of resolution 435 (1978). At that time, there seemed to be justification for some hope. South Africa felt its back to the wall. It quickly organized elections and set up a puppet government in Windhoek—actions which we vigorously condemned and which were, indeed, revoked by South Africa itself in 1983. We should emphasize that all this took place within the context of a process that had been set in motion by Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
48.	Lastly, in a bizarre reversal of the situation, we saw with horror the crumbling of the edifice we had constructed with such perseverance and self-denial. Now we are practically back to square one, since everything must now be done again. South Africa, which, following the Versailles Conference in 1919, was given the Mandate to administer Namibia, has never fulfilled or even been prepared to fulfil its obligation, to promote the moral and material wellbeing of that Territory’s inhabitants. The intransigence and bad faith of Pretoria have subsequently been confirmed. It is clear that Pretoria, with the complicity and support of certain permanent members of the Security Council, has made every effort to perpetuate the colonial status of Namibia.
49.	Events that have occurred in Namibia and in South Africa itself in the 20 years following the General Assembly’s decision to put an end to the Mandate of the Union of South Africa [resolution 2145 (XXI)] and the eight years since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978) by the Security Council demonstrate beyond doubt that the racist minority in South Africa views with utter scorn the resolutions and decisions taken by these two important organs of the United Nations.
50.	The strengthening of its military presence in Namibia, estimated at more than 10,000 men, the introduction of compulsory military service for Namibians, the establishment of a so-called security zone in Namibia, the forced recruitment and training of Namibians for the purpose of forming tribal armies and the use of mercenaries to strengthen the illegal occupation of the Territory all reveal a strategy that has been further corroborated by attacks against neighbouring independent countries and the use of Namibian territory to launch acts of aggression. This strategy has been strengthened by being combined with the establishment of a so-called internal administration whose purpose is to guarantee the sordid interests of the racist régime of Pretoria.
51.	In sum, we are facing an alarming situation in South Africa and Namibia, characterized by violence and the massacre of thousands of innocent people, and by considerable material destruction. In this context, the state of emergency in South Africa itself
is merely a further demonstration of the obvious impotence of the Pretoria régime aid of its refusal to respect the decisions of the internal ional community. All these manoeuvres, deliberately undertaken, no longer allow any doubt as to South Africa’s intentions.
52.	Faced with this situation, the Namibian people are fighting a number of different battles, including the battle against the indifference shown by certain foreign economic interests whose only concern is the exploitation of the resources of that country, and who are consequently impeding the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Indeed, selfish considerations have frequently caused the real question, which is decolonization and the inalienable right of the Namibian people to freedom ard self-determination, to take second place. There car be no doubt that any attempt to present this situation as part of an East-West confrontation or to link it to other extraneous considerations is totally at odd, with the wishes of the international community and can only further delay Namibia’s accession to independence.
53.	The Security Council has determined that in Namibia, an international Territory that is the direct responsibility of the United Nations, there are only two parties to the dispute: on the one hand, the Namibian people under the leadership of its sole authentic representative, SWAPO, and on the other hand, the illegal South African occupying régime.
54.	The racist minority régime of South Africa persists in its policy of apartheid, occupation and colonial exploitation of Namibia because of the stance taken by certain Western and other countries, including even some permanent members of the Security Council. Indeed, it is because of their support that the vile Pretoria régime is able to continue its illegal and brutal colonial occupation of Namibia in defiance of numerous resolutions of the United Nations, particularly General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974. The inalienable right of the Namibian people to self-determination and to independence with respect to its entire territory, including Walvis Bay, the Penguin Islands and other offshore islands, is unquestionable.
55.	Good intentions, pious hopes or ringing words of condemnation cannot suffice tC' overcome the intransigence of Pretoria, which will only honour the resolutions and decisions of the Unied Nations if it is subjected to effective means of pressure. The only hope of imposing effective measures on this régime is to be found in the unanimous agreement clearly expressed by the whole international immunity that any decision must go hand in hand with some form of comprehensive mandatory sane ions in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in order to oblige that régime to accept a just settlement of the question of Namibia, the only acceptable basis for which at present is Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
56.	Africa, for its part, is determined to pursue its efforts to find the solutions most likely to establish without delay the most favourable co iditions for the eradication of apartheid, the major political challenge
to Africa at the present time, in order to permit the setting up of a democratic, egalitarian and non-racial society in South Africa and to hasten the independence of Namibia in accordance with resolution 435 (1978). Peace and security in southern Africa are at stake.
57.	The time has come for all the Members of the Organization to participate in solving the problem of Namibia and bringing about the effective liberation of its people and the abolition of apartheid. Those who refuse to act with determination against South Africa become accomplices of the land of apartheid in its policy of aggression and repression and its utter disregard of fundamental human rights. If we act together, the immediate independence of Namibia will be within our grasp. Consequently we must all adopt a resolute attitude and take practical steps to apply with firmness the resolutions adopted by the Organization. Member States should refrain from giving South Africa any assistance likely to encourage its policies of State terrorism and its systematic acts of aggression and destabilization of the front-line countries, in particular Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique.
58.	The Security Council should adopt and impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa. The permanent members of the Security Council who have hitherto prevented this body from taking effective action should reconsider their position in the light of the increasingly explosive situation in Namibia and of the intransigence of the Pretoria régime, which is an obstacle to the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
59.	The OAU considers that the fight against apartheid—that is, against an intolerable system— must entail the effective application of sanctions against South Africa in all areas. In this spirit, we played our part in the organization and the smooth functioning of the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa, and the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare at the beginning of this month. The various recent meetings and conferences held in different parts of the world have shown that the international community fully supports the legitimate struggle waged by the black peoples of South Africa and Namibia against apartheid and colonial occupation. The World Conference held in Paris in June confirmed the determination of most of the world to spare no effort to achieve the desired aim. The same is true of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia, held at Vienna in July.
60.	The course of history is irreversible, and the just cause of the African peoples and patriotic forces of Namibia and South Africa will triumph. South Africa is the only country in the world where racism is written into the constitution and where skin colour determines an individual’s place in society; it has categorically opposed the modern values of freedom, democracy and peace that are so dear to the States Members of the Organization. Consequently, South Africa, that indescribable monster of our time, which bears no resemblance to any other modern State, unless it is Israel or Nazi Germany, which repeatedly shows its true colours through raids, aggressions,
massacres and hangings, thus turning the clock back several centuries to the age of the barbarians, must necessarily be a matter of concern to the rest of the free world, which is not yet ready to forget the dire memories left by the fascist régimes. Any other behaviour would be a sign of overt complicity with the apartheid régime.
61.	A danger to the people of South Africa, to neighbouring States, to Africa as a whole, the Pretoria régime is also a real and serious threat to international peace and security. Apartheid remains a major crime against humanity. It is this danger which keeps us all in a state of extreme nervousness, worsened every day by the many facilities granted to Pretoria in the form of sophisticated weaponry. We should not lose sight of the fact that the independence of Namibia has now become a matter of urgency and, quite naturally, has to obey a historic imperative, that very imperative which, a few years ago, dragged along certain European Powers in the wake of the independence of their former colonies.
62.	It is also this which prompts us to say that the behaviour of South Africa is anachronistic from every point of view. Thus it deserves the disapproval and hostility of the international community as a whole. The Namibian people not only continues to suffer terribly from the humiliation inherent in every colonial situation and from all forms of abuse, but, furthermore, and above all, it is bound hand and foot and forced to witness the systematic and savage depredation of the wealth of its soil and subsoil. In the meantime, the international community continues to hold endless ineffective discussions. Its resolutions and declarations succeed each other without any real outcome.
63.	Hence, we can only be scandalized by the fact that while, on the one hand, not one of the States represented here has come out categorically against the accession of Namibia to independence, on the other, the situation remains unchanged. Only the approaches seem to differ: unconditional independence is advocated by some, while independence subject to certain conditions is favoured by others. Thus the process continues to be blocked. If we are in the least interested in these conditions, particularly that relating to the Cuban troops in Angola, we have to face up to the reality that the problem is getting worse. Thus, what hope can we place in the conclusions of the most recent conference in Vienna, and what can we expect from the present session?
64.	There cannot be the shadow of a doubt that, in this context, the independence of Namibia remains a subject of grave concern. Hence, it appears necessary for us to give further thought to the underlying reasons for the failure of our actions, in order to make them more effective. In this connection, the political will of the various parties concerned with the question of Namibia, those who to a certain extent influence the policies of South Africa, is in our view an important, if not paramount, aspect of any settlement of this question. Evidence of this will can serve as a back-up to the various forms of action already undertaken. It is by not dispersing our energies and destroying our strength that we will reach the objective we all seek. Only concerted action by all the forces striving for the freedom and
emancipation of peoples, with concern for human dignity, can bring about decisive results.
65.	The initiative taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, at its twenty-second ordinary session held at Addis Ababa last July, to set up an ad hoc standing committee of heads of State and Government whose task it would be to follow developments on the question of southern Africa,3 and the decision taken at the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, to set up a Commission of Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers, whose task it would be to get in touch with Western countries in order to help to speed up the process of Namibia’s accession to independence and the abolition of apartheid,4 should be judiciously used and supported by the Organization.
66.	Thus, I cannot conclude my remarks without making a pressing appeal to the entire international community to discharge, in a responsible way, a duty which is incumbent upon it, namely, the liberation of Namibia from a régime which has inspired disapproval, hatred and condemnation; and we would like at the same time to reiterate our support for the peoples struggling in southern Africa in general, and more particularly for SWAPO, the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people.
67.	The OAU, aware of the deteriorating situation of the people of South Africa and of Namibia, and in the light of the dangers which threaten international peace and security in the southern part of our continent, urges the international community to give increasing support to the struggle of the people of South Africa and Namibia in every possible way, to apply comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa, and to grant economic and technical assistance to the front-line States, which suffer from the disastrous effects of the war-like situation in South Africa and Namibia, to the detriment of their peoples and of their economic development.
68.	This is a responsibility which is incumbent upon all of us, particularly the major Powers which are in a position to change the situation in southern Africa in order to bring it into line with the profound aspirations of its peoples. To all peace-loving and justice-loving peoples, and all those who adhere to and believe in the principles enunciated in the Charter of the United Nations, in the name of morality, Africa makes an appeal for a decisive struggle against apartheid and for the restoration of international legality.
69.	On this solemn occasion I should like, on behalf of the current Chairman of the OAU, to assure the United Nations of the unstinted co-operation of Africa, in order that the United Nations Council for Namibia may exercise direct authority over Namibia until it achieves independence and take the urgent steps required to induce the racist régime of South Africa scrupulously to abide by the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations in order to afford the Namibian people the opportunity immediately to exercise its inalienable right to self-determination and independence.
70.	Before concluding, I should like to make a pressing appeal to all countries, particularly the Western countries, to contribute to the success of this special session on Namibia, by scrupulously and immediately applying Security Council resolution 435 (1978). I know that every State has its own friends and its own interests. But I hardly need to recall the permanent interest of the international community, which should lead us all to take into account the universal values which are the aspiration of all peoples on earth and thus to honour the claims of Africa and the majority of the Members of the Organization to take the decision here and now effectively to afford immediate independence to Namibia, and to abolish apartheid forthwith.
71.	May 1986, the International Year of Peace, also be that which marks the advent of true peace in southern Africa, the independence of Namibia and the abolition of the hateful system of apartheid.
72.	The PRESIDENT: 1 now cell on the Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namiba, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana.
73.	Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana), Atting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia: Mr. President, when the Minister for Fcreign Affairs of Guyana, Mr. Rashleigh Jackson, addresses the General Assembly on behalf of the Guyanese delegation, he will convey to you our feelings of appreciation at your assumption of the presidency of the forty-first session of the General Assembly. He will also, of course, extend gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Jaime de Piniés, of Spain.
74.	But, Mr. President, you will understand, I am sure, that 1 could not resist using this opportunity to offer to you my personal congratulations upon your election to the presidency of the forty-first session of the General Assembly. I remember very well that in 1982, when 1 led a mission of consultation to Bangladesh, 1 had the honour to be received by you. I vividly remember the extensive consultations we had concerning the question of Namibia, and it convinced me all the more of your own personal commitment, and that of the Government of Bangladesh, to the question of Namibia’s liberation.
75.	In his current report on the work of the Organization5 the Secretary-General states that the most urgent remaining problem of decolonization is that of Namibia. The United Nations Council for Namibia has requested the convening of this special session of the General Assembly because, as the legal Administering Authority for the Territory of Namibia, its assessment of the situation is identical to that of the Secretary-General; we are arofoundly concerned at the inordinate delay in achieving Namibia’s independence and at the continuation and exacerbation of human suffering which that delay implies. Namibia has for far too long been a nation in waiting. The Council wishes to see resolute action taken by the Assembly and by the international community to exert maximum pressure on the Pretoria régime and on its collaborators to cease their obstruction of progress towards Namibia’s independence.
76.	It was over 100 years ago that the Namibian people began their struggle against foreign occupation. For an organization committed to the realization of the self-determination of peoples, that alone should be a sufficient impulse. But, what is more, the Assembly became directly involved in Namibia’s political evolution when, in response to South Africa’s continued disregard of the Mandate which it had been given over Namibia, it terminated that Mandate and assumed responsibility for the Territory. That was 20 years ago. The end of that 20-year timeframe must certainly move us to take stock of the manner in which we in turn have acquitted ourselves as the new mandatory power, so to speak, of what have been our deficiencies no less than our successes, and to determine what still needs to be done so that the people of Namibia may at last move forward to independence.
77.	Viewing the responsibility for Namibia as a sacred trust, in the words of the Charter of the United Nations, and considering also the evolution which has taken place in respect of Chapter XI of the Charter regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories, the Council feels particular anguish at the delaying of Namibia’s freedom.
78.	It is true that the United Nations has played a valuable catalytic role in advancing the decolonization revolution. The Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples constitutes the freedom charter of peoples under colonial rule. That instrument proclaims that peoples have a right to self-determination and that by virtue of that right they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development. These rights are inalienable and timeless. The General Assembly was proclaiming an international consensus that it was illegal to pursue colonial policies and policies of colonial occupation and that peoples victim of such policies had a right to struggle against them.
79.	When, in 1966, the General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and assumed responsibility for the Territory [resolution 2145 (XXI)], it was asserting the fundamental right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence, the enjoyment of which the Pretoria régime had sought to frustrate through its non-compliance with the terms of the Mandate which had been entrusted to it.
80.	That action by the General Assembly was later sustained by the Security Council, which, by its resolution 264 (1969), declared, in effect, that the General Assembly had acted correctly in terminating South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. The Council also decided that, since the Assembly had revoked South Africa’s Mandate, South Africa’s continuing presence in the Territory was illegal and detrimental to the interests of the people. South Africa was therefore under an obligation to withdraw that presence and administration.
81.	In its advisory opinion of 1971,6 the International Court of Justice, the highest authority on law in the relations between States, also gave its endorsement to the action taken by the General Assembly, stating at the same time that States were under an
obligation to recognize the illegality of South Africa’s continuing presence in the Territory and the invalidity of its acts on behalf of, or concerning, Namibia.
82.	What this proves is that the case against South Africa’s occupation of Namibia and for the accession of the people of that Territory to independence rests on unassailable juridical grounds. It has been stated in unequivocal terms by three of the principal organs of the United Nations, each acting independently: the General Assembly, the Security Council and the International Court of Justice.
83.	The thrust of the Assembly’s action in respect of Namibia since 1966 has therefore been to secure a political evolution on the basis of that juridical position.
84.	In the efforts of the Organization during the intervening years, 1978 is an important point of reference. After several years of stonewalling by South Africa, five Western members of the Security Council presented a set of proposals to that Council designed to engage South Africa in a process of negotiation for its withdrawal from Namibia and for the Territory to accede to independence after the holding of free and fair elections. These ideas were embodied in resolution 435 (1978), which was adopted by the Council on 29 September 1978.
85.	It is a matter of public record that the United Nations Council for Namibia, like SWAPO, was doubtful about South Africa’s intention to negotiate in good faith. We nevertheless gave our blessing and support to the initiative, insisting, however, on our expectation that the five Western members of the Security Council would exert all necessary pressure to force South Africa to co-operate in the implementation of the resolution and that, should South Africa not co-operate, they would feel a moral obligation not to stand in the way of punitive action by the Security Council against the South African régime.
86.	There is no evidence that any pressure was exerted on South Africa by those States to ensure its co-operation; quite the contrary.
87.	In April 1981 the Security Council met to consider the situation created by South Africa’s continuing intransigence in respect of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). The Council was asked to adopt a draft resolution which would have imposed selective sanctions on South Africa for its attitude of defiance and non-co-operation in respect of that resolution, an attitude which had been displayed with brutal clarity in the Geneva talks earlier that year. That draft resolution was vetoed by three Western permanent members of the Council. They vetoed a draft resolution which sought to direct a penalty against South Africa for disregarding their own settlement plan.
88.	It was our frustration at South Africa’s persistent efforts at subverting negotiations towards the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and at Western permissiveness regarding that intransigence that led to the convening of the emergency special session of the Assembly in 1981. On that occasion the Assembly demanded the immediate commencement of the unconditional implementa-
tion of resolution 435 (1978). It also called upon all States to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa and urged them to cease forthwith all dealings in South Africa in order completely to isolate it [resolution ES-8/2].
89.	Thanks to the remarkable endurance and diplomatic skill of the Secretary-General, all outstanding issues pertaining to implementation of the United Nations plan have at last been resolved. Yet efforts to bring about the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) remain foundered on the rock of South African intransigence on an issue that was first raised by the United States—that of the prior withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, or the concept of linkage. This is the pretext now being used by South Africa for maintaining the status quo in Namibia. Both the General Assembly and the Security Council have resolutely rejected linkage, affirming that the independence of Namibia cannot be held hostage to the resolution of issues alien to resolution 435 (1978).
90.	In the light of South Africa’s demonstrated unwillingness to co-operate in the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), the debate about sanctions has grown in intensity over the years. Most members of the international community have come to the conclusion that sanctions such as have been advocated at various times against Iran, Nicaragua, Poland, Argentina and Libya are the only sure means of compelling South Africa’s co-operation in the implementation of that resolution of the Security Council.
91.	The General Assembly, at the request of the United Nations Council for Namibia, has consistently called on the Security Council to impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa. My colleagues are aware that two permanent members of the Council have been preventing that body from responding to this call. As recently as November last year, those two States used their vetoes to protect South Africa from the justified wrath of the international community expressed at that time merely in the form of a request for selective sanctions. Once again, the draft resolution that was vetoed sought to punish South Africa for not co-operating in implementing resolution 435 (1978), in whose authorship those same two States participated.
92.	Meanwhile, pending the implementation of mandatory sanctions, the Assembly has urged all States to cease all political, military, economic or other co-operation which they may be extending to the Pretoria régime. Progress in this regard has been slow but steady. Many States which continue to maintain relations with South Africa have demonstrated their willingness to exert increased pressure through legislative and executive action, including, in one case, a total trade boycott of South Africa. The Council for Namibia expresses its sincere appreciation for these efforts.
93.	However, while at the popular level there is a categorical rejection on both sides of the Atlantic of the apartheid policies of the Pretoria régime, whether in South Africa or in Namibia, and while there is enthusiastic support for sanctions at that level, South Africa’s principal trading partners still engage in the
contradiction of condemning apartheid while continuing to do business with the régime that practises it, thereby buttressing and giving comfort to that régime. They say Namibia must be free, yet they give all support to the occupying rég me and look on benignly as Pretoria seeks to consolidate its hold over the Territory.
94.	Botha’s efforts in this direction are unmistakably clear. In June 1985 he installed what was referred to as a “Transitional Government of National Unity”, which differs little from the puppet governments in South Africa’s “independent homelands”. This creation is an ad hoc alliance of conflicting political groupings whose only common factor is their opposition to SWAPO. Their high rhetoric notwithstanding, after one year in office they have made no move to abolish Proclamation AG8, the South African edict which forms the basis for the segregation of the Territory’s ethnic groupings. The funding of Namibia’s health, educttion and agriculture projects, even of its drought relief, is therefore based not on the needs of the people, but on the colour of their skin.
95.	The so-called Minister of National Health, Welfare and Manpower, Moses Kt tjiuongua, spoke the truth when he said in Namibia: 'apartheid, tribal and racial discrimination and inequality of opportunity are not dead in this country”.
96.	In a territory where whites already own most of the fertile areas while blacks live in urban and rural slums, the Minister of Agriculture, Water Affairs and Sea Fisheries is an Afrikaner nationalist, Eben Van Zijl. So we know already how much redistribution of land will take place under that “Transitional Government”.
97.	Recently, in rejecting protests about a hospital to be built by the white administretion in Swakop-mund, Minister Van Zijl said that patients needed to have the “right milieu”; that, we know well, is a code meaning white hospitals for white people. Or, as President Kaunda of Zambia so picturesquely said at Lusaka on 23 August last, one hospital for the treatment of victims of white malaria, who are bitten by white mosquitoes, and anothei for victims of black malaria, who are, of course, bitten by black mosquitoes. One hospital for white pneumonia and another for the treatment of black pneumonia.
98.	The natural resources of the Territory, which are the birthright of the Namibian people and the basis for building a prosperous and productive society, continue to be plundered ty foreign enterprises which repatriate nearly all their profits. And those who dare to resist the racist domination of their country are subjected to harassment, persecution, arrest, detention without trial, and tc>rture. These are only a few examples of the inhumanity and the injustice which are the daily lot o? the Namibian peopk under South African occupât on and control. It is this inhumanity and this injustice, among other things, which the United Nations committed itself to ending when it terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia.
99.	As a practical means of exercising its direct responsibility for the Territory, the Assembly created
the United Nations Council for Namibia to take over administration of the Territory and prepare it for independence. The South African authorities have physically prevented the Council from entering the Territory, but have not been able to impede political action in support of the struggle of the Namibian people.
100.	Thanks to our extensive information dissemination programme, people in North America and Western Europe, in particular, have been made more aware of the struggle being waged for liberation in Namibia, the effects of South Africa’s continuing illegal occupation of the Territory and the manner in which those Governments which still co-operate with the Pretoria régime contribute to the prolongation of that occupation. This is an important achievement because we are convinced that when people become aware of the facts of an issue in all its ugly dimensions, such as South Africa’s oppression of the Namibian people, they are equipped to exert pressure for change in the relevant policies of their Governments.
101.	Our information programme also supplements the work of concerned non-governmental organizations and support groups which are making an invaluable contribution to the campaign in support of Namibia’s liberation.
102.	In addition to mobilizing international pressure for South Africa’s withdrawal from Namibia, the Council has financed and organized, through the United Nations Fund for Namibia, a large number of agricultural, health and educational projects for Namibian refugees, which are carried out in close cooperation with SWAPO. The United Nations Institute for Namibia, established at Lusaka, continues to grow and expand, training skilled manpower and conducting research pertaining to the policy-making and administrative needs of an independent Namibia. The importance of these activities cannot be overemphasized. The assistance programmes directly serve the needs of thousands of Namibians who have fled political repression in their country and are struggling to cope with the material and psychological hardships of exile and statelessness. In addition, these programmes equip the future leaders and administrators of Namibia with the skills which they will need to build an equitable and productive society after independence.
103.	But all these efforts are essentially in support of those being exerted by the people of Namibia themselves under the leadership of SWAPO. In 1960, against the background of the emergence of African States to independence and of their entry into the United Nations, SWAPO was formed as the liberation movement of the Territory. The formation of SWAPO manifested the political maturity of the people of Namibia. It sharpened the focus of their struggle and gave testimony to their determination to break out of South Africa’s stranglehold and to live as free, independent people.
104.	SWAPO quickly sought to assert itself as the independence movement of the Territory. In 1966, after unsuccessful efforts to persuade the Pretoria régime to co-operate in bringing about change by peaceful methods, SWAPO saw itself forced to
launch the armed phase of the struggle, and that year, indeed, marked a turning point in the history of Namibia. The first military engagement between SWAPO and the occupation forces took place in northern Namibia. Along with the armed offensive, which, considering the might of the enemy, has been prosecuted with telling effect, SWAPO also launched an offensive in the political sphere to gain the widest possible international recognition and support for the struggle of the Namibian people.
105.	After the formation of the Council for Namibia as legal Administering Authority for the Territory, SWAPO identified intimately with the Council’s work on behalf of the Namibian people. In 1973, it was recognized by the General Assembly as the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people [resolution 31 JI (XXVIII)], so that as far as the international Organization is concerned, SWAPO is the interpreter of the sentiment and wishes of the Namibian people. SWAPO has indicated its acceptance of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and has indicated on more than one occasion its preparedness to submit itself to all the provisions of the settlement plan contained in that resolution, including free and fair elections.
106.	SWAPO now enjoys the status of Permanent Observer at the United Nations, which is but a small step from statehood. It is also an observer in some specialized agencies of the United Nations system, such as WHO and FAO, which status enables it to represent directly the interests of the people of Namibia. SWAPO is also a full member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In brief, SWAPO is more than a liberation movement. The organization is associated with Namibian statehood, and the conduct of SWAPO in general and, in particular, in negotiations with South Africa, most notably at Geneva in 1981 and at Cape Verde in 1984, gave added confirmation, if any were needed, of SWAPO’s capacity and readiness for the responsibilities of statehood.
107.	In Cuanza Sul, Angola, SWAPO administers a settlement which provides shelter, food, education and vocational training to some 45,000 Namibian refugees. In Nyango, Zambia, 5,000 to 6,000 Namibians have developed a similar community which strives for self-sufficiency. Both Cuanza Sul and Nyango are equipped with schools, nurseries, daycare centres, clinics and hospitals. Both locations boast agricultural and livestock projects providing a variety of foods for consumption by the two communities. While some clothing is donated, Namibians also engage in weaving their own fabric and sewing clothes for the community. Namibian culture finds expression in frequent music and dance presentations. The history of Namibia is taught to all and the political circumstances of the present period of struggle and the goal of national independence are analysed and discussed as well.
108.	In summary, SWAPO is administering settlements for Namibian refugees where the sense of community and of collective responsibility are highly developed, and which are examples of discipline, hard work, pride and civic responsibility. These are all demonstrations, as I suggested earlier, of SWAPO’s capacity and readiness to assume responsi-
bility for managing the affairs of the Namibian people. These activities deserve the enthusiastic support of the General Assembly and I appeal to Member States to give them all possible support.
109.	Even as I appeal for intensified support for the liberation struggle being led by SWAPO, that struggle continues. After more than 100 years, without military help from outside, and pitted against the most formidable fighting force of any State on the African continent, the Namibian people patiently continue their struggle to free themselves—driven on by the justice of their cause and by their determination to live in freedom.
110.	Despite the threat of attack by the police, large numbers of people gathered in Windhoek last year to protest the installation of an illegal “interim government” by South Africa and to commemorate the nineteenth anniversary of the launching of the armed struggle by SWAPO. Just last month, 13,000 SWAPO supporters attended a rally at which speakers called for the resignation of the “interim government” and immediate implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). These actions, together with the military successes being scored by SWAPO, are evidence of the irresistible momentum of the drive for national liberation in Namibia.
111.	That motivation, that determination, cannot but triumph in the end, though we all know that that triumph will be a costly one in terms of human life and human suffering—a price which the Namibian people do not shrink from paying anyway.
112.	There is an undisputed global consensus that implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) is the peaceful, non-violent alternative to that cost, not only for the people of Namibia, but also for the front-line States which continue to suffer constant acts of aggression as the price of their support for the liberation of Namibia. In fact, implementation of this resolution and the freedom of Namibia are among the foremost international concerns today, as was demonstrated most recently, among other cases, in the final documents of the meeting of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare earlier this month.4 In a word, the Namibian question has pitted virtually the entire international community against South Africa in a battle whose stakes are rising daily.
113.	In his current report on the work of the Organization,5 the Secretary-General has stated that the particular problem of Namibia is ripe for solution now. The convening of this special session is a concrete sign that the General Assembly is determined to follow through on its commitment to bring Namibia to independence.
114.	In the name of the struggling and suffering people of Namibia, in the name of peace and security in southern Africa and beyond, I solemnly urge that at this special session the General Assembly live up to its responsibility in respect of Namibia. Let us all remobilize our political forces for resolute and decisive action in support of the liberation of Namibia. Let us, at this special session, resolve to exert maximum pressure for the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) by a specified date.
Failing such implementation, let us resolve that our States will take the necessary action for the complete isolation of South Africa with a view to compelling its co-operation.
115.	The PRESIDENT: Next I call on the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementatior of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Mr. Oscar Oramas Oliva of Cuba.
116.	Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Ciba), Acting Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of .he Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (interpretation from Spanish): It is patently clear that no other question in the annals of the United Nations has ever received such concerted, intense and close attention by the international community as that of the illegal situation that exists in Namibia. That fact alone not only demonstrates the will and determination of the nations which agree on the need to bring about an urgent end to the crisis but also reflects the extent of the intransigence and obduracy of the racist minority régime of South Africa in its desperate attempt to cling to its last bastion of colonial and racial domination.
117.	Indeed, it is profoundly disquieting that the efforts of the international community to bring about genuine independence in Namib.a continue to be obstructed by the defiant attitude of the minority racist régime of South Africa. Twenty years after the General Assembly’s historic decision to declare Namibia an international Territory under its jurisdiction, and despite the express opinion of the International Court of Justice confirming that decision, South Africa persists in its refusal to withdraw from the Territory.
118.	The continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa constitutes a blatant violation of international law, the denial of self-determination to the Namibian people, the continued encroachment upon and defiance of the authority of the United Nations and a veritable threat to international peace and security, particularly in southern Africa. All those elements have made this question a perennial item on the agenda of the Organisation for over 40 years now. Furthermore, the minority régime of Pretoria continues to resort to force and political stratagems in order to prolong its illegal occupation of the Territory and to deny the oppressed people of Namibia their most basic rights and fundamental freedoms.
119.	The constant delaying tactics of the Pretoria régime amply confirm what we already know: that South Africa will not willingly permit the fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people to attain true independence and liberation. With calculated cunning, the Pretoria régime has exploited the efforts of the international community, in order to bring about a sham independence in Namibia under a puppet régime designed to perpetuate its colonial rule there. We have all been witness to South Africa’s dilatory manoeuvres and tire deceitful manner in which, while delaying the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), it has presented us with a succession of faits accomplis.
including the latest attempts to circumvent the United Nations plan by promoting an “internal settlement” brought about through the so-called interim Government in Namibia.
120.	Our meeting here today clearly reflects the deep frustration and concern shared by the overwhelming majority of the members of the international community at the continued failure of the Security Council—the custodian of peace and security—to fulfil its responsibilities with regard to the critical situation obtaining today in southern Africa. Faced with the repeated refusals by South Africa to comply with its decisions, the Council finds itself incapable of taking any effective action under Chapter VII of the Charter because of the repeated use of the veto by certain Western permanent members of the Council. As recently as June this year, when the Council met to condemn the heinous acts of armed aggression committed by racist South Africa against Angola, Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, the otherwise unanimous call for sanctions went flagrantly unheeded.
121.	As we meet here today, we must ask ourselves seriously how much longer we must wait until we witness the peaceful transition envisaged in Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). The answer is clear and categorical: we must demand the immediate and unconditional implementation of those resolutions and as a corollary, we must call for the imposition against South Africa of comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. Any attempt to undermine the international consensus embodied in resolution 435 (1978), in particular any attempt to introduce extraneous issues such as a linkage between the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, must be categorically rejected, for that consensus represents the only acceptable basis for a peaceful transition of Namibia to independence and must be implemented without modification, qualification or pre-condition.
122.	The developments which have taken place since the adoption of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) are ample proof that South Africa will never willingly accord the Namibian people their right to genuine freedom and independence. South Africa’s record throughout eight years of negotiations has been one of duplicity and evasion. Throughout that period the illegal South African régime has made not the slightest pretence of moderating its apartheid policies or its exploitation of Namibia’s resources. Instead of creating an atmosphere which would be conducive to the holding of free elections in accordance with resolution 435 (1978), South Africa has created an atmosphere of tension and confrontation and has increased its militarization of the Territory, using it as a springboard for repeated dastardly and criminal armed attacks against neighbouring States and as a rearguard base for mercenaries operating in Angola.
123.	The increasing violence in and around Namibia and South Africa and the inability of the Security Council to take affirmative action in that regard constitute the background against which we must view the present crisis in the Territory. Namibia is a Territory under the direct responsibility of the
United Nations, for the administration of which the Assembly created a particular intergovernmental body. The only course of action is for the Assembly to take appropriate measures in keeping with the grave responsibility entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations. Only in so doing can the Assembly signify to South Africa that the United Nations will no longer ignore this serious threat to international peace and security in the region and that it will not continue to remain inactive in the face of so much cruelty and injustice and of such a crime against humanity. It is essential that the international community adopt the necessary measures, not only to enforce the effective implementation of the existing arms embargo against South Africa but also to bring about the total isolation of the régime through the imposition of a comprehensive boycott of all dealings with that country, whether of a political, military, economic or cultural nature.
124.	Such decisions taken by the Assembly at the special session will be a positive demonstration that the United Nations is resolved to fulfil its obligations towards the people of Namibia, as well as its responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of the Organization.
125.	I cannot stress too strongly the concomitant responsibility of the international community today, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to extend the maximum possible assistance to those African States which, at great sacrifice to their own economies and in all other areas, spearheaded the initiation of measures towards the complete isolation of the Pretoria régime. It is indeed incumbent upon the United Nations and its system of organizations now to take all appropriate actions to facilitate and accelerate the flow of such assistance to those Governments and peoples concerned, which are suffering because of their solidarity with Namibia.
126.	Before concluding, I wish, on behalf of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to commend the leadership of SWAPO, the sole and legitimate representative of the Namibian people, for the spirit of accommodation, the patience and the statesmanship they have demonstrated during their long struggle and their negotiations on the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). In the same context, I wish to pay a special tribute to the leaders of the front-line States for the crucial role they have played throughout in support of the cause of the people of Namibia.
127.	1 should also like, on behalf of the Special Committee, to acknowledge with appreciation the important work carried out by the United Nations Council for Namibia, under the leadership of its Acting President, Mr. Noel Sinclair, of Guyana, in the discharge of the mandate entrusted to it. The role of the Council as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence cannot be overemphasized. At the present stage of the struggle of the Namibian people, it is essential that the Council be given the utmost co-operation by all the Member States so that it may be able to continue to discharge its responsibilities with even greater effectiveness.
128.	If today we assume our responsibilities towards the people of Namibia firmly and resolutely, this will, we are certain, spare thousands of human lives and untold suffering for millions of human beings in southern Africa, who, like all of us, have the right to life.
129.	Mr. President, I am confident that, benefitting from your acknowledged leadership and guidance and your skill, wisdom and diplomacy, the work of the General Assembly at this special session will make a further positive contribution towards ending the current situation in Namibia.
130.	The PRESIDENT: I call on the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid.
131.	Mr. CHARLES (Haiti), Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid (interpretation from French): Mr. President, first of all, I wish to extend to you, on behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid and on my own behalf, our hearty congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at this special session on Namibia, at this critical stage of the Namibian people’s struggle for freedom and independence. Your country, Bangladesh, has worked ceaselessly within the United Nations and in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to promote the cause of peace and freedom. I am therefore confident that under your leadership the General Assembly at this session will mobilize further international support for the struggle of the peoples of southern Africa and give new impetus to the efforts of the United Nations for equality and justice throughout the world.
132.	Twenty years have elapsed since the United Nations assumed direct responsibility for the Territory of Namibia, and 15 years have elapsed since the International Court of Justice, in a historic decision, declared that South Africa’s occupation of Namibia was illegal. Eight years have elapsed since the Security Council adopted resolution 435 (1978), in which it unanimously approved the basic elements of a procedure for the attainment of independence by Namibia.
133.	These elements had been worked out by the so-called Western contact group in discussions and negotiations which dragged on for many years and they had the consent and agreement of the South African Government. The heart of the settlement was that Namibia would attain independence by exercising its right to self-determination through free and democratic elections to be organized by and held under the supervision of the United Nations.
134.	However, today implementation of resolution 435 (1978) is more remote than ever. The reports of the Secretary-General in this regard clearly reveal the stratagems and manoeuvres to which Pretoria has resorted in order to delay implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. In a report to the Security Council last year, the Secretary-General said:
“implementation of the resolution continues to elude us for reasons that the Security Council itself has described as irrelevant and extraneous”.7
135.	Meanwhile, the racist régime has proceeded to set up in Namibia a so-called transitional government made up of its puppets. It is clear that, having successfully obstructed the Namibian independence plan for years, the apartheid régime is now set on sabotaging it altogether, thus showing that it is resolved to pay no heed to the provisions of resolution 435 (1978).
136.	At the same time, the pundering of the Territory's natural resources continues apace. Strategic materials and valuable minerals, which represent an important share of South African trade with its major trading partners, particularly uranium and diamonds, are to a great extent mined in Namibia, in defiance of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for Nam bia.8
137.	In South Africa, as in Namibia, the racist régime has continued with impun ty to defy world public opinion and the internationtl community and to violate relevant principles and commitments undertaken. That is so because it has riot been forced to act otherwise. It must be noted tha its refusal to cooperate in the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia has in no way deprived it of the collaboration of Powers that were so actively involved in drawing it up. Furthermore, one of them has even gone so far as i o declare itself to be on South Africa’s side regarding the Cuban presence in Angola and has provided support and assistance to the South African agent, Jonas Savimbi. The Security Council has frequently stated that the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola, which South Africa continues to seek to impose as a prior condition for the implementation of the independence plan, is extraneous and irrelevant.
1	38. Should we not recall that the Cuban troops are in Angola at the invitation of that country’s legitimate Government to help it defend itself against the acts of aggression of the Pretoria régime? The Government of Angola, an independent and sovereign State Member of the United Nations, is entirely within its rights in taking all legitiriate measures to defend the country’s independence and territory. In this context we vigorously deplore the assistance overtly and covertly provided to the UNITA9 forces. That initiative, which is, to say the least, unfortunate, is contrary to international law and only increases the stubbornness of Pretoria on the question of Namibia and that of apartheid in South Af'ica.
139.	That is why at this special session, as at previous ones, the General Assembly must categorically reject linkage between Namibian independence and the presence of Cuban troops in Angola. It should also pledge itself to giving increased support to the peoples of Namibia and South Africa and their liberation movements, as well as io the front-line SUes that have been suffering continued aggression, destabilization and sabotage by the epartheid régime.
140.	I wish, on behalf of the Special Committee, fully to endorse the Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia and the Programme of Action on Namibia, adopted by the International Conference.10 Like the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South
Africa, held in Paris from 16 to 20 June 1986, the International Conference called for the immediate application of comprehensive, mandatory sanctions against South Africa pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Pending a decision to that effect by the Security Council, we urge all Governments that have not yet done so to take steps to impose comprehensive sanctions against the racist régime of South Africa. We also call upon all States to ensure that, in accordance with Decree No. 1 of the United Nations Council for Namibia, transnational corporations under their jurisdiction refrain from any participation in the exploitation of the natural resources of Namibia.
141.	This is the opportunity for me to pay a very well-deserved tribute to the United Nations Council for Namibia and its efforts to strengthen the actions of the international community aimed at the total independence of Namibia. In this connection, I wish to assure it of the full support of the Special Committee against Apartheid.
142.	The PRESIDENT: In accordance with General Assembly resolution 31/152, I now call on the Observer of SWAPO.
143.	Mr. GUR1RAB (South West Africa People’s Organization): At the outset I should like to join those who have preceded me in extending warmest congratulations and best wishes to you, Mr. President, upon your brilliant election to preside over this session and the forty-first regular session of the General Assembly. We are confident that your well-known qualities of statesmanship and diplomatic acumen will enable you to bring the work of the Assembly to a successful conclusion.
144.	In the same vein, we express our debt of gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Jaime de Piniés for the outstanding service he rendered to the Organization and to the cause of liberation, peace and human progress during his presidency of the fortieth session of the Assembly.
145.	We are delighted to see the Secretary-General back at the helm of the Organization and wish him renewed vitality and good health for many years to come.
146.	The General Assembly is meeting pursuant to its decision taken last year to hold a special session on the question of Namibia [resolution 40/97 F], We are not unmindful of the difficulties which at times seriously threatened the holding of this special session. That those difficulties have been overcome in good time and that the debate has actually commenced should give all those who have worked hard and long cause for satisfaction. For our part, we thank them and urge them all to keep it up, for many more hurdles await us along the way to the liberation of Namibia.
147.	The decision taken last year was necessary and appropriate in view of the fact that 1986 marks the twentieth anniversary of the termination by the General Assembly of Pretoria’s Mandate over our country. Following that historic action, which was lauded all over the world as an extraordinary act of statesmanship and a decisive manifestation of the
will of the international community to bring the racist Pretoria régime to book, the United Nations itself assumed direct responsibility for our people and our country.
148.	In Namibia, in the exile centres and in various other places in the world where we found ourselves engaging in essential activities in preparation for the patriotic struggle and for future responsibilities in an independent Namibia, we too hailed with jubilation that historic action taken by the United Nations on 27 October 1966 [resolution 2145 (XXI)].
149.	In July 1966, the International Court of Justice fell prey to sinister manipulations by Pretoria’s friends and became in the eyes of the Namibian people and of many others in the world an international court of injustice. The Court was compromised by handing down an outrageous ruling on legal technicalities instead of passing a binding judgement on the basis of the voluminous evidence about Pretoria’s crimes in Namibia presented to it over a period of six years by the two applicants, namely Ethiopia and Liberia, former Members of the League of Nations, acting on behalf of the Namibian people. We saw the outcome for what it was: a naked travesty of justice.
150.	The leadership of SWAPO dutifully reported back to the Namibian masses on what had happened at The Hague. We also reminded our people of the dire consequences that would flow from the Court’s indecision, particularly in terms of the great sacrifices which they would be called upon to make with the inevitable qualitative transformation of the struggle, which up to that point was still essentially political and diplomatic in character.
151.	The United Nations had its own responsibility to fulfil, and it possessed the Charter as its weapon in defending and promoting the legitimate right of selfdetermination of the Namibian people. In pursuit of that noble objective, the General Assembly had adopted resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, for which we are most grateful to the Soviet Union, which originated the idea. In the light of the postponement of a binding ruling by the International Court of Justice, the General Assembly had to exert its own political will, backed up by the court of world public opinion, in order to do what had been left undone by the judges, who had opted for political expediency rather than for the rule of law.
152.	There was indignation and moral outrage, and the intensity of the emotions expressed by many representatives in meeting rooms, corridors and lounges here in the United Nations had strong reverberations throughout the world. The final decision was taken on 27 October 1966: the termination of the Mandate. On 19 May 1967, the General Assembly established the United Nations Council for South West Africa [resolution 2248 (S-V)], with full legislative and executive powers, to be assisted by a United Nations Commissioner for South West Africa, and entrusted it with the responsibility of administering our country until the achievement of independence. After SWAPO decided on the name “Namibia" for the Territory, the United Nations adopted
that name in 1968 and the Council was renamed the United Nations Council for Namibia [resolution 2372 (XXI3)].
153.	The United Nations Council for Namibia has been doing commendable work in promoting the interests of the Namibian people. The statement by the Acting President of the Council, Mr. Noel Sinclair, was exemplary and forthright in demanding the immediate independence of Namibia.
154.	The Security Council joined the Assembly in 1969 by endorsing the Assembly’s decision that South Africa’s presence in Namibia was illegal.
155.	A few months prior to the termination of the Mandate, the Namibian people themselves had taken a historic step forward in the war of national liberation. For one thing, we refused then, as we continue to do today, to be intimidated by the machinations and manoeuvres of the imperialists and their racist clients in Pretoria. How could we, who have for so long been the victims of the most brutal and inhuman colonial legacy of genocide, concentration camps, forced labour, ruthless exploitation and unmitigated impoverishment by the marauding disciples and mercenaries of slave traders and by dubious “civilizing” and christianizing missions whose activities have left in their wake death, destruction and darkness, ever hope to get justice at the hands of those whose hands are dripping the blood of our people?
1	56. Therefore, in facing up to the challenge posed by the chicanery of the judges on 18 July 1966 at The Hague, we decided to hasten the day of the launching of the armed struggle in Namibia. On 26 August 1966, the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia, SWAPO's military wing, fired the first shots against the enemy occupation forces and installations, which effectively closed one chapter—that of giving undue importance to legal remedies in a revolutionary struggle.
157.	1986 therefore also marks the twentieth anniversary of the launching of the armed struggle by the Namibian people, under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative. The combatants of the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia have been heroic and have sacrificed much. They consecrated with their blood 20 years ago the battlefield at Ongulumbashe, in north-western Namibia, and by that courageous act of revolt signalled the beginning of a new era. Their exploits and daring in the face of many and difficult odds have inspired us all and will continue to inspire future generations of Namibia to be faithful patriots and loyal defenders of our national heritage of resistance, which was bequeathed to us by our forefathers who started the tradition of anti-colonial struggle by bravely opposing the German colonial intrusion and brutal subjugation.
158.	It is worth repeating that 20 years ago the United Nations took a bold decision by assuming direct responsibility for Namibia. I have given a brief account of how we ourselves responded to the challenge of the hour in 1966 by taking up arms against the racist usurpers of our motherland. We saw the decision of the General Assembly which
declared Pretoria's presence in Namibia to be illegal as an act of rededication on the part of the international community to deal prompt y and decisively with the fascists in Pretoria and tfiereby help bring about the early independence of Namibia.
159.	Well, here we are. 20 yerrs later, having another debate on the question of Namibia. 1 should say that, altogether, it is 40 years later—that is, since 1946.
160.	Speaking for the oppressed but heroically resisting Namibian people, I am happy to be able to participate in the debate which has just started. But, regrettably, Namibia is still not free. The agony and injustice of colonial occupation continues unabated. The brutality of the massive military build-up and State terrorism of the Botha régime has transformed our country into a huge military barrack of the occupation army, where new types of weapons and other lethal instruments of human destruction are being deployed and experimented v/ith. The continued illegality of the racist régime and its endless political manoeuvrings in favour cf puppet groups and institutions have already sowed seeds of enmity, distrust and civil strife in the country. The politics of eternal postponement of Namibia’s independence and the introduction of the notorious linkage precondition, for which we hold in particular the Reagan Administration responsible, continue to hold our independence to ransom and cause untold suffering to our people, whose only demand is freedom.
161.	On the one hand, the plunder of Namibia’s natural resources by the major Western Powers and their transnational corporations con inues to denude the country of its natural resources, while, on the other hand, the Namibian people are being impoverished in an extremely scandalous and debilitating manner, without regard to their present and future interests. Moreover, condemnable and discredited cold-war tactics have been introduced as well by Pretoria’s friends in an attempt to distort, for selfish and dangerous reasons, our patriotic struggle for liberation and to make it an aspect of the East-West conflict in order to justify aggressior which will lead to interference in the region and obstruction of Namibia’s independence.
162.	That is precisely what we see happening in southern Africa today. The linkage pre-condition has now effectively blocked all efforts far our freedom. The widely condemned policy of constructive engagement—which these days is called by its proper name: the policy of destructive engagement—has led to major setbacks for some of the front-line States and emboldened the Pretoria régime in its criminal activities of committing aggression against and destabilizing the front-line and other neighbouring States. The provision of financial and military assistance to the armed terrorist and reactionary bandits of UNITA9 is a case in point of interference and destabilization in the region.
163.	Lastly, for many years now we have witnessed a vicious and sustained campaign often taking the form of United Nations bashing anc, in the case of Namibia, virtual hijacking of the question of Namibia through active and calculated undermining of the United Nations responsibility for oar country.
164.	Those are some of the major impediments now confronting the United Nations, the international community as a whole and, indeed, the people of Namibia. The special session on Namibia, which is being held two decades after the assumption by the United Nations of direct responsibility for Namibia, is called upon to devise effective ways and means of removing these impediments. Politically, legally and morally, it is the right thing to do—now.
165.	The high-level participation in and the impressive results of the recent major international and intergovernmental conferences on southern Africa, held in Western Europe, the United States of America and Africa, have further strengthened the campaign to isolate the racist Pretoria régime and moved further, to a higher plane, the demand for the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the apartheid régime, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
166.	By its resolution 40/97 C of 13 December 1985, the General Assembly called for the holding of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia. That Conference was held at Vienna from 7 to 11 July 1986.
167.	In addition to the crucial task of mobilizing and strengthening further support and assistance for our struggle, led by the people’s movement, SWAPO, the Conference was also charged with the task of identifying obstacles to our freedom, proposing concrete steps that might be taken to remove them and, in particular, formulating a co-ordinated international programme of action aimed at securing the immediate independence of Namibia, on the basis of the United Nations plan for the independence of our country.
168.	Furthermore, the Conference, being a brainchild of the General Assembly, was also expected to recommend for the Assembly’s consideration new and effective initiatives to implement resolution 2145 (XXI), by which the Assembly terminated Pretoria’s Mandate over Namibia.
169.	The results of the serious work of that successful Conference are now before the Assembly, as contained in the Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia and the Programme of Action on Namibia. A companion document is the Appeal for the Immediate Independence of Namibia, issued on 9 July 1986 by the eminent persons participating in the Conference.10 The eminent persons concerned invited the General Assembly during this special session to consider and adopt effective action to secure the immediate independence of Namibia. Naturally, we endorse that call.
170.	In welcoming the success and timely pronouncements of the Conference held at Vienna, I wish, on behalf of the SWAPO Central Committee and the entire struggling Namibian people, to thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations for opening the Conference; Mr. Peter Jankowitsch, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria, for delivering an inspiring keynote address at the opening of the Conference and also for the warm welcome and generous hospitality extended to the SWAPO delega-
tion by the Government and people of Austria; Comrade Benjamin Mkapa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania, who served with competence, wisdom and eloquence as President of the Conference; Mr. Paul Lusaka, President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and the entire Council and its secretariat for the efficient and thorough preparatory work before the Conference and the invaluable services rendered during it; Mr. Rifai, Secretary-General of the Conference, for assuring its smooth running and success; and, indeed, the eminent persons for adding to our deliberations their enormous prestige, collectively and individually, and issuing an important appeal which has received world-wide acclaim. Needless to say, we also thank the participants, particularly those who have remained steadfast throughout the years in support of, and in solidarity with, our struggle, and who renewed their commitment by word and action in Vienna.
171.	In the OAU and the Movement of NonAligned Countries we have trusted allies and supporters. The recent declarations, resolutions and appeals adopted at the twenty-second ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held at Addis Ababa, and the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Harare, respectively underline not only their joint actions in unity but also reinforce each other in demanding intensification of the global campaign for the imposition of comprehensive, mandatory sanctions against the Botha régime. Both organizations also renewed their commitment and urged their members to provide increased and sustained all-round material assistance to the national liberation movements and the frontline States in order to enable them effectively to resist the endless destructive menace emanating from racist South Africa. To that end, both organizations have decided to establish a number of new solidarity funds to aid the victims of apartheid in the whole of southern Africa.
172.	The final documents of the two summit meetings will be before the United Nations as official documents." We attach great importance to them, and urge the Assembly to give them urgent consideration.
173.	Obviously, we are delighted that those dynamic organizations, which have been making outstanding contributions to our struggle, are now led by two of Africa’s pre-eminent freedom fighters—Mr. Robert Mugabe, Prime Minister of Zimbabwe and current Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and Mr. Denis Sassou-Nguesso, President of the People’s Republic of the Congo and current Chairman of the OAU, whose statement was delivered so eloquently by his Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning. We support their efforts to give practical effect to the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the organizations over which they preside. Foreign ministers designated by the two organizations and other foreign ministers are present or are on the way to participate in the session, as an act of political solidarity with the Namibian cause.
174.	This important meeting has the advantage of following in the wake of all the major conferences
that I referred to earlier. We consider it necessary and fitting to stress that this must be the last special session of the General Assembly on the question of Namibia. Twenty years of Pretoria’s delaying tactics are far too much for our people to have endured. Enough is enough. We do not believe that the United Nations is hamstrung for ever and unable to exert its political will on Pretoria; we know it is within our collective power to prevail over the racists and force them to relinquish their grip on Namibia. Now is the time for decisive action by the General Assembly and by the United Nations as a whole to fulfil the sacred trust of assisting the Namibian people in liberating our motherland and thereby helping to speed the day when independent Namibia may at last take its rightful place among the States Members of the United Nations.
175.	When we took up arms 20 years ago to fight, sacrifice and kill for our liberty and in defence of the motherland, we knew that the struggle would be long and bitter, but we were inspired by the great sacrifices of those who had stood up before us in devotion to the same principles and who had taught us by saying, “Let us die fighting”.
176.	On 26 August 1966, when the idea of military action against the racist war machine was said to be unthinkable, the combatants of the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia dared to meet the racist armed forces on the battlefield. Twenty years later SWAPO has successfully pinned down a huge colonial occupation army of over 100,000 troops and forced the Botha régime to expend more and more of its ill-gotten treasure in search of an elusive military solution in Namibia. SWAPO, as a vital political, military and diplomatic manifestation in the context of the Namibian reality, is a force to be reckoned with.
177.	The enemy knows this, and we continue to demonstrate our prowess in the struggle through daily action. The enemy’s manoeuvres are manifold; many have been its brutal activities designed to deny SWAPO the hearts and minds of the Namibian masses. But ours is a people’s movement. It embodies and expresses the aspirations of our people for liberation and national independence. SWAPO leads the masses of our people at home and abroad. In spite of Pretoria’s continuing attempts to keep the heroic resistance of the Namibian people largely hidden from the world media, SWAPO continues to be the central factor in the Namibian political equation. Without SWAPO’s leading role, the colonial conflict in our country cannot be solved. That is why, in rejecting the puppet entities being created in Namibia by the racist régime, including the latest one installed at Windhoek on 17 June 1985, we reiterate here once again that the only parties to the conflict in Namibia are, on the one hand, the Namibian people, represented by SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative, and on the other, the racist régime of South Africa, which illegally occupies Namibia.
178.	We say to the gallant freedom fighters of the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia, in the words uttered about another illustrious freedom fighter and ex-slave of this hemisphere’s past,
“The midnight sky and the silent stars have been the witnesses of your devotion to freedom and of your heroism.”
As for our movement, the vanguard of the Namibian revolution, we remain convinced that when the history of a free and independent Namibia is one day written, SWAPO will go down as having stood firm where others wavered, having sacrificed for the sacred cause of liberation where others compromised.
179.	At the present time we are implementing the directive of the Central Committee of SWAPO, which declared 1986 the Year of General Mobilization and Decisive Action for Final Victory. Our people in all zones of combat are enthusiastically responding to this clarion call of S WAPO’s leadership in order to hasten our liberal ion.
180.	The front-line States and their peoples have for many years now been the targets of acts of aggression, State terrorism, destabilization, subversion and sabotage by the racist Pretoria régime, which, thanks to the infamous policy of constructive engagement and the linkage pre-condition, has become even more violent and reckless in its acts of banditry in southern Africa. Durirg the month of May this year alone, the racist régime militarily attacked four front-line States—Angola, Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe—and killed innocent men, women and children and destroyed valuable property. In addition, as noted by the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group, Pretoria :s a very skilled practitioner of the effective use of sanctions against its neighbours. In a very convincing study prepared for the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, two reputable researchers, Phyllis Johnson and David Martin of the Southern African Research and Documentation Centre, located at Harare, provided ample evidence and arguments to show that Pretoria was already imposing economic sanctions against its neighbours. So much for those who claim that sanctions will not work and who are trying to caution us against insisting on our demand for the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanciions against the racist Pretoria régime.
181.	In that connection, we strongly condemn all the vicious and criminal actions take a by that régime against the front-line States. A case in point is the recent punitive trade restrictions aga nst Zambia and Zimbabwe in reprisal both for their principled support of the liberation struggles in South Africa and Namibia and, in particular, for the stand they took at the Commonwealth mini-summit ir London.
182.	Time and again it has been said that apartheid is the root cause of all the problem; in our region. During the more than 10 years since its independence, Angola has known no peace. What the great people of that embattled country have known at the hands of the racist army and its terrorist puppets as a daily occurrence is an ever-growing catalogue of killings, destruction, misery and occupation of parts of their beautiful and resource-rich country.
183.	The poverty of the spoken word hampers me in fully expressing to our comrades in-arms of the
MPLA Workers Party,12 the revolutionary Government of Angola and the ever-resilient Angolan masses the depth of our gratitude and the appreciation we owe them for all the supreme sacrifices they are making in support of our cause and for the complete trust and confidence they continue to repose in the leadership of SWAPO.
184.	We invite the enemies of Africa, our detractors and the apologists of apartheid, all who somehow always manage to exhibit a nasty proclivity for labelling victims of their criminal acts the perpetrators of all misdeeds, to listen to the words uttered at Harare by Comrade José Eduardo dos Santos, President of the MPLA Workers Party and of the People’s Republic of Angola, in dismissing the spurious arguments advanced to obstruct Namibia’s independence and justify the destabilization of Angola. He said:
“Namibia was illegally occupied by South Africa when Angola was still a Portuguese colony. Namibia today is a colony of South Africa, the only colony that remains in Africa, and this colonial issue cannot be confused with any other. It should be solved on the basis of the appropriate resolutions of the United Nations, especially resolution 435 (1978). On the other hand, South Africa’s war of aggression against our people started in August 1975, when Angola was still in the period of transition to national independence. At that time there were no existing Cuban forces in our territory. We know that it is not because of the presence of Cuban forces that Angola is attacked.
“With less intensity, other countries of the region where there is no existence of Cuban forces also have been attacked, since one of the objectives of the destabilization and aggression policy of South Africa is to overthrow the legitimate Governments of the front-line countries, especially Angola, to enable the rising to power of its puppets and to perpetuate apartheid and the illegal occupation of Namibia.
“We are sure that even if all the Cuban forces left Angola, the armed attacks against the Angolan people would not cease. Besides, if such a step was made, it would be a big and irreparable mistake. We understand that the tense situation prevailing in our zone is very complex and delicate and that the necessary trust does not exist for the serious, honest and constructive discussion of the problems with the Pretoria régime.”
185.	SWAPO wholeheartedly supports Angola’s position. We once again call upon all peace-loving and progressive segments of mankind to render all forms of practical assistance to Angola and other front-line States in order to enable them to strengthen their defence capabilities and to concentrate on development without interference and destabilization by Pretoria and by its friends and puppets. The Security Council has long rejected the linkage pre-condition.
186.	Before concluding, I should like to reassure our comrades-in-arms of the national liberation movements fighting for the right to self-determination and national independence in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and Asia and all those who are
demanding social justice and democracy in the world that our failure on this occasion to reiterate explicitly our steadfast solidarity with them was merely due to the fact that we wanted to limit our statement to the specific item on the agenda of the special session. We remain confident, however, that their struggles, like our own, will be victorious.
187.	In conclusion, I should like to return to the crucial question of the indispensable role of the Secretary-General in the decolonization process in Namibia. 1 do so in order to say that I completely agree with the conclusion reached by the Secretary-General in his report on the work of the Organization,5 which so succinctly adumbrated the current sad state of affairs of the question of Namibia’s freedom and independence. The Secretary-General’s conclusion in our view provides a basis for prompt and decisive action by the special session. The essence of the relevant section of the report is encapsulated in its two final sentences, which read as follows:
“The particular problem of Namibia, however, is ripe for solution now. Delay can only increase instability and violence in the region and unnecessarily prolong the suffering of Namibia’s inhabitants.”
188.	The whole matter has been put before the Assembly to be acted upon, now. The children of Namibia, in their letters addressed to the President of the United States, Mr. Reagan, say “Let my country go”. After 20 years and, indeed, eight years after the adoption of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, I ask the Assembly to help them realize their yearning for freedom. Let the resolution that will be adopted at the end of this debate enshrine their wishes by paving the way for the immediate independence of Namibia.
189.	The struggle continues.
190.	The PRESIDENT: At this point, 1 should like to inform members that I have received a request from the Chairman of the Group of African States that a representative of the African National Congress of South Africa be permitted to address the Assembly at its fourteenth special session. May 1 take it that the Assembly agrees to this request?
It was so decided.
Organization of work
191.	The PRESIDENT: Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to draw the attention of representatives to the long list of speakers that we have for the remainder of this session. In fact, 90 delegations are inscribed to speak during the rest of the week, and the list is not yet closed. In the .interest of the effective functioning of the session, and in order to respect the wishes of all delegations to present their views on the question of Namibia—a question to which we attach great importance—I should like to urge all representatives to do their utmost to shorten their statements. It is my sincere hope that representatives will heed my appeal and cooperate fully with me in this regard.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
Notes
'See Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1985. document S/17658.
Obid., Forty-first Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1986. document S/18241.
3See A/41/654, annex H, decision AMG/Dec. 1 (XXII).
4See A/41/697, annex.
^Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session. Supplement No. 1.
6Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion. I.C.J. Reports 1971. p. 16.
’See Official Records of the Security Council. Fortieth Year. Supplement for April, May and June 1985. document S/17242, para. 48.
^Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session. Supplement No. 24, vol. I, annex II.
’Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola.
l0See Report of the International Conference for the Immediate Independence oj' Namibia. Vienna. 7-11 July 1986 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.1.16 and addendum).
"See A/41/654 and A/41/697.
12Movimento Popular de Libertacao de Angola—Partido do Trabalho.
UNITED
NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.34
13 October 1987
ENGLISH
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 12 October 1987, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
- Report of the Economic and Social Council: Observance of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless [12]	,
This record contains the original text of speecnes delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
MLG/SY
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 12
REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
OBSERVANCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): It is a great honour for me today to open this special plenary meeting on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, which we are observing in accordance with resolution 41/190 of the United Nations General Assembly.
Food and housing are two basic elements essential to life. Yet, in many developing countries these vitally important elements are not provided in sufficient cru a n.t i t le s, with the result that the needs of the majority of people, especially the poor, are still not being satisfied. Although mankind has the resources and knowledge to produce sufficient food and housing for everybody, vast numbers of the world's inhabitants remain hungry and without housing.
Despite the efforts of Governments and the international community, the indications are that the housing conditions of many people throughout the world are deteriorating, even as demand expands in the wake of population growth.
EH/edd
The designation of 1987 as the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless was a recognition of the magnitude and severity of the world housing problem and a signal of the intention of the United Nations to tackle this problem at the international level.
As has been confirmed on many occasions by the General Assembly, and most recently in its resolution 41/146, "Realization of the right to adequate housing", the right to adequate housing is a basic human right. Unfortunately, however, an enormous number of people are not in a position to enjoy that right. The International Year of Shelter for the Homeless has made it possible to increase awareness of this problem, demonstrate the well-known reasons for the absence of sufficient housing construction and propose ways and means of overcoming the constraints which prevent us from providing adequate housing.
The housing problem is primarily a social problem. It has to be looked at in close interrelationship with events within the individual countries. Every State must step up its efforts to mobilize all its material and human resources in all areas. Investment in housing construction and infrastructure will also serve the broader objectives of strengthening national economies and creating employment, and, by creating a demand for local materials and capital goods, will help to ensure a solid technological basis for industrial development. Moreover, adequate housing is one of the decisive factors in maintaining appropriate levels of health care and labour productivity in the society. Thus, measures and action taken to build houses and the infrastructure can be seen as one of the elements in the overall activities in this area of human settlements, and this is an integral part of the national efforts with regard to economic and social development.
All of this is to be found in the report of the Secretary-General (A/42/378) , which I now commend to the General Assembly for serious and thorough
(The President) consideration. I would also draw attention to what is being done in several countries, including the German Democratic Republic, by way of housing construction programmes, the aim being to eliminate the housing problem as a social problem over the next few years.
The United Nations has the extremely important task of ensuring favourable international conditions for the solution of the housing problem. In addition to taking practical steps to resolve global economic problems, it is necessary, above all, to ensure international peace and security, since the prevention of a thermo-nuclear world war is the essential prerequisite for the prosperity of civilization and its settlements.
With about 1 billion people who either do not have adequate housing or have no housing at all, the task of ensuring adequate housing for all, the cost of ensuring adequate shelter for all is bound to be enormous. Yet, everyone knows that, however enormous that expenditure may be, it is minuscule compared to global expenditure on armaments. The fact that every year an enormous amount of the world's resources is wasted on armaments is documented in many studies and recently attention has again been drawn to this in the documents and deliberations at the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which was held in this Hall last month.
In 1985 world expenditure on armaments amounted to $US 8 trillion, which is about $US 1.5 million every minute. One can only imagine what would happen regarding this housing problem - and indeed many other economic and social development problems facing mankind today - if even a small fraction of that money could be diverted from the production of weapons to efforts to attain the goals of peace and development.
I believe that the increased attention being paid to the question of redistributing resources is eloquent proof tnat most people understand the extremely close interrelationship of peace, disarmament and development.
In conclusion I would just say that the Commission on Human Settlements has proposed a global strategy to the year 2000 as a follow-up to the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. That is a practical proposal which deserves the most thorough study by all Governments. It could start the world on a course of action that would bring about a significant improvement in the housing situation by the year 2000 and enable us to attain our cherished objective of decent adequate housing for all.
I now call upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The General Assembly has before it my report, which sums up the results of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and sets out the main elements of a new agenda for human settlements to guide action up to the year 2000 and beyond. It was the recognition of the vast and growing nature of the global housing problem and of the need for new strategies to deal with it that prompted the Assembly's designation of 1987 as the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. However, since housing is inextricably related to other elements of human settlements development, the Economic and Social Council suggested that my report be placed in the general context of trends and prospects in this sphere. These are in turn influenced by population and economic trends. My report is therefore somewhat like a global overview.
The International Year of Shelter for the Homeless was envisaged to have a slightly different character from other international years. Action was to focus on innovative national approaches which could potentially be adopted in other countries also, so that knowledge of shelter options could be disseminated to all
Member States for their consideration.

The goal was to highlight programmes which met the basic housing needs of the poor and the disadvantaged in order to make it easier for Governments to bring about immediate, though small, improvements and at the same time set themselves on a course which would result in substantial improvements for all by the year 2000.
It was a fundamental principle of the whole strategy that housing solutions should be linked to national resources and that international assistance should be seen only as a necessary support, not as a substitute for comprehensive national action. My report points out that a sound and workable housing policy must rely on effective utilization, development and mobilization of indigenous resources and skills and on the full involvement of community groups in planning, building, maintaining and improving shelter and infrastructure. It also points out that, to provide shelter on a scale commensurate with need, Governments must, consistent with their social systems, make provision for participation in the production process by formal and informal entrepreneurs, non-governmental organizations, co-operatives and individual households.
In its simplest terms, the recommended line of action envisages a partnership between the public and the non-public sectors, both formal and informal, enlisting governmental action as well as the self-help effort of the people themselves. This concept can be extended to the entire settlement structure. The long-term goal should be to achieve a decentralized operation of the settlements system, making maximum use of local initiatives and resources. A development approach which emphasizes national self-reliance clearly has a lot to commend it from the immediate financial as well as the long-term social viewpoint.
The International Year of Shelter for the Homeless has been a success in generating awareness of the problem of homelessness and inadequate shelter and it has gone some way to strengthen the corresponding commitment to take action towards
the solution of the problem. For this, I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Renasinghe Premadasa, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, for his vision in proposing the International Year. I thank the Commission on Human Settlements and its secretariat, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) for the sound programme that was drawn up for the Year and efficiently implemented. I should like to convey my appreciation to all Member States which have participated in the observance of the Year, undertaken substantive activities within their own countries and given support to the international effort.
I also salute the effort of the hundreds of thousands of men and women, civic and community groups, non-governmental organizations, international organizations and multilateral and bilateral aid agencies that have worked hard at all levels over the past four years to advance the objectives of the Year. These objectives can be achieved only through a concerted action set within the framework of specific national shelter strategies. This, in essence, is what the Commission on Human Settlements has concluded in proposing the adoption of a global strategy for shelter to the year 2000. If we are to solve the problem confronting us, there is no alternative.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed at 12 noon today. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided. It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I therefore request those representatives who wish to participate in the debate to put their names on the list as soon as possible.
I call on the Chairman of the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements and Minister for Territorial and Human Settlements Development of Bulgaria, Comrade Stefan Staynov.
Mr. STAYNOV (Bulgaria):Chairman of the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements (interpretation from French): I should like to express my gratitude at being permitted to participate in my capacity as Chairman of the Commission on Human Settlements in the work of the forty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
One hundred and six countries sent delegations to the tenth anniversary meeting of our Commission and 46 of them were headed by Ministers. These figures -and this was the first time that we had had such high figures - demonstrate the	>
importance attached by Member States of the United Nations to the work of Habitat. Since General Assembly resolution 41/189 opened the session to all Members of the i United Nations whether or not they were members of the Commission, the discussion of the problems which are the object of Habitat activities was much broader and more thorough than ever before.
This was no mere chance, for 10 years have elapsed since Vancouver. The Commission and the Habitat Centre have acquired the experience needed for an in-depth discussion and the adoption of extremely relevant documents. Also, and most important, the problems that brought us together in Vancouver, instead of fading over the years, today are even more acute than ever. There is no doubt in anyone's mind that among these problems the most acute is the problem of the homeless.
I emphasize the acuteness of this problem because the need for housing for every human being is as old as the existence of mankind. To deprive a person of his home is flagrantly to infringe his dignity. It is inconceivable that after
centuries of efforts, as we are about to enter the twenty-first century, when man has penetrated the secret of the atom, has conquered space and is moving towards other planets and other constellations, towards infinity in time, we have to talk about the homeless, people who have no roof over their heads, who are deprived of the warmth of a home. Yet, the existence of the homeless is a cruel fact. The number of such people is constantly increasing. The figures are indeed pitiless and impressive.
The second half of our century has rightly been called a period of revolutionary urbanization. Since 1950 the urban population has doubled in the developed countries and quadrupled in the developing countries. Already in 1980 one in six were living in a city of more than 1 million inhabitants. The statisticians were right to say "living in a city" and not "in a house". Cities, with millions of inhabitants - and not only such cities - also have millions of homeless. Today, over 1 billion individuals have no home and 100 million of them do not even have a roof over their head.
That is why resolution 37/221 proclaiming 1987 the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless is viewed by all as a thoroughly considered initiative and not as a mere gesture. It is regarded as a task worthy of the United Nations that once again demonstrates that this most representative of world forums' continues to tackle the urgent problems involved in creating decent living conditions for the human person. It displays courage and responsibility, for the world community has set itself the task of solving in a historically short period of time - by the year 2000 - a problem mankind has not succeeded in coming to grips with throughout history.	,
The very scope of the problem quite naturally raises the question of whether 1 the task the United Nations has set for itself in proclaiming this year the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless can in fact be successfully carried i out. Of course, a definitive answer to the question will not be available for two or three decades. But on the basis of the analysis carried out at the tenth session of the Commission on Human Settlements, I can today give this question a positive answer. To bolster my assertion, I shall recall the tasks we have set	!
ourselves and put before the General Assembly the assessment of what has already been done and the work scheduled carried out in the next stage.
The goals and objectives of the International Year as defined in 1982 by the General Assembly and specified the following year in resolution 5/14 of the Commission on Human Settlements can be briefly summed up as follows: awareness of ; the scope and of the social and political significance of the problem; the	‘
formulation of national policies and programmes to solve the housing problem with f special attention to measures which, in 1987, are to ensure better housing in those j areas where the poorest and most disadvantaged sectors of the population live; the ;
MLG/SY
(Mr. Staynov, Chairman, Commission on Human Settlements) establishment and development of international co-operation in the field of housing; the elaboration and implementation of strategies and programmes designed to obtain the final goal, namely, providing housing and services to all the homeless by the year 2000.
In order to attain these objectives, several projects and plans have been prepared and measures taken by countries. A prior assessment of results was carried out at the tenth session of the Commission, the final assessment to be provided at the special session to be held in 1988 in New Delhi. Written reports submitted by countries give us an impressive picture of what has been done in the area of programming, planning and legislative initiatives; in mobilizing financial, human and material resources; in taking practical actions and implementing pilot projects - all of which is designed to step up efforts made by the local authorities and the people themselves, enhance the role of the State, draw in organizations in the private sector and promote bilateral and multilateral co-operation.
All of these initiatives proceed from a single common idea; to ensure, through comparative analysis of the results as regards models and experience gained in the area of building housing, the possibility of finding the best approaches suited to the varied and specific conditions of the housing problem in various countries.
A correct analysis of what has already been done would provide the basis for the developing countries to draw up new programmes to improve, by the year 2000, living conditions for the poor and the homeless. In other words, we find ourselves at a stage where concrete action has to be taken to achieve the long-term programmes. It is generally considered that these programmes must be an integral
part of the overall programmes, that is, the socio-economic development plans of the various countries.
Then it is time to take up the next, and last, stage of the programme for the International Year, in other words, practical large-scale action designed to resolve completely the problem of the homeless by the year 2000. My recalling the actions taken at the national level would be incomplete if I did not mention the national co-ordinating centres set up by 139 countries and their role in promoting national initiatives and acting as clearing-houses for international information.
At this point I should like to speak of what has been done at the international level. That the Commission on Human Settlements can report to the General Assembly that some progress has been made in the tasks set out for the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless is largely due to particularly active, consistent and inspired work done by the United Nations Centre on Human Settlements (Habitat) and to the efforts made by its Executive Director, Arcot Ramatchandran. There was also active assistance for all the national efforts; and through technical co-operation 167 pilot projects were executed in 83 countries. There was also applied scientific research on various aspects of the housing problems - which was made available to all interested countries. There were systematic efforts for the training of the cadres needed by the developing countries, and the establishment and development of information services. I should like from this rostrum to express our deeply felt thanks for all these activities.
The support and direct participation of other bodies within the United Nations system is also a significant contribution in respect of what has already been done to carry out the tasks of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and also for the next stages. Indeed, they have not only changed some of their
projects but also created new projects dealing specifically with these problems. This is true of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Health Organization (WHO) , the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) , the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) . This is not an exhaustive list because, in addition, we should mention and indeed thank other bodies within the united Nations system that made contributions, not to mention a Long list of non-governmental organizations.
Experience confirms that the overall solution to the housing problem can be provided only within the context of a global strategy for human settlements. However acute the problem of providing shelter to hundreds of millions of people, the problem of housing cannot and must not be confined simply to providing a roof. It has to be looked at in the broader context of the development of human settlements, and it necessarily Includes, in addition to housing, the workplace, services, recreation space - in other words, creating a human environment where people not only have a roof over their head but also the opportunity of total fulfilment socially.
That means - on the basis of the lasting humanitarian principles adopted at the Vancouver Conference, and taking account of the new conditions - ensuring overall planning and development of human settlements that can satisfy current and future needs of people for housing, employment, health care, education and everything else that makes a person1s life truly human.
All those matters were taken up in the second document discussed and adopted at the tenth session of the Commission: the new agenda for human settlements. That document is tantamount to a programme, and served as the basis for the meidum-term plan for the Commission's work. The new agenda for human settlements and the long-term programme for the International Year complement one another and are mutually enriching with their new functions, constituting the basis for harmonious planning of a framework for life. It was therefore greatly appreciated by all the delegations that took part in the tenth session of the Commission.
It seems to me impossible, if not meaningless, to envisage solving the problems of human settlement development in future without extending international co-operation into all areas relating to problems of the habitat at all levels and involving all organizations entrusted with the problems of human settlements, on the one hand, and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements on the other.
We must therefore emphasize that an essential aspect of the work of Habitat is technical assistance to developing countries. This confirms the correctness of the recommendation adopted by over 100 Governments at the tenth session that we must continue to strengthen and develop the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements so as to carry out successfully and correctly its particularly important tasks, set by the international community.
I trust that the Special Commission of the Economic and Social Council will take duly into account in its in-depth study of the economic and social bodies of the United Nations the views expressed by the Commission on Human Settlements in its resolution 10/20, and that the General Assembly will adopt, in accordance with its rules of procedure, resolution 10/1, adopted by the Commission and submitted to the General Assembly, on the global strategy for housing to the year 2000. As Chairman of the Commission at its tenth session, I formally ask the General Assembly to be kind enough to adopt that resolution.
At the Commission's tenth session delegations unanimously declared that solving the housing problem at the world level required the removal of conditions that create and perpetuate it. In other words, the problems and tasks involved in the future development of human settlements cannot be considered - still less resolved - outside the context of the present state of international relations at both the political and the economic levels. The great majority of delegations at the session clearly emphasized that the decisive pre-condition was undeniably removal of the threat posed by the destructive forces of the human spirit: an end must be put to the arms race. They said that peace was the paramount pre-condition for the creation and protection of the material and spiritual elements of a framework for harmonious life, which is truly indispensable for every individual. Not only will lasting peace enable man to reach the heights of which he dreams, but it will also free enormous financial resources to solve mankind's housing problem, the problem of housing for all human beings, whatever their race, nationality, creed or social status.
That was recently confirmed here in New York at the United Nations Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development. The questions discussed
and the decisions taken by that forum certainly directly involve the work of the Commission and Habitat. Moreover, they are directly related to the implementation of the principles of the Vancouver Declaration.
At the beginning of my statement I asked rhetorically whether the work that the United Nations set itself when it proclaimed 1987 the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless could be done successfully, and I have answered "Yes". To what I have said in support of that answer, I wish to add hope and optimism.
The forty-second session of the Assembly has already rightly been called the session of hope. I subscribe to that, because of my personal credo as an architect-builder, whose profession is in its very nature and essence the antithesis of destruction. That profession lifts mankind up and inspires optimism through its work. I also wish to express my deeply held conviction that mankind will enter the twenty-first century united by the only possible option: lasting peace and the imagination to create, protect and make flourish a framework for harmonious and humane life on Earth.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : I now call on the Prime Minister of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Mr. R. Premadasa, who has expressed the wish to make an address on the item under consideration.
Mr. Premadasa, Prime Minister of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, was escorted to the rostrum.
BCT/mh
---- .PREMADASA (Sri Lanka) (spoke in Sinhalese«, English text furnished by the delegation) .« Today we are convened in a special meeting of the United Nations General Assembly to commemorate the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless - 1987. This is a unique occasion for the world community, it signifies and gives expression to our collective commitment to a better tomorrow. The presence of so many distinguished representatives with expertise and experience in the field of shelter dignifies this occasion. To everyone here I bring the personal felicitations of His Excellency Mr. J. R. Jayewardene, the President of Sri Lanka.
At this moment, when we should be discussing housing development with tranquillity, my heart is saddened; my eyes fill with tears; a cold shudder runs through my body. This is because of the tragic acts of terrorism which have resulted in not only the destruction of thousands of shelters, but also the loss of thousands of lives in Sri Lanka. On this occasion, I should like to make a plea to the Assembly. I should like it to divert its attention to my motherland, Sri Lanka; to Sri Lanka, which is an independent, sovereign and unitary country, a country which has earned its rightful place in the United Nations, in the Non-Aligned Movement, in the Commonwealth of Nations and in the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation.
I urge the Assembly to divert its attention to Sri Lanka, which introduced the concept of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. I want it to open its eyes to the dastardly acts of terrorist violence perpetrated by terrorists who are being assisted and sheltered from outside our shores. I want the Assembly to understand fully the manner in which innocent families, together with their children, have been thrown out of their homes, the manner in which their houses have been set on fire and razed to the ground. In the face of such acts, which are dastardly, barbarous and unjust, can a United Nations assembly of this stature
(Mr. Premadasa, Sri Lanka) turn a blind eye and a deaf ear to what is happening in Sri Lanka? Where else can we make representations against this grave injustice other than at this world assembly?
Terrorism in Sri Lanka is not aimed at finding a solution to an ethnic problem. Terrorism in Sri Lanka is not intended to gain human rights. It is now established beyond any doubt that terrorism in Sri Lanka is aimed at destroying democratic systems, tearing up the country into bits and pieces and murdering innocent people. At least we are relieved by the fact that this truth, this absolute truth, has now been realized by the civilized democratic world. Now everyone has come to recognize who the cunning parents are who fostered, who nurtured, who sheltered and who armed these mischievous and murderous miscreants. Undoubtedly those responsible will be subjected to the condemnation and the ridicule of the entire world community.
PKB/SY
(Mr. Premadasa, Sri Lanka) (continued in English)
Seven years ago, at the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1980, Sri Lanka proposed the concept of a selected year to focus on shelter. We did that because the great industrial and agricultural development visions tended to bypass the nexus of human development - the home. Citizens of developing countries in particular have a long and strong family attachment to the traditional home. Thus, poor housing and substandard dwellings affect the very soul of our societies.
The International Year of Shelter for the Homeless was born out of that concern. However, there was also another fundamental assumption that guided our understanding of the importance of an international year, namely our belief in the value of individual effort. We were conscious of the fact that the personalized involvement of ordinary men and women could solve national problems. This is more so when the masses are motivated, mobilized and disciplined. Our perception of the International Year reached far beyond mere construction programmes. We saw it then as a new moral order transcending ideological, political and social barriers.
Since the adoption of the proposal for the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, remarkable changes have taken place in the context of development. It is now increasingly evident that shelter can become a new organizing principle for development. In the less affluent areas of the world, at least 100 million people are without homes. Hundreds of millions of others live in substandard or obsolete housing. The grand designs of economic strategies scarcely touched this devastating plight of the poor and ill-sheltered. However, in a short span of time housing has become both a catalyst and a stimulus. It has shown promise as a new development effort that will address and redress this condition.
MLG/PLJ
I say this not as an abstraction of theory. I speak from the crucible of experience. In the past decade, we have built well over half a million housing units in Sri Lanka. The One Million Houses Programme, which was launched in 1984, has made steady progress. We hope to complete this one-million target in 1989,
Our motto is minimum intervention by the State and maximum participation of the people. Our end objective is the creation of a house-owning democracy in Sri Lanka. In a display of self-help and self-confidence our people have accepted the challenge, and there has been a release of mass creative energies^ we have thus reduced the direct cost to the State of an average family dwelling to $US 200 in rural areas and JUS 400 in cities. Our efforts are far from perfect and far from complete*, and we have much further to go. However, what successes we have had illustrate the value of embracing the central themes implicit in the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. What we have accomplished is largely due to the imagination and labour of ordinary men and women fired with the vision of ownership through personal dedication.
The spirit of the Year of Shelter must not terminate at the end of 1987. The International Year has given us an opportunity to put aside, at least in the area of human settlements, the diverse divisive issues - divisive issues of ideologies, political systems, economic conflict and the arms race. It has allowed us to demonstrate that the global community of nations can work together, if we can sustain the encouraging momentum of the International Year, we can perhaps prove that this ethic of national and planetary co-operation can be extended into other areas of human concern.
That is why the efforts of the International Year must continue if they are to realize both our more immediate developmental objectives and our large visions. Our visions must be lasting if they are to have purpose. To this end, I have
(Mr. Premadasa, Sri Lanka) submitted five specific proposals to the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements.
First, my proposal for the extension of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless to a global programme targeted to assure shelter for all by the year 2000 has received wide support. My second proposal calls for the creation of an independent international credit institution - a global housing and shelter bank. The third proposal, the initiation of regional research groups on regional settlement approaches, technology sharing, and shelter education, is being actively pursued. My fourth proposal is of immediate relevance to the developing countries. It calls for the commencement of an international pledging system to accelerate settlement building, develop long-range forecasts and strategies, and create a sense of global accountability. My fifth proposal calls for the establishment of a specialized agency or international institution within the United Nations system solely devoted to the promotion of shelter and allied activities.
These five proposals are the building blocks for a new international spatial order - a massive effort for social justice and development, giving priority to housing and living space. Such an effort, co-ordinated and monitored through the United Nations, can provide the vital thrust for development. This will constitute the most sought-after link between the inadequacies of the present and the delivery of satisfaction to the global masses in the future.
A new international spatial order would have a transcending impact on human values and aspirations. It could give new life to that old and central institution called the family, the most primary of all human organizations. It could provide and engender a multitude of other development efforts. Above all, it could bring a vibrancy to life in the poorest regions of our planet and hope to those who live
In the name of all those who look for a better life, in the name of all those who seek development and not dependency, I call on this Assembly to endorse the concept of a new international spatial order and to undertake appropriate institutional planning that will make this vision a reality. That would be a monument to the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and a beacon for the future.
Those of us who are committed to providing shelter must remember that our efforts do not take place in isolation from the overall context of world events. In many ways housing is a barometer of global security, so our concerns must also embrace those issues which determine the destiny of mankind. The security or insecurity of nations is not lodged in the plenitude or paucity of armaments alone. We must not forget other forms of security: political, economic and cultural.
Two years ago, when I addressed the fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly, I urged the United States of America and the Soviet Union to agree to a reduction of military expenditure by 10 per cent each year for five consecutive years, beginning in 1987. Such restraint could make available over $US 60 billion for creative and life-sustaining investments in development. As long as the arms race persists the dreadful prospect of a war of universal destruction remains a clear possibility.
We are happy to note that the United Nations Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development just concluded has recognized these imperatives. There is a clear causal connection between arms expenditures and the shortfall of capital for development. That is why we should support any accord aimed at diminishing arms expenditure. We must work together to end this most
(Mr. Premadasa> Sri Lanka) unpredictable system where the security of many is held hostage to the ambitions of a few. It is in this spirit that we welcome both the declarations of the United Nations Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development and the preliminary progress made in the area of super-Power arms reduction.
In today's world there is an unfortunate tendency for large countries to seek psychological and physical advantage at the expense of smaller and weaker States. Such large and often predatory nations need to be reminded of the fundamental principles of the United Nations*, that might does not make right*, that relations between nations must be based on the concept that the sovereignty of states is inviolable and that dealings between legitimate Governments must be based on reciprocity and non-interference in internal affairs. Any attempt to abridge these principles is surely not in keeping with the United Nations Charter. Such attempts are out of step with the dictates of public morality bequeathed to us by such great sages as Mahatma Gandhi. We must not lose or pervert this heritage in the quest for strategic advantages or political supremacy.
The quest for political security needs to be accompanied by a search for economic stability and cultural integrity. We are now almost two generations into the post-colonial world, yet patterns established in times of colonialism remain deeply rooted in our physical environment and our external relations. Inbalances of trade, debt burdens and inadequate rates of growth reflect many of the structural patterns of the past. We also need to be sensitive to waves of cultural assault which endanger the traditions and the ways of life of old societies. Paradoxically, the persistence of old patterns in economics and the intrusion of social modernizations combine to destabilize and degrade a large part of our world.
What protection have we from these threats and infringements? I believe that the answer rests in the capacity of each country to accentuate the ethic of
self-reliance. We must involve our people in the mental and physical dynamics of self-development. If the disadvantaged nations of the world can create the necessary grass-roots mobilization and maintain a sense of discipline in nation-building, a large part of these global problems can be resolved. If the affluent nations of the world realize that the good life of plenty cannot be long sustained at the expense of mass deprivation, a new partnership for development can be forged. This is the message of all the great faiths of humanity. It is a call we ignore at our peril.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
We stand at the crossroads of history. We, the peoples of the planet Earth, the only known species of human life in the universe, are heirs to a mixed legacy. Great creativity has elevated a large part of our heritage and nourished it with the ideals of compassion and caring. Great destruction is also within the provenance of human capability. Today, these forces of creativity and destruction contend on a scale unknown in the past. On the outcome will rest the destiny of humankind.
As we reflect on this commemoration of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless - our own contribution to weighing the scales of history on the side of creativity - let us take guidance and inspiration from the teachings of the great spiritual leaders of the ages. Without exception, Lord Buddha, Lord Krishna, Lord Jesus Christ and Prophet Mohammed preached the message of social upliftment. They spoke with one voice on issues of human concern and welfare. Lord Buddha expressed it in the Sutta Nipatas Ek am hi saccam na dutiyam atthi - truth is one; there is no second.
That truth is contained in the high ideals of the International Year. As we work towards its upliftment, let us join hands in the spirit of fraternity that will make this International Year a memorable beginning, the beginning of a long march for a better life in a saner world. As the Charter of the United Nations enjoins us, let us "reaffirm faith ... in the dignity and worth of the human person ... to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". To that commitment, let us dedicate our work and ourselves.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka for his statement.
Mr. Premadasa, Prime Minister of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, was escorted from the rostrum.
Mr. McINNES (Canada): I feel privileged to have the opportunity to speak to the Assembly today about the problem of homelessness and the outlook for dealing with this stubborn and complex issue, for today is Thanksgiving in my country. Thanksgiving is a special holiday celebrated by everyone, a time when we give thanks for the bounties of our rich and beautiful country.
It is very appropriate, then, that I should speak to the Assembly today about the issues surrounding the homeless. For Thanksgiving is also a time to reflect upon those less fortunate than ourselves, both at home and abroad. It is a time to take stock of our progress over the year and to look ahead to achieving even more. Today's discussions are an important initial step.
This debate is important for three reasons. First, it observes the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and allows us to focus on the plight of millions of people who have inadequate housing or no shelter at all. Secondly, it marks the tenth anniversary of the creation of Habitat and the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements, through which it is possible for the nations of the world to work together for a better human environment. Thirdly, the provision of shelter is intrinsic to human dignity and living conditions without which there is human misery and the potential for unrest and conflict.
It was with a sense of urgency and impending disaster that the United Nations declared the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. The wisdom of that decision was recognized by members of this Assembly whose Governments have, in the aggregate, sponsored 360 demonstration projects in their own countries in support of the objectives of the International Year. The International Year of Shelter for the Homeless is not just a token expression of concern. It is an investment in this planet's future.
Canada has had more than ordinary interest in the world's housing problems for a long time. The sponsorship of Habitat 76 in Vancouver was an expression of it. This gathering captured the world's interest in the emerging crisis of housing. The most precious legacy of Habitat 76 was the creation of the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements and the Habitat Centre in Nairobi, the products of whose work we have before us today.
An important part of that work is the formulation of a resolution on global strategy for shelter to the year 2000. Canada heartily endorses this resolution. I hope the General Assembly will ask the Commission on Human Settlements to formulate an acceptable plan to implement the global strategy and to submit it through the Economic and Social Council for adoption by the General Assembly.
Canada equally supports the resolution on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. The momentum gained this year obviously should not be lost. It is therefore important that the decisions and commitments made be integrated into the regular work of the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements.
Canada has been impressed with the new agenda for human settlements. This agenda is an example of the valuable kind of work done by United Nations agencies in distilling the diverse experiences of all its members to produce realistic guidelines for the future. Canada strongly favours action based .on constant policy review and innovation to forestall recurring crises.
The Nairobi session of the Commission for Human Settlements, marking its tenth anniversary, was productive. Canada supports the work programme for the two years immediately ahead of us, as well as the medium-term plan carrying us from 1990 to 1995.
Although I will not take the time to review all the specific draft resolutions of the United Nations considered at the tenth session of the Commission on Human Settlements, I should like to note Canada's strong support for the one relating to co-ordination between United Nations agencies. We believe in Habitat's full and equal membership in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination as soon as feasible. Until that is achieved there should be interim arrangements to ensure sound co-ordination within the United Nations system on matters relating to human settlements.
So far I have merely touched on the most important draft resolutions and recommendations before us. These will be dealt with more comprehensively by other members of my delegation in committee. I should now like to turn more generally to the lessons of this International Year and to our joint experience in shelter and human settlements.
I will not repeat those oft-quoted statistics, so shocking that it is still hard for us to comprehend their full meaning. The size of the shelter problem and the enormity of future urbanization can lead to a sense of cynicism and hopelessness. Indeed, the cynics may ask what really has been achieved with all the time, talent and money put into international and national problems of shelter since Habitat 76. Even those of us most committed to the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements must admit that the problem is far worse than when we started, and no one in the world seriously expects to see the day when all the problems of housing and settlements are solved.
And yet I think we are entitled to more optimism today than ever before. There are some real prospects of progress.
My first reason for optimism is that, staggering as is the need for resources to solve the world's physical problems of living, the resources needed do exist. My colleague Canada's Secretary of State for External Affairs recently reminded
(Mr. McInnes, Canada) the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development that the world spends 31 trillion, or 6 per cent of world output, on arms. This figure stands in stark contrast to the urgent need, particularly in the developing countries, to meet basic human needs, including the need for adequate housing. What is required is the exercise of the political will by all States to reduce this shockingly high level of resources devoted to military-related activities.
This summer saw another meeting that gave ground for hope - that of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, where a rare international consensus was reached on the relationship between debt and trade.
Moreover, a recent dramatic development for those of us who wish to see hope in this world was the understanding reached by representatives of the United States and the Soviet Union on the withdrawal of medium-range nuclear missiles. We hope that this is the beginning of a process in which there will be increasing moves towards disarmament and peace.
Given the world's limited resources, a global reduction of military spending could make additional resources available to meet pressing socio-economic needs.
There is, then, slightly more possibility today than yesterday that resources might be available to do something about shelter and settlements. But, if the resources were there, would they be used for these purposes? That is another cause for cautious optimism. Habitat 76 and the ensuing work of the Commission on Human Settlements have had their influence. Perhaps it would be going too far to say that shelter and settlements are now on the international political agenda, but they are getting there. Today's meetings are something of a milestone, an acknowledgement that shelter and settlements have been given a higher international priority than ever before.
I believe that we are also entitled to some optimism over the way in which resources for shelter and settlements are likely to be used when money is available. We have been learning lessons about building houses. I do not mean only that technology has been advancing, though it is undoubtedly true that technology can play a positive part in the most modest shelter as well as in vast engineering products} I mean the way in which we approach building.
It was not long ago that in most parts of the world the conventional way to get houses built in a crisis was to have Governments build them. Today in Canada the Federal Government almost never builds houses, but it facilitates house-building by the private sector. Even for social housing for those on limited income the Federal and provincial or local governments co-operate in providing money, but construction is generally undertaken by private interests. This system, which reflects our faith in the private enterprise system, has worked well for us.
Over the past generation, however, there has been a marked tendency in Canada to involve more and more of the people who will use housing in the self-help process of housing production and to incorporate the experience in social housing and special concerns in providing for the needs of the community. This principle of consumer involvement is being recognized in both developing and developed countries.
Where public funds are far too small to make a substantial impact on shelter needs, the inadequacies of shelter in squatter settlements can best be reduced by the consumer's becoming the producer of his own shelter requirements. In such • circumstances, Government resources are best employed in providing land , basic infrastructure and services, training and related enabling legislation.
This conviction is born of the Canadian experience from our earliest days in pushing back the frontier. Our pioneers were given land, tools and sometimes a
(
(Mr. McInnes, Canada) kittle money. Not only their ingenuity and hard work, but also their sense of involvement and feeling of conununity produced more than adequate shelter.
Mutual self-help generally means a community effort in which people pool their talents and resources to build together better than they can build alone. Mutual self-help also extends across international borders.
The plight of people living with no shelter, or with shelter which is a hazard to their health, is one problem. No less a problem is the management of cities as the human race becomes predominantly urban for the first time in the planet's history. The problem of housing in such places is bad enough. But perhaps even worse is the complexity of running the cities themselves: providing transportation, safe water, proper sanitation and at least some level of amenities, while trying to raise revenues to support them. In most of the countries where megacities have grown not only are there few resources to provide necessary infrastructure, but there is all too little experience in managing cities of any kind. The fact that this problem does not as readily translate into images of desperately suffering people in no way lessens the crisis in running settlements.
BHS/at
A/42/PV. 34
56
(Me. McInnes, Canada)
Many Canadian cities and towns are aware of this situation and are doing something about it. The twinning of cities in Canada and the developing world is gathering momentum. We have now begun professional exchanges, with civic administrators from the developing world coming to Canada to see how we run our cities, to learn from our successes and from our mistakes. Experienced Canadian administrators are volunteering to spend time in the developing world to help their colleagues draw up plans to cope with the urban crises which are easily foreseen but not easily solved.
These, then, are some reasons for optimism as we look at the staggering problems of shelter and settlement across the world. Canada fully realizes the magnitude of these problems. We cannot escape the fact that they are rapidly growing worse. The statistical projections of human misery are almost beyond the mind to grasp. On the other hand, it would be a tragic mistake to begin thinking the problems are so great, the disasters so inevitable that they are beyond the capacity of the United Nations, or of any other human intervention, to affect.
We can help. Realistically, we can at least reduce human misery. We are making progress in producing shelter for the homeless. The work of this special Year has not been in vain. We can build on the hard and effective work of the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements. If, individually and together, we show the political will, we can pursue practical ways towards fulfilling the vision we shared at Habitat in Vancouver 10 years ago, a vision which must be extended into the next decade.
Mr. ENDREFFY (Hungary)s The socialist countries, for which I have the honour to speak - the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People's Republic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the
(Mr. Endreffy, Hungary)
Polish People’s Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics - consider the observance of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless to be an important means of mobilizing efforts, primarily at the national level, to provide shelter for the homeless in countries where this problem exists. The observance of the Year has served a useful purpose also in focusing the attention of the international community on the importance of developing equal and mutually advantageous co-operation in the fields of town planning and architecture, wider dissemination of information about achievements in these areas, and exchange of experience in the solution of housing problems in different countries.
The results of the work done within the framework of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, observed in accordance with General Assembly resolution 37/221, is convincing proof of the urgent need for continuing efforts in this direction, realizing the existing plans and projects for the satisfaction of the housing needs of the poor and the disadvantaged, and exploring means of, and potential resources for, attaining the noble goals of the Year. A useful contribution to the observance of the Year and the development of international co-operation in the field of human settlements is made by the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat).
The socialist countries have supported the adoption by the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements of the Global Strategy for providing shelter for all in the world by the year 2000. The Strategy has formulated several important guidelines for the solution of this complex socio-economic problem. The speedy achievement of the noble goals of the Strategy requires conditions of peace, disarmament and international security, as well as implementation of the principles of justice and democracy in economic relations at both the global and national
BHS/at
(Mr. Endreffy, Hungary) levels. Our countries have put forward and soundly substantiated the idea of creating an international fund called "Disarmament for Development", which could play a decisive role in redirecting resources from military purposes to the needs of development and the solution of other socio-economic problems of our time, including the implementation of the Global Strategy.
Practical steps towards the solution of the shelter problem would provide a stimulus for the building industry and other related branches of the economy, as well as for the growth of capital investments in those sectors, thereby promoting the expansion of employment in developing countries, the increase of population incomes and the general improvement of national economies.
The socialist countries have constructively participated in the realization of the programme for the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and stand ready actively to promote the implementation of the Global Strategy for providing shelter for all in the world by the year 2000.
The socialist States, on a bilateral basis and through participation in multilateral projects of co-operation, have provided manifold assistance to developing countries in housing construction for the population and the training of personnel in this field, which is a contribution to the realization of related national programmes.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Denmark, who will speak on behalf of the States members of the European Community.
Mr• bierring (Denmark): I have the honour to make the following statement on behalf of the European Community and its member States.
First, I should like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his very substantial report on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless (A/42/378). it gives an excellent description of the goals and accomplishments of the Year.
(Mr. Bier ring, Denmark)
it is evident that the severe economic and financial strains experienced by most developing countries in the last decade have had an adverse effect on human-settlement activities, and we share the view that there is a continued need to focus attention on these problems. We very much look forward to the results of next year’s meeting of the Commission on Human Settlements, where the results of the International Year will be evaluated. In anticipation of the evaluation we are of the opinion that the Year of Shelter for the Homeless has helped focus international attention on problems of human settlement.
The two main objectives of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless weret by the end of 1987 to secure a measurable improvement in the shelter situation of the poor in developing countries and, with the year 2000 as a target, to demonstrate ways and means of improving the shelter of all the poor around the world. To be sure that the Year would prove successful it was decided to formulate an action-oriented programme containing a number of specific goals, the achievement of which would considerably improve the situation of the homeless before, during and after the Year. In general we share the Secretary-General's assessment of the Year of Shelter for the Homeless and are pleased that it has succeeded in raising international awareness of the problems of the homeless and, in addition, advancing the specific goals. However, large problems still remain and continued attention to them is necessary.
With regard to the accomplishment of the goals at the national level, we find it very positive that a number of developing countries have established shelter strategies and will urge others to do the same.
The importance of co-operation between the private and the public sectors in the area of providing shelter as well as the valuable participation of non-governmental organizations is also underlined in the Secretary-General s report, and we find it important that this co-operation be further extended.
(Mr. Bi er ring, Denmark)
Being a focal point for shelter-related activities in the United Nations system, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) has at the international level fully supported the objectives of the Year. We attach importance to the task of the Commission on Human Settlements. Consequently, in April of this year the majority of Member States participated in the tenth session of the Commission and took part in the important debate on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and the ensuing adoption of relevant resolutions and decisions. It has become clear that the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) has made significant efforts to improve co-operation between States and co-ordination within the United Nations system. Further improvements of the co-ordinative role of Habitat remains necessary for the coming years.
All the States members of the Community have always supported the ideas and the aims behind the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and have been active in promoting these ideas during the Year. We shall continue to do so. Public awareness of the serious problems involved has been heightened through numerous activities and events, including exhibitions and the publication of books, articles and reports. In addition, the Year has served as an important stimulus for new discussions at the policy level on the broader issue of human settlements.
The provision of shelter for the poor and disadvantaged is not a task that falls only on developing countries. The need to take a fresh look at human-settlement policies and development co-operation policies has become increasingly apparent in all countries owing to the increased attention aroused by the United Nations, and particularly Habitat.
The Year has helped to raise public consciousness of the serious problems facing the homeless. More authorities and planners, more decision-makers have had the benefit of the intellectual input coming from the initiative stressing the
(Mr. Bierring, Denmark) importance of shelter in improving health and well-being, employment, industrial development, the environment and overall national economic and social development. We shall continue to address the problems and try to maintain the momentum created during the Year.
The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and its Executive Director are to be congratulated on their very effective implementation of the decisions of the General Assembly and of the Commission on Human Settlements on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. We should also like to commend the actions taken by the Executive Director with a view to ensuring the effective follow-up of the full integration of the activities of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless in the regular work programme of Habitat, upon the formal termination of the International Year on 31 December 1987.
Mr. NOORAN I (Pakistan): Pakistan greatly welcomed the designation of 1987 as the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. It will help focus the attention of the international community on a fundamental aspect of human living conditions. We also congratulate the Government of Sri Lanka on its thoughtful initiative in bringing this subject to the United Nations. The import of this subject goes far beyond its significance as a social welfare measure. It carries implications for the political, social and economic development of countries. The provision of housing to the shelterless is therefore becoming an increasingly important responsibility of Governments, particularly in the developing countries with low incomes or large populations.
We greatly appreciate the efforts of the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs in undertaking the comprehensive report "Housing and economic adjustments in the 1980s". The preliminary findings of the report already point to its value and usefulness, especially for the policy-makers and planners of the Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
•	(Mr. Nooran i, Pak is tan)
developing world. A scientific study, such as that being contemplated, would help to give them a better idea of the diverse sets of policies and options which are available in this vital sector, enabling them to select approaches most suited to their national environments and circumstances as well as to make judicious use of their limited resources.
An important area to be examined by the report is the linkage between housing policies and developmental activities. A correct appreciation of the role of housing and development could help in deciding appropriate adjustments or initiating efforts to stimulate complementary sectors which could contribute to the overall invigoration and revitalization of economies.
We believe that economic, social and political concerns are interrelated. An overall policy must reflect a balanced, integrated and comprehensive approach.
,	(Mr. Noor ani , Pak istan)
An important measure such as housing for the shelterless would invariably contribute towards creating a positive socio-political environment conducive to economic growth. Assurance of shelter can have a tremendous impact on the total socio-economic condition of an individual or a family, enhancing their productive capacity and absorbing them in the mainstream of economic activity.
^ reflect his firm commitment to the betterment of the living conditions of our people, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Mohammad Khan June jo, included "housing for the shelterless" as one of the points in his Five-Point Political Programme. In pursuance of that programme, the Government of Pakistan has already taken several concrete steps which are bringing about a quiet transformation in the life of the common people, the landscape of our cities and, in particular, the rural villages.
The main thrust of the Prime Minister's plan is to provide housing for people belonging to low-income groups on an urgent basis and to ensure that by 1990 family units belonging to all segments of the population own a place of residence. Furthermore, the plan envisages improvement and development of areas in the cities where low-income groups have found habitation. Some of the major steps being taken on an urgent basis as part of the overall plan are as follows: first, creation of 2. 2 million residential plots for allotment to families without houses in the rural areas. These are known as the Seven Marla Schemes. The sum of 500 million rupees has been allocated for the development of this scheme. About 500,000 poor and shelterless people in the rural areas are already being provided with these residential plots and also facilities to build their own homes on them. Second, improvement and development of slum areas in the cities, known as Katchi Abadis, where nearly 25 per cent of the urban population lives. For this purpose, 730 million rupees have been allocated. The dwellers in these areas are being
(Mr. Noor an i, Pak is tan) given proprietary rights. Simultaneously, a major improvement programme for the provision of basic facilities in these areas is under way. The programme is proceeding in phases.
As an outcome of this programme, the Government is expecting that the slums, where 25 per cent of the urban population is living, would be transformed into clean and organized localities with adequate amenities of life as is their right. Similarly, by 1990, 2.2 million shelterless rural families would be able to own land on which to build homes. These measures coupled with widespread rural-based economic development programmes would also help to reduce pressure on the cities resulting from the phenomenon of the migration of the rural population into the cities, a phenomenon which afflicts many developing nations.
I have given these details to underline the importance given by the Government of Pakistan to the task of providing housing to the shelterless. The earnestness with which we are pursuing this policy reflects the sensitivity of the Government to the basic concerns of the people. Gradually a great change is taking place in the life of our people as a result of the high priority attached by the Government to the social sector along with a balanced and rapid growth of the economy.
In the overall policy housing for the shelterless occupies a prominent place, but we do not pursue it in isolation. A comprehensive and co-ordinated approach, which simultaneously ensures progress in the health and education sectors and in the creation of job opportunities, is necessary for stable and balanced development.
The magnitude of the problem especially for countries with low incomes or large populations, the impact of large-scale housing schemes on ecology and the attendant social and demographic consequences, merit international attention. Enhanced international activity focusing on study and research in the housing and ecological sectors can greatly assist countries such as ours to do the right
(Mr. Noor ani, Pakistan) planning and to pursue appropriate policies. The contribution of agencies such as Habitat in accumulating and organizing international experience in these fields is commendable. We fully support the role of the United Nations in this vital sector and desire its strengthening because of its direct relevance to the welfare and betterment of the living conditions of a large part of the human population.
«L_“ (Malaysia): This Assembly Hall has been the venue - and those assembled here the audience - for many urgent and passionate cries for the "right to life" for the hungry, the poor and the homeless.
It was in this Assembly Hall that we adopted, in December 1982, resolution 37/221 proclaiming 1987 the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. Two years of hard work preceded that proclamation, beginning in December 1980, when the General Assembly reaffirmed that adequate shelter and services were a basic human right.
My delegation pays special tribute to the leaders of Sri Lanka for having initiated the proposal during the fourth session of the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements, held in Manila in 1981, to declare an International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. Malaysia fully supported the proposal because we shared the same concern that the development of human settlements was not keeping pace with the demands of the situation and the problem of providing adequate shelter, particularly to the lower income group, was reaching crisis proportions. We supported the idea also because it would serve to heighten awareness and to focus the attention of the international community on the plight of the homeless both in urban and rural areas in the developing countries.
Malaysia is a developing country which advocates a property-owning democracy. As such, my country is firmly committed to the provision of adequate housing for all, particularly for the lower income group. This policy has been a regular feature of all our Five-Year Development Plans implemented since independence.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
PKB/edd
(Mr. Yusof, Malaysia)
In conformity with this strategy, and in the spirit of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, Malaysia has undertaken various activities. These include the continuation of ongoing projects with emphasis on more public and private sector low-cost housing programmes as contained in the Fifth Malaysia Plan. Other activities include the construction of long houses to accommodate families affected by development projects and the establishment of housing loan schemes amounting to a maximum of 7,500 Malaysian ringgits to each low-income family, in occupations such as fishermen, rubber tappers, farmers and other families in similar categories, in order to assist them in the construction or purchase of their own houses.
(Mr' Yusof, Malaysia)
Malaysia has also implemented several demonstration projects, which include the NADI Programme - the urban sanitation programme - in Kuala Lumpur, and a special low-cost housing programme.
The NADI Programme, which is partly funded by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and jointly undertaken by the Ministry of Federal Territory and the Kuala Lumpur City Hall, is based on an integrated approach to achieving the goals of eradicating poverty and restructuring society in line with the country's new economic policy. It is also designed to upgrade the capabilities of the urban poor, provide them with opportunities to solve problems and develop them into an integral part of society in Kuala Lumpur. First launched in 1980, NADI covers 30 low-income areas. In addition, the Programme provides a range of services, including the provision of health facilities, basic amenities and community and family development activities, and the development of various other kinds of commercial and handicraft training to provide employment and generate income. The urban sanitation programme is also intended to provide a suitable alternative for sewage disposal in the low-income urban communities. The feasibility study was conpleted in 1985, and the project is ready to be launched nation-wide as soon as funds are available.
The special low-cost housing project, which was launched in July 1986, involves the construction of 80,000 units of low-cost houses annually over the period from 1986 to 1988. The objective of this project is to generate economic growth and employment opportunities. The project emphasizes public and private sector participation, the incentives for which include the provision of 2 billion Malaysian ringgits annually by central and commercial banks for bridging and end-financing, and reduced premium for land conversion and subdivision. To
(Mr. Yusof, Malaysia) date, a total of 246 projects, amounting to 96,138 units of low-cost houses, have already been approved, and 31,581 units are in the construction stage. Obviously, these are a small part of the national effort.	.
In recognition of the fact that the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless represents a plan of action before, during and after 1987, the National Steering Committee in Malaysia has planned and implemented a number of additional activities, which include: first, a seminar to mark the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless, held on 30 March 1987, jointly organized by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and the Housing Developers' Association of Malaysia; secondly, a seminar on "Adeauate Shelter - Key to Children's Prosperity", held in June 1987, jointly organized by the Ministry of Welfare and the National Welfare Council for Children and focused on the need to provide adequate shelter as appropriate for children's welfare; thirdly, a special sale of commemorative stamps for the occasion, launched on 6 April 1987, with the aim of creating an awareness of the national and global problem of providing adequate shelter, particularly for the poor, and bringing into focus the efforts of the Government in implementing the relevant development projects in this regard; and, fourthly, in response to a reauest by the International Year secretariat, the preparation of a monograph on the involvement of private developers in low-cost housing, which has already been completed and will be forwarded soon to the United Nations Commission on Human Settlements.
In keeping with the objectives of resolution 37/221, and as can be discerned in the various projects being undertaken, Malaysia is actively pursuing measures for, and will continue to give high priority to, meeting the need for adeauate shelter of the low-income group. Under the country's Fifth Malaysia Plan - from 1986-1991 - greater emphasis is given to the concept of human settlements in the
(Mr* Yusof, Malaysia) planning and implementation of housing projects in order to ensure the provision of the necessary economic, social and infrastructural facilities in housing areas.
My delegation has also followed with interest the many activities undertaken world-wide in observance of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless. The variety of activities is not only a manifestation of the interest of the Governments of many countries in observing appropriately the commemoration of the Year, but also evidence of the heightened awareness of this basic human need which the occasion has served to bring to the international community. The activities undertaken during the Year have not only focused our attention on the plight of the poor and the homeless but, more important, pointed to the need for sustained action if the world is not to be caught in yet another crisis.
Like other developing countries, Malaysia is aware of this need for sustained action and will continue to put the desired emphasis on providing adequate shelter, particularly to the low-income group, as indeed is reflected in the stress given to this vital issue in each of the country’s five-year development plans. We believe that self-help is a necessary condition of the eventual success of the international strategy for the homeless.
Mr. MOYA PALENCIA (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): As we observe today the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless we have heard the Executive Director of Habitat say that the housing crisis is of immense dimensions and that between 30 per cent and 50 per cent of the inhabitants of the major cities in the developing countries live in slums or extremely marginal areas. The death of 15 million people a year, mainly women and children, from diseases associated with the insanitary conditions in which they live cannot leave us indifferent. A decent, sanitary dwelling should be an essential part of everybody's life. It should be one of the fully guaranteed human rights.
MLG/PLJ
No system is unaffected by poverty. The economic crisis has aggravated the problem and we find homeless people in all the great cities in the developed and the developing countries. We are convinced that with international co-operation this situation can quickly be remedied.
While in the developed countries the increase in the number of homeless persons has been well publicized, in the developing world the situation is even more serious, and to it must be added the historical backwardness and earlier shortcomings. The effect of the economic crisis and the restriction of financial flows for development, and the conseauences of the retrenchment carried out in many of these countries, are other factors to be added to the equation.
In order to solve the problem, what is needed is a suitable volume of resources and a coherent and co-ordinated policy that takes into account traditions and local customs, involves the participation of all sectors of the society and provides solutions to the problems of urban and rural growth and their relationship to the environment.
In 1987 we are celebrating the International Year of Shelter for the
Homeless. The Secretary-General's report (A/42/378) reminds us of the origin and development of this idea. It was intended to emphasize the need for decent housing for the poorest, and for the international community to take measures to remedy the living conditions, which seemed to be deteriorating under the inpact of the crisis.
We agree with the Secretary-General that actions taken at the national level are not necessarily limited to a single year or may not have been carried out within that year, but rather these actions belong within the framework of broader policies and, conseauently, the substance of his report should serve as highlighting the effort carried out. We also agree that the improvement of housing cannot be measured in purely quantitative terms because other aspects must be considered too, and that it would be very difficult to reflect all the experiences of the various countries in a document of that size. We believe that the report is very useful because it demonstrates the general trends.
The Secretary-General’s summary includes various references to what has been done in my country; I shall expand on those references by describing in greater detail to our reconstruction effort.
First, we must emphasize the interest taken by President de la Madrid in urban development and its relation to ecological problems, which is clearly shown with the establishment for the first time in Mexico of a state secretariat of urban development and ecology. Constant vigilance in regard to these activities, whose intensity has not slackened notwithstanding the crisis, demonstrate the priority given to housing and the protection of the environment. The policy of decentralization undertaken by the Government has yielded important results. We have managed to transfer decision-making power on projects and the use of resources to the communities, thereby promoting renewed vigour and activity at that level.
Concerning human settlements, the decentralization of government offices has resulted in the partial halting or slowing down of the migration towards Mexico City and establishment of centres to attract settlers in other existing settlements.
In September 1985 Mexico City suffered an earthcruake of such a magnitude that the housing of 95,000 families was totally or partially lost. Half a million inhabitants found themselves homeless in a few seconds. As one can imagine, we were not ready to confront that kind of a problem. It was necessary to innovate and to set in motion all resources. The Mexican people organized quickly and spontaneously. Emergency shelters were set up. Rescue teams and support groups, were also set in motion and solidarity overcame many economic, social or generational differences.
The international community provided solidarity and collaboration, for which we renew our gratitude. We shall never forget the speed with which the United Nations mobilized to support Mexico’s efforts.
The Government set up emergency machinery. It organized camps, hospitals, supply distribution centres, rescue operations, overseeing the safety of buildings, the demolition of unsafe structures and the removal of rubble. It proceeded to co-ordinate the activities of all existing housing bodies and various institutions that provided already completed housing or housing on the verge of completion and made available credit to their affiliates or to the victims.
But many families were not covered by this classification, mainly the inhabitants of the areas near the centre of Mexico City who refused to leave their neighbourhoods and the residents of the Nonoalco Tlatelolco housing project containing more than 10,000 families who insisted on staying in their homes.
The emergency required, above all, temporary housing. It was necessary to set up minimum health, administration and safety conditions. It was necessary to carry out work simultaneously on many fronts in high density population areas, without disturbing normal business activities,,
In a recent Habitat publication some figures are given comparing the housing situation before and after the reconstruction and showing the magnitude of the effort made. Seventy-nine per cent of housing units had less than 40 sauare metres, and the average was less than 22 square metres. All of the new housing units have at least 40 square metres. Sixty-two per cent of housing units did not have the minimum requirements and 25 per cent were in a severe state of deterioration. Two-thirds lacked sanitary services and 29 per cent had shared kitchens. Ninety-seven per cent of the inhabitants rented their dwellings and a majority had been in the area for more than 30 years. In many cases various families lived in the same housing unit.
We are pleased to say that half a million Inhabitants of the centre of Mexico City have substantially improved their living standards: all the housing units are single family units and have sanitary facilities, laundry, kitchen, two separate rooms and a living room. All have a minimum space of 40 square metres and share playgrounds where trees have been planted and where there is plenty of sun. No building has more than three floors, given the characteristics of the sub-soil, and all of them exceed the minimum requirements of the Mexico City building codes which have been raised since the earthauake. So far 48,000 housing units have been constructed and 46,500 housing units are new, 2,300 pre-fabricated, and 6,220 were repaired and rehabilitated, including 2,500 in buildings catalogued as historical monuments.
This task would not have been possible without the resolute participation of society as a whole. Foundations and support groups of solidarity, the university community, 1,350 private enterprises, government entities and inhabitants of the area took part in the process. In the most intense phase of the work, that meant 114,000 direct jobs. The neighbours became the best inspectors of the state of progress and the auality of work at all phases of rec DigitizedJbytDag Hammarskjöld Library
Agreement and dialogue were the means that enabled the Government of Mexico to deal with the problem and solve it. Sixty-nine organizations of persons having suffered damage to properties, neighbourhood societies and co-operative societies, 10 universities and institutions, eight technical support groups, eight colleges and chambers, and 15 foundations or similar private associations, signed with Government representatives an agreement for a democratic solution for the reconstruction which included necessary conditions for carrying out this task, establishing the terms on which the housing was to be acquired.
This meant on average eight and a half years, and payments between 20 and 30 per cent of the minimum monthly wage; beside renewal, democratization also occurred in the ownership of housing in the centre of Mexico City.
The housing designs and materials and the way we proceeded earned us a number of prizes and tributes for our reconstruction effort from certain international institutions or meetings. I refer to the World Association of Major Metropolitan Areas which paid tribute to us, the International Union of Architects which awarded the Sir Robert Mathew World Prize and the World Architectural Biennial in Sofia which also gave us an honourable mention.
The Mexican experience shows that the co-operation of the whole of society is essential for a strategy to succeed, and that dialogue and broad-based democratic agreement are the key to a solution.
We are quite convinced that without the organized and vigilant effort of the citizens and without the co-ordination and guidance of the authorities, reconstruction could not have been done so fast and so effectively.
The solution of social problems requires a firm political will/ strict utilization of resources, budgetary discipline and a determination to struggle, a spirit of solidarity such as was shown in Mexican society after the earthquakes of September 1985. Mexican strategy to resolve the problem of housing of social groups with lower income levels is based on fundamental respect for their ways of organizing their lives in society and the urban environment. It contains elements of financial disciplines which make it possible to make the maximum use of available resources and guarantee access to loans for affected social groups, and also includes a technical solution involving quality standards, orderly building and a rapid pace of conduct of the operation.
We wish to offer our fullest co-operation in disseminating this experience, as well as technical advice and training that might be of interest to other members of the international community that face similar situations, because the plans and designs, the material research and the forms of organization of labour used by us could serve as a basis for providing new solutions.
In April this year we met in Nairobi for the tenth session of the Commission on Human Settlements. There we adopted proposals which are to be considered by the General Assembly at this session and which we hope will make it possible to improve the general situation of human settlements. Some of the proposals seem novel as compared with those of 10 years ago. The progress made is due to the fact that we understand better the nature of the problem and how its multidimensional nature reauires the participation of all sectors and all elements of economic activity, starting, of course, with proper planning.
Human settlements policy must be designed on the basis of national characteristics and the participation of the population as a whole. It must be integrated in the development plans which each country sets for itself. Development must be viewed as a long-term endeavour with an integral approach. It deserves the support of the international community, particularly through measures to overcome the economic crisis - in other words, through an attitude of joint responsibility for the solution of problems, especially the problem of the external debt, which has become the major obstacle to development.
The elimination of injustice, unemployment, hunger, insanitary living conditions and the lack of housing is a priority in any development programme, because in marginalization and poverty lies the origin of all conflicts. Let us seek joint, agreed solutions so as to establish a new system of international economic relations based on justice and equity.
Mr. ABDOUN (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): The united Nations General Assembly resolution proclaiming 1987 the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless was the culmination of serious efforts on the part of the international community, for shelter is in essence a basic human right. The initiative that led to that proclamation by the General Assembly was the convening of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, in Vancouver, in 1976. The Vancouver Conference emphasized, inter alia, that Questions of human settlements are international issues that call for concerted efforts so that appropriate programmes may be developed to address those problems and find suitable solutions. The international community strengthened its efforts in addressing the question of shelter when it created the Commission on Human Settlements. My delegation expresses its appreciation of the work done by the Commission within the framework of the United Nations Economic and Social Council.
It was essential to establish a focal point to co-ordinate what was required of the international community, the United Nations system and local communities concerned with the Question of human settlements. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements undertook that task and served as secretariat to the Commission. We wish to express satisfaction at the performance of the Centre during the period since the Vancouver Conference.
The problems facing the developing countries in the area of human settlements are particularly severe. In addition to the lack of skilled manpower, the difficult economic conditions and the scarcity of financial resources have made the provision of shelter for a large sector of urban and rural populations an extremely difficult task. Our Governments have failed to reconcile the resources available
(Mr. Abdoun, Sudan) with those required. That has made the implementation of strategies and programmes to meet the housing needs of hundreds of millions of human beings a serious challenge.
The situation has been exacerbated by the severe natural conditions in our countries. During the 1980s large parts of Africa have been plagued by drought and desertification. Our agricultural output has been the victim of drought, forcing a large part of our population to migrate, so it was only natural that problems of shelter would assume tragic dimensions.
Despite the fact that the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless has witnessed some relative improvement in providing shelter for some of the poor, and despite the efforts of the international community, which have led to increased national and international awareness of the gravity of this problem and its vast implications for the economic and social sectors, the overall picture remains bleak in a great many of countries.
The Secretary-General indicated this in the conclusion to his report to the General Assembly (A/42/378) when he said that the scourge of homelessness and inadequate shelter was far from having been eradicated and that concerted and massive action over a period of time by Governments, organizations and individuals all acting together was called for. The many studies made have demonstrated that the improvement of shelter for millions of human beings in the developing world requires the formulation of comprehensive strategies in which housing policies could be viewed as a whole, along with the need to make radical changes in the economic and service sectors. However, the formulation of such comprehensive strategies is closely linked to the improvement of the overall economic capabilities of these nations. There is a close link between the improvement of rates of growth in the developing world and the improvement of the living conditions of the population.	Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Abdoun, Sudan)
One can imagine the conditions of those countries that are faced with the need to improve shelter for more than 1 billion people at a time of constant population growth at a rate of about 80 million people a year. That makes it imperative for the international community to make ever greater efforts to increase the financial resources allocated to this sector and to pay increasing attention to the need for training and development and the exchange of know-how and expertise and enhanced exchanges among all countries.
My country has experienced important changes in the areas of housing and human settlements. The most important is the establishment of a special Ministry of Housing, whereas once this was a mere department with extremely limited resources and terms of reference. The creation of this Ministry is an important step towards formulating national policies to address the overall issues of housing and to make scientific studies for this purpose.
(Mr. Abdoun, Sudan)
The programme of action announced by my Government contains a number of important steps in this regard, foremost among which are the followings first, the modernization of population policies to go beyond the distribution of land and to implement an integrated housing plan that encourages investment in the area of housing and the construction of co-operative housing complexes, special priority being given to housing the limited-income population; secondly, the creation of a ministerial commission to review housing grants in order to bring them into line with limited-income households; thirdly, the formation of another ministerial commission to examine the national housing plan and ensure the distribution of housing lots for eligible citizens.
Notwithstanding these important achievements, my country continues to face several challenges providing shelter for large sectors of the population as a result of drought, which has forced large numbers of persons to leave their villages and urban centres and move to cities, as well as to suburbs of the national capital, creating severe problems in housing, food and sanitation and increasing the number of the homeless.
In order to address the serious dimensions of this problem, the Government has taken the following measures: first, the creation of makeshift camps to absorb refugees who go to the capital and the larger cities and to meet their basic needs; secondly, following the relative improvement in rainfall over the past two years, the Sudanese authorities have taken several steps to resettle the homeless in their villages and rural areas after improving conditions there for them; thirdly, the Government constantly makes efforts to contain the political problems in the southern part of the country that led to the movement of large numbers of persons.
(Mr. Abdoun, Sudan) Pending success in these political initiatives they have been absorbed in special temporary camps.
The Assembly may be aware that the economic conditions now facing Sudan make it extremely difficult to find a comprehensive solution for this problem. Unless efforts are made by the world Organization, donors and non-governmental organizations to supply the aid necessary to provide adequate shelter for these homeless, it will be impossible to do so.
In conclusion, the situation facing the international community in the provision of shelter, and the need to formulate a global strategy for shelter to the year 2000, require the adoption of further measures at both the national and the international levels. In this regard, my delegation supports the broad guidelines for such measures outlined in the report of the Secretary-General now before us.
^e meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.41
20 October 1987
ENGLISH
Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-FIRST MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 19 October 1987, at 10 a.m.
President;
later:
Mr. FLORIN
Mr. MAHBUBANI (Vice-President)
(German Democratic Republic)
(Singapore)
- Development and International Economic Co-operation [82)
(e) Environment: Note by the Secretary-General
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
87-64245/A 8107V (E)	.
AP/edd	A/42/PV. 41
2
The meeting  was called to order at 10.15 a .m.
AGENDA ITEM 82 DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION (e) ENVIRONMENT; NOTE BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/42/427) The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As members will recall, at its 3rd plenary meeting the General Assembly decided, on the recommendation of the General Committee, that, prior to the consideration of this sub-item by the Second Committee, the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, transmitted to the Assembly by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, should be introduced at a plenary meeting. Accordingly this meeting will be devoted to the introduction of the report.
I believe that this meeting is one of the outstanding events of the forty-second session. On this occasion the General Assembly is honoured to welcome speakers of the highest distinction. The Assembly and its relevant organs are called upon, as, indeed, is the entire international community, to address themselves in depth to one of the most important global problems; the preservation of every facet of our environment. In this spirit the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, to be introduced by the Chairman of the Commission, the Prime Minister of Norway Mrs. Brundtland, and the report of the Intergovernmental Committee of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) deserve our undivided attention.
I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It is with a sense of deep gratitude and satisfaction that I welcome the Chairman of the World Commission on Environment and Development, the Honourable Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, Prime Minister of Norway,


and the report that she and the other Commissioners have laboured over so intensively during the last three years, holding numerous public hearings, in 10 countries on five continents.
This is a very significant report. In its pages one hears the voices of farmers, housewives, students, native tribes and slum dwellers, as well as Heads of Government, scientists and industrialists, from around the world sharing a common concern for our planet. In its travels the Commission found that the world holds no sanctuaries; that the effects of neither waste nor poverty can be quarantined. They found that too often decision-making on development and environment issues is determined by sectional interests and the traditional boundaries of geography, politics or ideology.

The Commission also confirmed and strengthened the new perception that is just gaining ground, namely, that economic growth and preservation of the environment are imperatives, not options to choose or reject, and that they are central and indivisibly linked elements in human well-being.
The report is a profound recognition of the legitimate claim of all people to a hospitable, life-sustaining environment. Its conclusions constitute a clarion call for strict and universal respect for basic human rights, without which sustainable development cannot be fully realized. Disregard of the rights of others and the claim of all to a standard of living consonant with human dignity has been a major factor in environmental and development problems. We must make the connection between the enormous inequities of poverty and wealth within and among nations, the degradation of the biosphere and the survival of future generations.
The Commission's views on sustainable development cast a piercing light on the acceleration of interdependence, with important implications for traditional concepts of national sovereignty and the collective custodianship of all nations of the health of our planet.
We have already made progress in some areas, particularly through the hard work of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) . Its Governing Council has placed before the Assembly a very important report entitled "The Environmental perspective to the year 2000 and beyond, which has given a renewed sense of direction in respect of many environmental problems. To give a concrete instance, we must thank UNEP for spurring agreement on an international treaty on the ozone layer, which for the first time represents the combined efforts of Governments, scientists and industry to prevent a global issue from reaching crisis proportions.


is monumental and urgent for it involves nothing less than a radical departure in
the way we conduct development. The report states:
"The changes in human attitudes that we call for depend on a vast campaign of education, debate and public participation. This campaign must start now if sustainable human progress is to be achieved.
• • •
	"We are unanimous in our conviction that the security, well-being and
very survival of the planet depend on such changes, now." (A/42/427, p. 38) Most of us in this chamber belong to a generation which has only belatedly realized the peril in which our environment has been placed and far too slowly appreciate the finite nature of resources. We have, in effect, been rapidly mortgaging the future of our children.
I would suggest that in the circumstances we should be well advised to bring greater wisdom to today's youth by undertaking for them a global educational effort on the substance of the World Commission's report. The report has for all youth a major relevance that transcends nationality, culture, ideology and race. Moreover, it clearly defines the important role of the United Nations in development, human rights, the preservation of ecosystems - or, in the broadest sense, the achievement of sustainable development. The report therefore affords a unique opportunity for the United Nations to forge a contract with the world's youth. The young themselves recognize that learning, together with a dynamic interchange of ideas on global problems, is the most important ingredient in their future and for their survival.

We could begin by bringing young people together through a series of regional seminars, sponsored perhaps by the five regional Commissions, to study the elements of sustainable development. Two or three years later we might envisage a culminating global conference that would bring the youth and educators together with a view to integrating sustainable development into local educational programmes around the world.
In suggesting the importance of eductional programmes for young people I would not wish to imply that this report has less relevance for the present generation, which now bears responsibility for global leadership. On the contrary, the report imposes serious obligations on Governments, intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, which have the urgent necessity of reclaiming opportunities all too frequently missed.
As your Secretary-General I am committed, in close co-operation with my colleagues, to integrating the recommendations of the report into the work of the United Nations system, should the General Assembly so decide.
To the extent that today's leaders and their successors learn the lessons of this report, humanity's common future can be assured.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Norway.
Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Norway, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mrs. BRUNDTLAND (Norway): It is a great pleasure for me to present to the General Assembly the unanimous report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, "Our common future".
The World Commission on Environment and Development was given a challenging mandate by the General Assembly. We were asked to take a fresh look at the interrelated issues of environment and development and to define shared perceptions on the long-term environmental issues and aspirational goals of the world community to the year 2000 and beyond. During the 1,000 days since our Commission's inception there has been an endless flow of information about increasing threats to the global environment and environmental disasters often caused or aggravated by our own policies and practices.
We early came to recognize that poverty is the main cause and effect of environmental degradation in many developing countries. Clearly it is totally unacceptable and incompatible with human decency and solidarity even to suggest that the poor must remain in poverty in order to protect the environment. What are needed are national and international strategies that offer real options, that secure and enhance incomes as well as the environment on the local, national and international levels.
The Commission became collectively convinced that present development patterns cannot be allowed to continue. While economic and social development suffer from severe national and global imbalances, threats to the environment are becoming global in scope and devastating in scale and effect. The survival of this planet requires that we act now.
The Commission came out equally convinced that the necessary changes are indeed possible. Our report is not a prophecy of doom but a positive vision of the future. Never before in human history have we had greater possibilities. The time and the opportunity have come to break out of the negative trends of the past.
We need not only a new vision but political conunitment and a broad mobilization of human ingenuity. We need intensified multilateral co-operation based on recognition of the growing interdependence of nations.
I believe that today's meeting conclusively demonstrates that the idea of sustainability and the interlinked issues of environment and development have now risen to the top of the international political agenda. Our common concerns for the future can create necessary the momentum for change.
The overriding political concept upon which our report is founded is that of sustainable development - a broad concept for social and economic progress. We define it as paths of human progress that meet the needs and aspirations of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs. It requires political reforms, fair access to knowledge and resources, and a more just and equitable distribution within and among nations.
Poor people cannot be condemned to remain in poverty. It is mass poverty which drives millions of people to overexploit thin soils, overgraze fragile grasslands and cut down yet more of the rapidly disappearing tropical forests -these great lungs vital for the global climate and thereby for food production itself.
I need not dwell here on the familiar catalogue of environmental deterioration. Global warming is expected to change agricultural and settlement patterns and to flood seaports. Acidification is moving into the developing world. Six million hectares of productive dryland turn into desert each year. Against this kind of grim backdrop, we welcome the recent achievements in Montreal on the protection bf the ozone layer. For all nations will ultimately share the same destiny. Our environment and our economies have become so intertwined that we can no longer choose to remain apart. The environment respects no national boundaries and we cannot act as if it did.
Sustainable development recognizes that there are thresholds imposed by nature - yes - but no limits to growth itself. In a world ridden by poverty, growth is absolutely necessary. Growth is the only answer to the problems of developing countries. But the contents of growth must be changed. Growth cannot be based on overexploitation of the resources of third-world countries. Growth must be managed to enhance the resource base on which they all depend. The environment and the natural resources of developing countries must cease to be the victims in a world economy troubled by serious imbalances. The victims must instead become allies in our struggle for survival.
Debilitating debts, soaring interest rates, interrupted financial flows and adverse terms of trade offer developing countries few options but to overuse their resource base while their capacity to address environmental issues remains low. These trends have too long been working against developing countries. New international economic conditions must be designed to enhance the resource base of developing countries.
The industrialized world must take a full share of responsibility to ensure that the international economy helps rather than hinders sustainable development. This is also, as we all know, in the industrial countries' own interest. Commodity markets must be strengthened. Restrictive trade practices should be abolished. Terms of trade must change to favour developing countries rather than to impoverish them.
Urgent action is now necessary to alleviate the debt crisis in ways that represent a fairer sharing between debtors and lenders. The massive drain of resources from developing countries must be reversed. What is needed is new loans on concessional terms, new investments and economic reform.
In many countries strongly increased assistance from external sources will be needed. Donors, lenders and investors must make a fundamental commitment to
(Mrs- Brundtland, Norway) sustainable development. There is no alternative to substantial increases in financial flows. Additionality - both in quantity and in quality - must be based on equality and mutual self-interest. Internationally agreed targets are, we all know, far from being met. The concern for our environment and our common future should now help us to move forward, to the benefit of us all.
Sustainability objectives should be of serious concern to everyone. Our report aims at raising a global awareness among Governments, aid agencies and others concerned with development of the necessity of integrating environmental considerations into economic decision-making and planning at all levels but the Commission was emphatic in coupling its demand for higher quality and environmental sensitivity in aid and in lending with substantially increased aid flows.
Some countries might be sceptical about the application of the sustainability criteria in aid and lending and perceive it as a new form of conditionality. It is clear, however - and I emphasize this point - that this kind of integrated process must be made operational by the Governments themselves as part of their own national strategies for development. External assistance will be needed to help many countries establish their professional and institutional capacity to conduct this integration in practice. Such assistance must come at the request of countries concerned and must be facilitated by the international community. Growth must promote a fair distribution of income. It must be firmly based on the stock of natural capital that sustains it.
To achieve that, the Commission advocates full integration of environment and economics into decision-making at all levels, nationally and internationally. We must attack the problems at their source. We must clearly recognize that the policies of sectoral ministries, such as ministries of finance, industry, energy and agriculture, are the ones that determine the state of the environment and
(Mrs. Brundtland, Norway) consequently our options for the future. Sustainable development objectives must be integrated into the goals of all branches of public administration as well as the legislative bodies and municipal democratic institutions. We must break away from our sectoral ways of viewing economy and ecology. We must learn to accept the fact that environmental considerations and economic growth are parts of a unified management of our planet. The one is dependent upon the other.
In this connection, I believe that a very special role is to be played by our Secretary-General. In exercising his overriding and co-ordinating responsibilities for implementing sustainable development in the United Nations system, he needs our total support. We should all give the Secretary-General that precise support. It is indeed appropriate that our leading international civil servant assume a key role in pursuing the basic objectives for our survival: peace, development and environment.
MLG/edd
A/42/PV.41
16
(Mrs. Brundtland, Norway)
The United Nations system was brought into existence to provide multilateral solutions to shared problems. At this point in history, when we face the prospect of genuinely co-operative relations between the major Powers, should we not have the courage to use our global international Organization to provide political and intellectual leadership in saving this planet from degradation and collapse? Should we not adopt sustainable development as a central goal of the United Nations itself, assisted in that process by a strengthened United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), which can then fully perform its catalytic role?
The Commission has proposed that "Our Common Future", upon due consideration, be translated into a United Nations action programme for sustainable development. We are heartened by the large number of countries that have spoken favourably about our call for action and for concrete suggestions to assist and secure the follow-up process and successful implementation.
The time has now come to move forward towards a true revival of multilateralism. The time has come to restore the authority of the United Nations.
A broad and genuine process of global change will entail a further evolution of open societies, based on more effective popular participation in decision-making. The status of women will have to be further enhanced. Political reforms and broad access to knowledge and resources are obviously required.
Disabled people, whose handicaps may come from hunger, war, or environmental decline or disasters, must participate on an equal basis. The non-governmental organizations play an essential part. Their access and influence are central to sustainable development. They play an active role in translating political programmes into action. Industry should be at the forefront and be encouraged to develop more sustainable techniques. Trade unions must be seriously engaged in this essential process. Most important of all is the interaction between all these key players based on exchange of information, creative dialogue and inspiration.
MLG/edd
(Mrs. Brundtland, Norway)
The Commission's open method of work has generated great hopes and expectations in many parts of the globe. This General Assembly has the opportunity to respond to those expectations.
I cannot mention all the groups, organizations or Governments who have supported us and placed faith in us. We have received political, financial and intellectual support from a broad spectrum of sources. The Commission benefited from endless hours of sheer hard work by committed people. I offer thanks tp all of them from this rostrum as a humble gesture of profound gratitude.
The Secretary-General himself has been a most ardent supporter. His role, and the close co-operation with UNEP and its Executive Director, Mr. Tplba, gave us all an additional measure of mutual strength, conviction and dedication.
The Commission commends the report "Our Common Future" to the peoples of the United Nations.
Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Norway, was escorted from the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : I now call on the President of the Republic of Maldives, Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.
Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, President of the Republic of Maldives, was escorted to the rostrum.
President GAYOOM: It is indeed a great honour for me to participate in the United Nations special debate on issues of environment and development. I am here at this distinguished gathering not only to speak about environmental dangers and the struggle to save the Earth's environment, but also to share with the General Assembly our recent traumatic experiences of environmental disturbance and anomaly. As we are devoting our deliberations today solely to topics relating to
(President Gayoom) environment and development, I will not speak about any international political issues; my Government's views on them have already been stated by my Foreign Minister, when he had the privilege of addressing the Assembly earlier this month.
Before I proceed, however, Mr. President, may I congratulate you on your election to preside over this forty-second session of the General Assembly. I have no doubt that you will discharge your important duties with efficiency and skill. I should also like to convey my compliments to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for the exemplary manner in which he has been working for the cause of world peace and international understanding.
It is my particular pleasure today to express my sincere appreciation of Prime Minister Gro Brundtland of Norway, Chairman of the World Commission on Environment and Development, for her dedication to "the challenge of facing the future and of safeguarding the interests of coming generations", as she herself puts it in the Commission's exhaustive report, "Our Common Future". Indeed, I thank her for setting the noble example of a national leader who is motivated by an active concern for all the peoples of the world. I should also like to congratulate the United Nations Environment Programme, the Man and Biosphere Programme of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United States Environmental Protection Agency for their commendable pioneering efforts in the fight to save the world's threatened environment.
We are gathered1 here today at a time of potential crisis confronting our planet and its population - the crisis of environmental destruction which man has brought upon himself. Man’s actions over many centuries have transmuted the natural order of his environment to the point where the whole world is ensnared in the consequences. As the scale of man's intervention in nature has increased, the scope of nature's repercussions has multiplied. Consequences of the actions of individual nations have reverberated globally, and all mankind's present and) future generations may suffer the penalties for the errors of a few.
rToday, the world is faced with risks of irreversible damage to the human environment that threaten the very life-support systems of the earth, the basis for man's survival and progress. According to studies conducted by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 35 per cent of the earth's land surface, an area larger than the African continent and inhabited by more than 20 per cent of the world's population, is at risk from desertification. Up to a total of 20 million hectares of tropical forests, an area nearly the size of the United Kingdom, is estimated to be lost each year. And as much as from half a million to 1 million species of life on earth could be extinguished over the next two decades. This is all without precedent in human history. The words "environmental trends" have now come to embody a host of appalling global predicaments, such as desertifications, mass deforestation, loss of genetic resources, water pollution, toxic air emissions, hazardous wastes, acidification of the environment and world sea—level rise.
Scientists all over the world now accept the fact that concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases will continue to increase in coming decades, mainly as a result of human and industrial activities. They agree that these gases effectively enhance the greenhouse effects and deplete the stratospheric ozone layer and that these effects will, among several other critical
implications that they have for life on earth, gradually raise the earth's temperature and change its climatic patterns. Such global warming would not only thermally expand the oceans but also melt the polar ice-caps. The world sea level will consequently rise significantly faster than during the past century.
Scientific findings now predict a possible mean sea-level rise of about 1 metre within a century. Such a rise would have critical impacts on all coastal and island nations and prove physically, socially and economically disastrous.
The predicted effects of the change are unneverving. There will be significant shoreline movement and loss of land. A higher mean sea level would inevitably lead to increased frequency of inundation and exacerbate flood damage. It would swamp fertile deltas, causing loss of productive agricultural land and vegetation, and increase saline encroachment into aquifers, rivers and estuaries. The increased costs of the reconstruction, rehabilitation and strengthening of coastal defence systems could turn out to be crippling for most affected countries.
A number of scientists and organizations have independently carried out preliminary case studies on the possible effects of sea-level rise in different key coastal areas of the world, such as the Netherlands, the United States, Egypt, Bangladesh and the Maldives.
The study conducted in the Netherlands estimated that a 1 metre rise in sea level would make it 10 times more likely that the advanced coastal defence infrastructure at present protecting the country would be overtopped. Tidal wetlands, areas of high agricultural and horticultural importance, and densely populated urban industrialized zones, including the Rotterdam harbour area, would be threatened by erosion, salination or increased vulnerability to storm surges.
According to studies compiled by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, a sea-level rise of a few metres would in the United States inundate major
(President Gayoom) portions of Louisiana and Florida, as well as beach resorts along the coasts. A rise of 1 or 2 metres by the year 2100 could destroy 50 per cent to 80 per cent of United States coastal wetlands. The studies revealed that in the case of Egypt, a 1 to 3 metre rise in sea level could erode up to 20 per cent of the nation's arable land, unsettling up to 21 per cent of the country's population, or over 10 million people. In Bangladesh this rise could swamp up to 27 per cent of the total land area, displacing up to 25 million people.
As for my own country, the Maldives, a mean sea-level rise of 2 metres would suffice virtually to submerge the entire country of 1,190 small islands, most of which barely rise over 2 metres above mean sea level. That would be the death of a nation. With a mere 1 metre rise, also, a storm surge would be catastrophic and possibly fatal to the nation.
We in the Maldives have seen and lived through grim experiences which could be indicators of the dire consequences of global environmental change provoked and exacerbated by man. Geographically, the Maldive Islands lie in the equatorial calm of the northern Indian Ocean, away from cyclone paths. The brief annual monsoonal turbulences and the occasional high tidal swells have hardly ever endangered the 190,000 inhabitants of the islands until now. This year the frequency and magnitude of unusual tidal wave action have risen alarmingly. The period from 10 to 12 April recorded the highest sea level evidenced in the country, during which unusual high waves at high tide struck the islands with a ferocity that inflicted extensive and unprecedented damage throughout the country. Male, the capital island, housing one quarter of the nations's population, suffered the worst of the ordeal. One fourth of the urban land was inundated by salt water and 30 per cent of the land reclaimed during the last seven years was completely washed away.
The nation's only international airport sustained extensive damage to its physical infrastructure and installations. Along the full length of the archipelago large parts of several islands on the south and south-eastern atoll rims were extensively flooded or inundated. Breakwaters, harbours, boats, causeways, houses and property fell victim to the ocean's assault. Agricultural crops and vegetation succumbed to the salt-water encroachment above and below the ground surface. Throughout the country beaches were damaged, placing at risk one of the country's chief income-generating natural resources.
The incident was branded a freak occurrence at the time, but it recurred in the southern atolls, though to a lesser extent, during June and September, and we are now compelled to accept the traumatic reality that the worst may be yet to come.
It was the testimony of ordinary people, as Mrs. Brundtland has remarked, that convinced the World Commission on Environment and Development of the human costs of such environmental destruction. That being so, I have brought to this special debate the testimony of the people of the Maldives.
The rich and developed nations clearly have the wealth and the land to defend themselves from a rise in sea level, even if they wait for it to occur, yet they are already preparing. Because small States are more vulnerable, we have to prepare sooner. But the Maldives lacks the economic, technical and technological capability to deal with the formidable prospects of a significant rise in sea level. We did not contribute to the impending catastrophe to our nation; and, alone, we cannot save ourselves.
The profound dilemma of environmental transition is a global one and its implications are worldwide and long term. Though the Maldives and other low-lying archipelagic nations may have to suffer the most immediate and extreme effects of a global sea-level rise, there is a potential danger to a significant portion of the
BHS/MO
A/42/PV.41
27
(President Gayoom) world's population in the near future. The costs of lethargy and complacency in investing in environmental protection and improvement are clearly spiralling. Measures cannot be taken in isolation. No one nation, or even group of nations, can alone combat the onset of a global change in the environment.
Given the trends of international involvement in the issue of environment, the Maldives can only offer the experiences of an endangered nation. The Maldive. Islands are not merely the home of a few thousand people; they are a unique natural phenomenon, such as is found nowhere else on this earth. It is the phenomenon that Thor Heyerdahl, the Norwegian explorer, describes in his book The Maldive Mystery as "green jade necklaces and scattered emerald jewellery placed on blue velvet" with each islet a "separate gem set in a ring of golden beach sand".
The Maldives possesses delicately balanced fragile and transient environmental ecosystems in its atolls of coral islands and reefs. It is endowed with islands crowned with green palms and lush tropical vegetation, fringed with white sandy beaches and inset within stretches of clear turquoise lagoons and living reefs. A beauty canopied by blue skies and nurtured by pure fresh air and warm sunshine.
It is now a distressing probability that the environmental change caused by industrial progress in the developed world may slowly drown this unique paradise in its entirety. The country's ecosystems alone, by virtue of their uniqueness and vulnerability, deserve protection. Our authorities are monitoring the sea-level changes with two gauges recently installed as part of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission's Gloss Global sea-level network. Elementary monitoring and research activités on these ecosystems are being initiated in the country. We need to monitor the increases and understand the response of our coral reefs. We hope that this activity, if augmented by a concerted international effort, can evolve into a worthy scientific research programme which can ultimately help save
(President Gayoom) millions of lives around the world. With such help the Maldives can be protected and preserved as a biosphere reserve for scientific study or an environmental sanctuary of aesthetic beauty and tranquillity which can benefit all the world.
It is in the interest of all the world that climatic changes are understood and the risk of irreversible damage to natural systems and the threats to the very survival of man evaluated and allayed with the greatest urgency. The world has already seen the first few steps in this new and much needed awakening. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the International Council of Scientific Unions are promoting the World Climate Research Programme. National and international organizations and movements are trying to make headway against the rising tide of environmental destruction; the list is too long to be cited here. All these efforts, and specifically UNEP's initiatives, as signified by tne World Commission on Environment and Development, and the recent, historic Montreal protocol, an agreement to reduce the world-wide use of chorofluorocarbons, bring rays of hope into the bleakness of the issue. But this is not enough. The hope must be sustained and realized. In the face of a global threat, anything less than an all-encompassing international commitment and effort can become futile in this colossal struggle.
The economic, technical and technological resources are available collectively. It is not too late to save the world. It is not too late to save the Maldives and other low-lying island nations. Only the vital collective commitment is missing. And I believe that we are gathered here today to initiate just such a commitment.
Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, President of the Republic of Maldives, was escorted from the rostrum.	,
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the Prime Minister of the Republic of Zimbabwe and Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Mr. Mugabe.
Mr. Robert G._______Mugabe, Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, was escorted to the rostrum.
-—'...........MUGABE (Zimbabwe) : Sir, the head of the Zimbabwe delegation to the General Assembly at the forty-second session has already congratulated you on your unanimous election to the presidency of this body. Allow me also to add my own personal felicitations to you. Your election is a recognition of your commitment to the cause of multilateralism and a fitting tribute to the role played by your country in international affairs.
The Secretary—General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has proved to be a dedicated champion of the cause of peace. We admire his commitment to the service of humankind. We all owe him a debt of gratitude. Therefore, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, of which his country, Peru, is a valued member, I want to thank him most sincerely and ask him to persevere in his labours in the search for peace, justice, equality and progress throughout the world.
To my colleague Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway I wish to extend special thanks for a job well done. The task requested of her by the Secretary-General and the international community was not an easy one. It involved, inter alia, preparing strategies for sustainable global development and its impact on the environment to the year 2000 and beyond. This was a daunting task. It called for imagination, determination and above all a vision of a common future. It required a review and mastery of a vast range of complex technical and political concepts. The result is the Commission's report just presented to this Assembly, which, together with those of the Brandt Commission on North-South issues and the Palme Commission on security and disarmament issues, now forms the third
(Mr. Mugabe, Zimbabwe) leg of this great triad on which peace, security and the well-being of all of us can be built. We are all much indebted to the members of the Brundtland Commission. Their report is like a breath of fresh air in a world polluted by poverty, hunger, disease, racism, industrial waste and the threat of nuclear annihilation.
It mercilessly exposes the errors of our ways and quite rightly castigates us for foolishly acting the part of the biblical prodigal son, when we know that we do not have a wealthy and magnanimous father to run to after the fun is over. The development path we have chosen, the report makes clear, is unsustainable. Our use of the earth and its bounty has been selfish, haphazard and extravagant. Present developmental trends threaten to radically alter the planet, threatening the lives of many of its species, including, ultimately, humankind itself. Each year 6 million hectares of productive dry land turns into worthless desert, 11 million hectares of forest are destroyed, and acid precipitation kills forests and lakes and acidifies vast tracts of soil beyond reasonable hope of repair. The burning of fossil fuels emits carbon dioxide into the air, causing a gradual warming of the globe - the so-called greenhouse effect. By early next century global temperatures may have been raised enough to cause a shift in agricultural . production areas, raise sea levels to flood coastal cities, and disrupt national economies. Other industrial gases threaten to deplete the planet's protective ozone shield to such an extent that the number of human and animal cancers would rise sharply and the food chain of the oceans would be disrupted. Industry and agriculture place toxic substances into the human food chain and into underground water tables beyond reach of cleansing. We use resources such as land, trees and animal life at rates that deny those resources the time to regenerate themselves. As the report so eloquently states:
(Mr. Mugabe, Zimbabwe) "Nature is bountiful, but it is also fragile and finely balanced. There are thresholds that cannot be crossed without endangering the basic integrity of the system. Today we are close to many of these thresholds; we must be ever mindful of the risk of endangering the survival of life on Earth." (A/42/427, p. 44)
This is a sombre picture of our present misdeeds and possible future if we carry on as before. From this it is clear that we cannot go on as in the past. We must change our ways. There are compelling political, economic, social and moral imperatives for doing that. We inherited the earth from our forefathers and hold it in trust for our children. It is a debt of honour that we should pass it on in a livable state - at the very least the state in which it was passed on to us.
' Therefore all nations have a duty to address the challenge facing us; for what happens in one part of the globe has consequences for all. The disappearance of rain forests in the tropics and the loss of plant and animal species and changes in rainfall patterns caused partly by desertification and deforestation in developing countries have their impact on the developed countries, while the release of carbon dioxide and of gases that react with the ozone layer, mainly by the industrialized countries, have their own implications for the developing countries. Many of the risks stemming from productive activity and the technologies we use cross national boundaries. Though the activities that give rise to these dangers tend to be concentrated in a few countries, the risks involved are shared by all, rich and poor - those who benefit from them and those who do not - and most who share in the risks have little influence on the decision-making processes that regulate these activities. Perhaps the most pertinent example in this connection is the existence of nuclear weapons and the possibility of nuclear war. The existence of nuclear weapons means that the fate of 5 billion people, the planet Earth itself and all the species upon it is in the hands of a handful of persons. Even without a
(Mr. Mugabe, Zimbabwe) nuclear war, Chernobyl and Three Mile Island have happened. Radioactive wastes from the nuclear industry remain hazardous for centuries.
The report also cites preventable poverty as one of the major causes of environmental degradation today. It argues that poverty pollutes our environment. Those who are poor and hungry will often destroy their immediate environment in order to survive. They will cut down their forests. Their livestock will overgraze the grasslands and in growing numbers will crowd into congested cities. They will overuse marginal land.
This explains why the greatest environmental damage is occurring in developing countries. These countries are poor. They are faced with falling commodity prices, a rise in protectionism, a crushing debt burden and dwindling or even reverse financial flows. If their commodities bring little money, they must produce more of them to bring in the same amount or at times even less. To do this, they cut down trees, bring under cultivation marginal land, overgraze their pastures and in the process make desert out of previously productive land.
But in these actions the poor have no choice. They cannot exercise the option to die today so as to live well tomorrow. Developing countries are caught in a vicious circle, which the Commissioners have acknowledged in their report.
(Mr.•Mugabe> Zimbabwe)
I am reminded here of the story related by a former Yugoslav Foreign Minister, Comrade Marinkovitch, to the Commission for European Union in January 1931. In replying to criticism by industrialized States, he illustrated the dilemma in which his country found itself, thus:
Last year, when I was in the Yugoslav mountains, I heard that the inhabitants of a small mountain village, having no maize or wheat on which to live, were simply cutting down a wood which belonged to them ... and were living on what they earned by selling the wood ... I went to the village, collected together some of the leading inhabitants and endeavoured to reason with them, just like the great industrial States reason with us. I said to them: ’You possess plenty of common sense. You see that your forest is becoming smaller and smaller. What will you do when you cut down the last tree?’ They replied to me: ’Your Excellency, that is a point which worries us, but on the other hand, what should we do now if we stopped cutting down our trees?’
I can assure you that the agricultural countries cure in exactly the same situation. You threaten them with future disasters; but they are already in the throes of disasters."
Developing countries today find themselves in a similar predicament. They know that cutting down trees and the destruction of tropical forests will lead to soil erosion and future disasters, but their problem is survival today. The answer to their predicament does not lie in demanding that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank or other institutions not give them assistance until they promise not to destroy the tropical forests. Such conditionality would be self-defeating. What is needed is the injection of more resources to enable the developing countries to formulate development programmes that have environmental
(Mr. Mugabe, Zimbabwe) safeguards. To ask us to plan for our survival tomorrow when our survival today is in doubt is to demand too much of us, for it is only when we can survive today that we can talk of tomorrow.
The report before us must be commended for its clear articulation of the causes and impact of poverty on the developing countries and on our common environment. The developing countries have had, over the past few decades, to face life-threatening environmental concerns. They have operated in a world in which the resources gap between most developing and industrial nations is ever widening; in a world where the industrial nations not only dominate the rule-making of some key international bodies, but have already used much of the planet's ecological capital. This inequality, the report notes, is the planet's main environmental problem and also its main development problem.
In short, it is largely the current inequitable international economic system, which takes more out of the poor nations than it puts in, which is the major cause of environmental degradation in the developing world. The decline in commodity prices compels developing countries, many of which are heavily dependent on primary commodities, to overuse their fragile soils in the hope of raising enough money to enable them to purchase the ever more expensive manufactured goods from the industrialized world. Trade barriers in many industrialized countries make it hard for developing countries to sell their goods for reasonable returns, putting yet more pressure on the ecological system. External debt devours nearly all the export earnings of the developing poor nations, leaving them with little or no export earnings at all for domestic investment and development.
Recent figures of the United Nations indicate that about 70 per cent of the total debt of developing countries is owed by countries whose exports of primary commodities account for 50 per cent or more of their total exports. For
(Mr; Mugabe, Zimbabwe) sub-Saharan Africa primary products account for over 90 per cent of total exports. The creation of stable markets and the establishment of just and fair prices for primary commodities in the international markets could be a significant starting point on the road to sustainable development in the developing world. For that to happen, commodity markets need a thorough restructuring. Both producers and consumers should co-operate in bringing stability to the commodity markets and should share the benefits of trade equitably.
The current negative economic trends must be reversed. For this to happen, it is imperative that a solution to the crisis of external indebtedness be found. According to recent projections the total external debt of developing countries will be about $US 1,020 billion by the end of 1987. Under present circumstances such a debt cannot be repaid. We in the Non-Aligned Movement view the debt crisis as a major symptom of the prevailing inequitable international economic relations. The crisis highlights the urgent need for the international community to adopt a coherent approach to the interrelated problems of money, finance, debt, trade and development that confront us today. That is why we believe that the early convening of an international conference on money and finance for development with universal participation is already overdue. We hope that the report before us will make those who previously resisted the call for such a conference realize that they too have a stake in the convening and success of such a conference.
This report offers us an opportunity to address some of these major problems. It is in part for that reason that I said earlier that the report before us is also like a breath of fresh air. In a world where in most fields, from the arms race to regional crises and the ailing international economy, humankind seems to have lost control over its destiny, this report makes clear that we are not condemned to keep
(Mr. Mugabe, Zimbabwe) sliding down the precipice. Solutions, are not only possible, but well within grasp, if only there is the requisite political will and international co-operation. What we need therefore are policies that can sustain and expand the environmental resources base. The report is to us an urgent notice, based on the latest and best scientific evidence, that the time has come to take the decisions needed to secure the resources to sustain this and coming generations.
That is the challenge to us and the message of this report. We can do it, but we cannot succeed except in a context of multilateralism. As the Chairman has put it so well in the foreword to the report;
"Perhaps our most urgent task today is to persuade nations of the need to return to multilateralism. ... The challenge of finding sustainable development paths ought to provide the impetus - indeed the imperative - for a renewed search for multilateral solutions and a restructured international economic system of co-operation. These challenges cut across the divides of national sovereignty, of limited strategies for economic gain, and of separated disciplines of science." (A/42/427, p; 12) Here, I submit, is the heart of the matter, what is needed is greater democratization of international decision-making processes so as to enhance international co-operation for the management of economic and ecological interdependence. But what we have seen in the last decade and a half is a standstill in global co-operation and at times even a retreat from multilateralism. We need to revese these trends if we are effectively to address our common future.
(Mr. Mugabe, Zimbabwe)
What is remarkable about this important conclusion is that, starting from a totally different perspective, the Brundtland Commission should have concluded by issuing the same clarion call championed by developing countries for decades. Indeed the whole perception of the debt crisis, the widening gap between developed and developing countries, the unacceptable diversion of resources from economic development to the arms race, and the dangers to the continued survival of mankind posed by nuclear weapons is in line with our own. Only a few months ago, during the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, the non-aligned nations spent a great deal of energy urging developed countries to give due importance to non-military threats to security such as poverty, illiteracy, hunger and under-development. That Conference constituted an important step on the road to a more rational reordering of priorities and to sustainable development. This report, via another route, has arrived at basically similar conclusions.
The case made by the report before us for sustainable development is not substantially different from the case made over the years by the developing countries. But its importance lies in the fact that its membership comprised commissioners from the South and the North. Their ability to agree on some of the key issues augurs well for the resuscitation of multilateralism.
In conclusion, I wish to say that what we need now is action. What is before us is a means to an end, and not the end itself. We should resist the tendency to quibble about this or that word or phrase in the report. Let us use the bricks in this report to build the house we want to live in.
Mr. Robert G. Mugabe, Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, was escorted from the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the Prime Minister of the Republic of India.
Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India, was escorted to the rostrum.
Mr. GANDHI (India) : The miracles of modern science and the towering achievements of technology have given us a measure of mastery over nature. Economic progress has, however, engendered a callous disregard of the harmony within the ecological system. Therefore, we have to consciously remind ourselves: we are a part of nature; we are not apart from nature. We are a strand in the single fabric whose warp and weft link together all that is of the earth and the water, the air and the sky.
We have learned to our cost that development which destroys the environment eventually destroys development itself. We have learned to our benefit that development that conserves the environment conserves also the fruits of development. There is thus no fundamental dichotomy between conservation and growth.
Yet striking the right balance between the environmental imperative and the demands of development is not that simple. Conservation imposes an escalation in costs, when resources are limited, the increased cost of any one project necessarily means less investment for others. This appears to imply a curtailment of economic growth. When the evnironment is not protected, damage to the environment will extract its own price - from those living in the vicinity, from others at a distance, or even from a coming generation.
We do not know enough about the impact on the environment of developmental decisions. We also do not know enough about how best to offset damage to the
^r‘ Gandhi, India) environment. There are no easy solutions. Yet we cannot ignore environmental considerations. We have to strive for the optimum mix through increased knowledge and increased awareness.
In India, we are seeing a growing awareness of the symbiotic relationship between the protection of the environment and sustainable development. There is the renowned chipko movement in the Himalayas, where women prevent the wanton felling of trees by throwing themselves protectively around tree-trunks. Island communities join hands to stop the coral—mining which destroys their lagoons. Villagers band together to stop goats from grazing on the bramble planted to halt the advance of the desert. Environmental groups are active. In our Parliament, members are increasingly receptive to environmental concerns. They are beginning to demand that the conservation of the environment be guaranteed before major development projects are undertaken.
^ At one time, environmental issues related mainly to the quality of life of the affluent. Today, in developing countries like ours, we are primarily concerned with the lives of the poorest, when village ponds and wells go dry, it is the poor who trek to ever-more distant sources for water. When forests are destroyed, it is the poor who go farther and farther afield in the search for fuel wood. As lands are degraded and forests recede, it is the poor and their animals who, in the dry season, trudge hundreds of kilometres in search of grazing lands, it is the livelihood of the poor, and their hopes, that shrivel in the arid anguish of drought and are drowned in the raging fury of floods.
It is also the poor who suffer most from pollution. When water-borne epidemics strike the urban slums, it is the poor who are afflicted by disease and even death. When factories spew harmful gases into the air, it is the workers in the nearby housing colonies who suffer the contagion. When industrial units
(Mr. Gandhi, India) discharge their effluent into rivers, it is the poor fisher folk who are deprived of their incomes.
Although they bear the brunt of environmental damage, the poor are themselves little responsible for any of that damage. For centuries, they have lived in harmony with nature. The problem is caused by large-scale commercial exploitation, which garners the profits but escapes the consequences. Yet when laws are passed and rules are made to conserve the environment, the burden falls on those who have gained the least and suffered the most. The people of the forest cannot suddenly be cordoned off from its bounty. Fuel and building materials must be made readily available, at prices thay can afford. Shepherds and cowherds must be found alternative pastures or provided fodder. To be effective, conservation must be humane. That is the challenge before us.
A large nunber of animal and plant species are seriously threatened. Apart from the ethical and aesthetic case for protecting these disappearing species, it is possible that answers to unsolved problems of health and survival might be found in the yet undiscovered secrets of these gene pool reserves.
We in India are now developing mechanisms to control pollution and check the deterioration of the environnment. We assess the environmental impact of development work so as to harmonize development with the environment. We carry out research and take the results out to the field. We promote environmental awareness among the people. We hope this will lead to greater vision, concern and care in the planning, designing and implementation of development projects. We learn as we go along.	.
We are trying to integrate these complex environmental issues into our design of development. There are no easy or ready-made answers. In principle we would wish to give equal priority to development and conservation. In practice there are many gaps in knowledge, many intangibles and unknown quantities. Experts disagree and assessments vary.
Conservation is not a national task alone. Even as peace is indivisible, so is the world environment. The one world which Jawaharlal Nehru spoke of so often in this very forum is a world which exists in the physical laws governing the environment. The environment everywhere is jeopardized by the noxious fumes and the life-killing wastes of industrial pollution. The poisoning of the rivers and seas deprives and endangers all of us all over the world. The accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and the threat to the ozone layer put the innocent as much at risk as the polluters themselves.
Worst of all is the passing on of pollution and environmental hazards beyond one's boundaries. There is no political boundary which delimits the spread of poisonous gases, no line on a map which radiation cannot cross, no national frontier at which effluénts can be turned back. All those affected by such transnational consequences of environmental damage must have an equal say in the resolution of problems. We must also keep the global commons and space free of
environmental degradation. The conservation of the earth's environment has to be ensured through democratic discussions and decisions in international forums, it also requires concerted international action to reduce disparities between countries. The compulsions of development and limitations of financial resources tempt many developing countries to exploit their natural resources beyond endurance, ignoring environmental safeguards. If the world economy is to move to more sustainable paths of development, the crucial requirement is to widen the options available to developing countries for growth.
A world economic system which denies itself the benefits of interdependence is both unjust and inefficient. Growth in the developing countries is being hampered by protectionism, the deteriorating real terms of trade, the unfavourable conditions for the transfer of technology and the curtailment of the flow of development assistance.
Programmes of conservation must therefore be addressed to inequities in the international economic order. For example, the lion's share of the world's natural resources has been pre-empted by a few countries. The average citizen of the industrialized countries consumes 10 times more fossil fuels and minerals than the average citizen of the developing world. The world's resources just cannot sustain such profligate consumption of energy and materials.
The developing countries cannot be denied the right to develop; nor are the world's natural resources sufficient for all to follow the greedy path to growth. What, then, is the answer to the conundrum? The answer lies in more rational patterns of consumption, more efficient utilization of depletable resources by the developed countries and more equitable access to those resources for the developing.
The international conununity must also address itself to safety measures in high-risk industries. Bhopal, Seveso and Chernobyl have shown how vulnerable we are. It is incumbent on the management of such industries to ensure the utmost vigilance in design, operation and maintenance. Valuable lives must not be lost to inefficiency, indifference, negligence, or worse.
All other environmental dangers pale in comparison to the ever accumulating stockpiles of nuclear weapons. We must remove the threat of a thermonuclear war's wiping out, in a wink of history, life as we know it from our common planet. All nuclear weapons must be dismantled.
The report "Our common future" is both a document of high technical excellence and a call to concerted political action. The report reminds us that "the earth is one, but the world is not*. We must recognize that, even as development which degrades the environment is self-defeating, so do impediments to development endanger the environment. We must also recognize that environmental issues ate closely linked to the larger issues of peaceful coexistence and international co-operation, disarmament and development. Any unidimensional perspective on the environment would be gravely misplaced, the environment is an international issue, to be placed in the context of international co-operation, to be pursued through international institutions, to be linked to all aspects of international relations. Conservation is each nation's task, but it is a task which can be accomplished only ip the setting of a co-operative world order.
In one of his most famous slokas, Guru Nanak Dev, the founder of the Sikh religion, sang:
"Air is the vital force,
Water the Progenitor:
The vast Earth is Mother of All."
The verse sums up the Indian tradition of respect for nature, respect for all that gives us life, respect for the sources of our well-being on earth. In our tradition there is no arrogance towards nature, no desire to dominate it. Our ancient wisdom teaches us to seek harmony with all creation. All creation is i nte rdepende nt.
The core of the Brundtland report is recognition of that interdependence. Everything in our experience, from the centuries-old teaching of our seers to our contemporary experiments in development, endorses the essence of the message given to us by Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland and her colleagues. We thank them in all sincerity for their deep insights and sage advice.
I should like also to express my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his constructive role in focusing the attention of the international community on this vital issue.
The report of the Commission is the culmination of an important phase of the task. The international community will have to carry forward that task. As experience grows and lacunae in knowledge are filled, answers will slowly be found to the complex questions of development and the environment. The search for the right answers must go on relentlessly. It is a world-wide endeavour to which India pledges unstinting support.
Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, Prime Minister of India, was escorted from the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian); I now call on the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Denmark, His Excellency Mr. Poul Schluter, who will speak on behalf of the States members of the European Community.
Mr; Poul Schluter/ Prime Minister • of - Denmark/ was escorted• to- the - rostrum.
Mr. SCHLUTER (Denmark); It is a special privilege and a great pleasure for me today to speak on behalf of the European Community and its member States. The reason is that I can warmly congratulate the Prime Minister of Norway, Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, on the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, which she today has introduced to the General Assembly. Our congratulations, of course, go also to the other members of the Commisssion on their extremely necessary and valuable report, "Our Common Future".
We think that it was a wise and far-reaching decision the Assembly took in 1983 by adopting the resolution that has resulted in this report.
Over the years we have witnessed doomsday prophecies of what would happen if we just let the world go on as it is going. This applies to environmental aspects in the broadest sense as well as to relations between rich and poor countries. Fortunately, prophecies seldom come true. They may serve as an eye-opener and stimulate a debate on threatening trends. The debates on world development and environmental issues have been very useful. We may disagree on how far we have come in tackling the environmental and development problems. No one, however, will deny that very much remains to be done.
In spite of the remarkable progress in promoting development, it is still a fact that an increasing number of people are living in extremely poor conditions. In spite of the increasing awareness of the need to protect the resource base of the planet it is still a fact that an erosion of that base is taking place with alarming speed.
The report of the World Commission is not a doomsday prophecy, but a very timely reminder of the fragile ecological balance on which we have based our economic development. By bringing together all the environmental concerns that have been voiced over the years and placing them in the context of a strategy for truly sustainable development, the World Commission has made a useful contribution to the inclusion of the environment in the political agenda of today. It is an appeal to us all and a great challenge at the same time. The report grasps the fundamental questions we are facing right now: what are we doing to nature? What are we doing to each other? What are we handing over to our children and grandchildren? Are we able to switch global development into a new direction? Are we too ossified in our attitudes and modes of thinking to revise our concepts of the quality of life? Is consumption on the present pattern sustainable? Those are fundamental questions - and there are a lot more.
The questions require, in the view of the Community, thorough consideration in all countries, and we have no doubt that we will all come to the same conclusion: a need to find new directions for the evolution of our societies. In this respect we, as policy-makers, have a special responsibility to take the lead and convince our constituencies of the global and mutual interest in finding a path to a better life for all people. But, if I may, I would quote a Danish poet of our time, Piet Hein, who said with three T-words what I believe to be very true: "Things Take Time". We must realistically take into account that this applies also to these problems, even though we know that some of the problems confronting us are serious and, of course, of an urgent nature.
Pessimism and gloominess are not my personal style: I believe in the future. With the creative human mind and political will we have the ability to make the world a better world. The European Community would therefore like to stress
that the World Commisssion, although it paints an alarming and depressing picture of the environmental and development problems, strikes a generally optimistic tone in its assessment of our ability to overcome the problems. But it requires that the basic concepts of the Brundtland report be taken very seriously by the world community.
The report is a complex, wide-ranging and thorough description of the current global situation and prospects for the future. It proposes long-term environmental strategies for achieving sustainable development to the year 2000 and beyond. The twin goals of economic development and well-being, on the one hand, and the preservation of and care about the environment, on the other, are placed in a common context which expands our understanding of the interrelationship between these two goals. It stresses the possibility of implementing the two goals at the same time, and makes a number of proposals in that regard.
Let us not conceal the fact that there are differing views on some of the conclusions drawn by the World Commission. We, for our part, have this summer made our views known. When we deal with such highly complex issues, it is not surprising that perceptions may differ.
The basic approach of the report, however, the emphasis on sustainable development, is universally endorsed. Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs is the true challenge of our time. I can assure the Assembly that the European Community and its member States stand ready to shoulder their part of this joint responsibility.
The report emphasizes not only that development must be sustainable, but that it should itself be based on economic growth and that environmental concerns must be integrated into all economic considerations.
Sustainable development is not relevant only when questions of environment or development in general are being dealt with: it is as relevant when dealing with
(Mr* Schluter, Denmark) specific economic sectors such as energy, industrial development, agricultural policy, and so forth. And sustainable development is an issue for the developing as well as the developed part of the world. Care for the environment is a global concern. As is said in the report, we have in the past been concerned about the impacts of economic growth upon the environment, but now we are forced to concern ourselves with the impacts of ecological stress - such as degradation of soils, water régimes and forests - upon our economic prospects.
The Assembly decided at its thirty-eighth session that the report of the Commission should in the first instance be considered by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and that UNEP should hand over the report to the General Assembly together with its comments, it further decided that, on those matters which are under consideration by the General Assembly itself, the Assembly would consider the relevant aspects of the report of the Commission.
We are now attending the first session of the General Assembly since the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development was completed and published. It is now up to Member States to react to the strong appeals contained in the report. The report provides us with clear and positive guidance for the solution of the problems.	.
The Governing Council of UNEP accepted the report as a guideline to be taken into account in its future work. The Governing Council also decided to submit a draft resolution to the General Assembly for its consideration.
The European Community and its member States fully support the adoption of the draft resolution. It recommends that the report of the World Commission be transmitted to all Governments and to other parts of the United Nations system for further study, and invites them to take account of the analysis and recommendations in determining their policies and programmes. It is our hope that the Assembly will adopt the draft resolution by consensus and with full determination to follow it up.
Some aspects of the World Commission's report fall outside the mandate and purview of UNEP. We remain ready to discuss those issues also in the relevant organizations and bodies.	-
Let me in general terms assure the Assembly and Mrs. Brundtland and her colleagues on the Conunission that the Community and its member States are prepared
to discuss the issues brought up in the report of the World Commission to help promote solutions to the immense problems covered in the report. Accordingly, we can give our support to the recommendations in the draft resolution that United Nations agencies should review their policies and activities aimed at contributing to sustainable development.
In this way the report of the World Commission should not only help us and other countries to focus more clearly on environmental issues, but indeed help to anchor the environmental issues firmly in the United Nations system. It should help all United Nations agencies to take full cognizance of the importance of environment issues beyond the specific sectoral aspects which have hitherto been addressed.
The General Assembly itself has an important role in seeing that sustainable development finds its way into the activities of the United Nations system, and we therefore look forward to the General Assembly's review of the issue in 1989.
The Community and its member States have already discussed specific aspects of the Commission's report among themselves, as for example at a meeting of European Community Energy Ministers in Denmark last month. The report and its conclusions will also be discussed next weekend at a meeting in the Netherlands between Environment Ministers of the European Community and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). More generally, in May 1987 the Council of Ministers called upon the European Commission and the member States to think constructively about the conclusions of the report in the light of the discussions in the United Nations and taking account of the multisectoral approach of the report.
The commitment of the Community and its member States to the environmental cause, however, is not new. This has been reflected in Community policies for many years, and was recently reaffirmed in what is known as the Single European Act,
(Mr. Schluter, Denmark) which contains a new legal basis for our policy on the environment. I should also like to mention that in 1984 the Council of the European Community adopted a resolution on the environmental dimension of the Community's development policy. This was followed last year by a resolution on the European plan for the protection of natural resources and the fight against desertification in Africa. Also, the Conference on forests and trees, hosted by the French Government at the beginning of 1986, should be seen in this context.
At the national level in the European Community thorough attention has been paid to the World Commission report and has led to fruitful discussions. In our member States consideration is now being given to possible follow-up to the conclusions in the report. I am sure that others are having similar national and regional level discussions and we hope that, in compliance with the draft resolution, everyone will participate in a positive manner in the discussions that must take place at a global level in the near future.
We cannot afford to stop the discussions on these important matters after this meeting. It is important that deliberations on sustainable development and its implications are given higher priority and become a continuous and effective process.
This year we have made a start. It is, however, of the utmost importance, that the discussions are followed up by actions.
Mr. Poul Schluter, Prime Minister of Denmark, was escorted from_the rostrum.
MLG/mh
Mr. McMILIAN (Canada) (interpretation from French) : It is a great honour for mef as Canada’s Minister of the Environment, to explain my country's perspective on the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development in this special debate in the United Nations General Assembly, (spoke in English)
The Brundtland Report is a landmark document, providing as it does a strategy for the entire world community on the most vital issues of our time.
Those issues addressed in the report - pollution, environmental degradation, economic development and poverty - are not new. Indeed, individual countries and the world community as a whole, through the United Nations, have grappled with them for decades.
In 1969 the then Secretary-General U Thant issued the following warning:
(Mr. McMillan, Canada) "The Members of the United Nations have perhaps 10 years left ... in which to subordinate their ancient quarrels and launch a global partnership to curb the arms race, to improve the human environment, to defuse the population explosion, and to supply the required momentum to development efforts. If such a global partnership is not forged within the next decade ... then the problems I have mentioned will have reached such staggering proportions that they will be beyond our capacity to control."*
U Thant was no alarmist. His were well-informed concerns. If he was correct 18 years ago, then we today are not just running out of time, we are living on borrowed time.
The Assembly might consider these facts. Some 15 million acres of productive land around the world are converted into worthless desert every year - an area, during a 30 year period, larger than Canada's three prairie provinces combined, in Canada alone we lose 26 acres of productive farmland every hour to urbanization. More than 27 million acres of forest throughout the world are destroyed each year -an area equivalent, over three decades, to Canada's six eastern provinces. Deforestation caused by logging, farming, ranching and mining is expected to eradicate 1 million species of flora and fauna by the end of the twentieth century. The rate of habitat destruction and species extinction throughout the world is so rapid that renowned Canadian scientist, Dr. David Suzuki, has predicted that all wilderness is likely to vanish within the next 30 years.
Single incidents - such as those of Three Mile Island, Bhopal and Chernobyl -jolt us into realizing both how vulnerable we are and how often we have been spared total disaster by the grace of God alone. Our reprieve may be short-lived.
* Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore) , Vice-President, took the Chair.
JSM/MO
A/42/PV.41
62
(Mr. McMillan, Canada)
If we are, indeed, living on borrowed time, we should ask ourselves, from whom have we borrowed it? The concept of sustainable development articulated by the World Commission provides I think, the answer. The Commission defines sustainable development as that which
"meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs".	(A/42/427, p. 54)
It is significant that the Commission has defined the concept in temporal terms. The message is clear: when we fail to act within the framework of sustainable development we not only borrow from future generations, we steal from them as well.
But, when the natural environment is sacrificed in pursuit of economic goals grounded exclusively in the present, we suffer in our own time. That is especially true of people in the developing world. If poverty is pollution, as some have suggested, then pollution is also poverty. Poverty perpetuates a vicious circle. Out of sheer desperation, people destroy their natural resources for food, heat and shelter - the very resources they need to escape their desperation. As developing nations plunge into debt, the vicious circle is accelerated. We wealthy countries have failed in our efforts to alleviate the plight of the world's poor. Worse still, we have often contributed to their plight, however unwittingly.
Surely the policies of the industrialized world are fundamentally flawed when the interest payments of many developing countries are larger than the amounts they receive from us in aid. We may not ourselves strip their rain forests of virgin timber, but we certainly bear some responsibility for the conditions that compel those who do.
If, in the words of ecologist Richard st. Barbe Baker, the planet is being "skinned alive", industrialized countries contribute to the offence both at home and abroad.
l^1 McMillan, Canada)
indeed, the history of humanity as a »hole has been one of seemingly unbridled planetary destruction. It is as though our ultimate purpose is to exploit every natural resource until nothing remains of it. Baying decimated one species, we line up the next victim for slaughter. It is the supreme irony that, throughout history, the very resources that humankind has extinguished are those which, had they been well managed, would have been renewable. One wonders whether we are driven by a kind of death wish that challenges us to test the outer limits of our capacity to destroy everything we tobch, including ourselves. Perhaps Bertrand Russell was right when he observed:
Ever since Adam ate the apple, man has never refrained from any folly of which he was capable."
When will we realize that there is nothing intrinsically hospitable about planet Earth? Our planet does not support a rich and complex web of life because it is ideally suited for that purpose; it is ideally suited for that purpose because of the rich and complex web of life. Without the moderating effects of vegetation, of gas exchanges and of the recycling of materials conducted by billions of invertebrates, the planet Earth would be as unlikely a site for the Garden of Eden as the planet Mars. The disaster created by desertification in areas like Ethiopia where forests once flourished should sound the alarm about the fate of Earth if we persist on our course.
The dire warning and inspired counsel of the Brundtland Commission have come none too soon for all of us. Canada is heeding that warning and accepting that counsel.	'
The Canadian response to the World Commission extends well beyond Government. Just as Canadians originally called for the Commission, generously funded it and supported its work throughout, so also are we consulting one another about how to set on its findings. Among other things, we formed a National Task Force on
(Mr. McMillan, Canada)
Environment and Economy nearly a year ago in anticipation of the Brundtland report. Many of the members of the Task Force are with me today at the General Assembly. Composed of seven federal, provincial and territorial Environment Ministers, corporate leaders, environmental group representatives and academics, the Task Force has met in three different regions and four cities across Canada from British Columbia right through to the east coast. Its report has now been unanimously endorsed by the federal Government, all 10 provinces and both territories. It has also received widespread industry, media and public support.
The Task Force recommendations, like those of the Brundtland Commission, focus on the structural changes needed to integrate environmental and economic decisions both in Government and in business. Those changes are not marginal; they are fundamental.
Mere tinkering with the status quo is a prescription for failure. What is required, in particular, is a change in the way people think - the most challenging change of all. Albert Einstein once observed in a different context:
"the splitting of the atom changed everything except our mode of thinking". The challenge of Brundtland, and of Canada's own Task Force, is to change that mode.
(Mr. McMillan, Canada)
The Canadian Task Force report emphasizes the need to make Government and industry leaders more accountable for what they do to the environment. To that end, the Task Force calls for improved environmental assessments, state-of-the-environment reporting and business codes of ethics, among other instruments.
The Task Force embraces the concept of conservation strategies for each jurisdiction within the country - an approach already taken in my home province of Prince Edward Island and begun in Canada's north by the territorial governments and the Inuit.
The Task Force's central recommendation is the creation of broadly based consultative groups, called round tables, at the national and provincial and territorial levels. The round tables would bring together leaders from all sectors to foster ideas on sustainable development in Canada and to provide leadership in putting those ideas into practice.
Already, the principle of sustainable development is taking root in Canadian soil. Nowhere are the roots more deeply planted than in the magnificent archipelago off the west coast of British Columbia, known as South Moresby. The experience should inspire confidence in the approach around the world. At stake was the most internationally significant wilderness area in Canada. Often described as the Canadian Galapagos, it harbours species of flora and fauna unique in all the world. It contains some of the last virgin rain forests on the North American continent. South Moresby is also the ancestral home of the Haida. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has declared one of the Haida's ancient villages, Ninstints, a World Heritage Site. But all the natural and cultural splendour of South Moresby was nearly lost to Canada and the world in a classic struggle between those who wanted to preserve
(Mr» McMillan, Canada) this area and those who sought to harvest its vast natural resources. Instead of clashing fatally, environmental and economic goals were finally reconciled. A national park is to be created in South Moresby as part of a multi-million dollar economic development strategy for the area based on the sustainable development concept. The Haida's role will be central.
To my mind, the relationship of Canada's native peoples to the natural environment provides a model in sustainable development. The subsistence use of renewable resources over centuries by the Haida, the Dene, the Inuit and many other indigenous nations in Canada demonstrates a harmony with nature that is the antithesis of practices that gave rise to the Brundtland Commission.
Beyond Canada's borders, the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) - the federal Government's principal arm for foreign aid - has adopted a radically new approach to its development projects in the developing world. The object is to avoid the kind of environmental degradation too often associated in the past with projects funded by industrialized countries. CIDA is committed to promoting programmes that foster sound environmental practices and to ensuring that its projects are subject to the most rigorous environmental scrutiny.
The Government of Canada believes that environmentally sound policies are not a brake on the economy; they are an integral part of the engine of growth, Canada is committed to working with developing nations to alleviate their environmental and economic plight through efforts that reflect their own priorities and cultures. It is not an exercise in imposing our methods on them. Rather, our concern for the well-being of less developed countries is directed at their basic problems: loverty and debt and the environmental devastation they breed.
Towards that end, Canada's Secretary of State for External Affairs, Mr. Joe Clark, informed this Assembly last month that the Canadian Government has
(Mr. McMillan, Canada) decided to cancel all development assistance debt owed to our country by sub-Saharan Francophone Africa. Just last week Canada confirmed its decision to do the same for Commonwealth Africa. We urge other holders of third—world debt to explore how they, too, can strike at this fundamental problem.
Just when one despairs of humanity's willingness to set aside self-interest for the good of the human family as a whole, something happens to provide hope. Two such rays of hope penetrated the darkness last month. One was the agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union to work towards the dismantling of intermediate- and short-range nuclear missiles. The other was the global accord -known as the Montreal Protocol - to protect the stratospheric ozone, the layer of gases that shields the human race and all other life forms from the most lethal of the sun's radiation.
Both events reinforce the message of the Brundtland Commission that, through global co-operation, humankind's common future can be secured.
It is particularly significant that the Montreal Protocol - the first-ever global protocol for the global atmosphere - was achieved under the leadership of the United Nations Environment Programme. The Protocol now needs to be ratified and implemented around the world to be effective. The Government of Canada implores all Member nations that have not yet done so to sign the Protocol and to ratify it with urgency.
We Canadians are deeply concerned about another atmospheric problem: global climate change. Experts believe that a close-to—sea-level jurisdiction, like my own Prince Edward Island, could literally be washed into the north Atlantic by rising sea levels caused by increased temperatures stimulated by pollution. The Canadian prairies, bread basket to a hungry world, could face sharply reduced crop yields and, worse still, desert conditions that render the land incapable of agriculture.
BHS/ed
(Mr. McMillan, Canada)
Canada will host an international scientific conference on this subject in June 1968. It will be the most important such conference ever held in the world, drawing as it will some 300 experts from as many as 40 countries. I am delighted that Canada's widely respected Ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Stephen Lewis, has agreed to serve as general chairman of the conference.
Earth's atmosphere, like its seas, is a global commons. Ultimately, critical atmospheric problems need to be addressed through international law - a law of the air. The Montreal Protocol is the first element of such a law. The willingness of the human family to forge a truly useful treaty on ozone demonstrates one thing: when the political will is mustered, it is possible to improve the odds in the risky game the world has been playing with its own future.
For Canada, the biggest single risk is acid rain. It is destroying our lakes, killing our fish, undermining our tourism, retarding our forests, harming our agriculture, devastating our built heritage and threatening our health. Half the acid-rain-causing emissions that affect Canada originate in the United States, just as much of the acid rain in many other countries around the world comes from their neighbours.
^r* McMillan, Canada)
This is a transboundary indeed, a global, problem. In 1985 21 countries signed a protocol in Helsinki, committing each nation to a 30 per cent reduction of its annual sulphur dioxide emissions. Canada was a signatory and, accordingly, established a domestic programme to slash its emissions in half by 1994 based on 1980 allowable levels.
Hcwever, such action can be effective only if accompanied by the parallel actions of others - in Canada's case, our American neighbours. We Canadians are attempting to work with our United States friends on the acid rain problem in the spirit that succeeded with the ozone. But a truly global approach on the issue is also necessary. We urge those countries not now parties to the Helsinki protocol to sign it, for their own sake and for that of the world community. An acid-damaged environment is by definition not a sustainable environment.
On behalf of Canada, I make two recommendations. First, the United Nations General Assembly should support the concept of sustainable development called for by the Brundtland Commission, and United Nations agencies and affiliates should ensure their programmes reflect that concept. Secondly, the United Nations should hold an international conference on environment and sustainable development in 1992 - the twentieth anniversary of the historic Stockholm Conference. The purpose would be to review progress by member countries in implementing the Brundtland report. Canada offers to host such a conference.
I conclude on this note. The environment and the economy cannot be addressed as two separate global problems; only by viewing the two as one can either be solved.
Rene Dubos's fourth rule of ecology is, "Everything is connected to everything else." it is not just an Environmental precept; it is also a profoundly moral statement. The statement implies that each nation has obligations to every other nation; and, if all nations are to survive, those obligations must be met.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr . - McMillan, Canada)
American writer Norman Cousins has stated, "The starting point to a better world is the belief that it is possible." The Brundtland Commission does more than issue a challenge; it inspires belief that the challenge can be met. On behalf of the people of Canada, I urge all nations, through their actions, to affirm that belief.
Mr . BUKMAN (Netherlands): It was a wise decision of the Assembly to hold a plenary debate on the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development and to invite its Chairman, Mrs. Brundtland, to introduce it here today. The World Commission's report is about our common future. If we are to preserve this planet for future generations we must, in shaping our future, use all our imagination and vigour, in close co-operation with all sectors of society. This is the basic challenge of the report.
On behalf of the European Community and its member States, the Prime Minister of Denmark, Mr. Schluter, has set out our basic positions regarding the report. Allow me, therefore, to make some additional observations on the part of the Ne th er lands.
The 1972 Stockholm Declaration marked the beginning of the ack new ledge men t that the preservation of the environment is a global concern. Prior to the Stockholm Conference the Netherlands Government took the initiative to hold a seminar on the theme "Environment and development", of which the conclusions had a marked impact on the debate afterwards. Since then, through trial and error we have become more and more aware how closely the two concepts of environment and development are related: they are two sides of the same coin.
(Mr. Bukman, Netherlands)
The Commission's report adds a new dimension to this process of growing awareness of the inter linkage of envir raiment and development. The concept of sustainable development clearly shows the need for an integrated approach incorporating financial, economic and social aspects. In this complex web of relationships the United Nations presents itself as the most appropriate institution in which the "call for change" of the Brundtland report can be transformed into a global programme for action. In doing so, we should base our actions on the lessons of the past. The report rightly observes that poverty is both a cause and an effect of global environmental problems. The present developmental problems in sub-Saharan Africa are a dramatic illustration thereof. Physical conditions often force farmers to over-exploit the land, leading to depletion of the soil and, as a consequence, desertification. Increasing fuel wood requirements exact their toll and newly planted trees are often the only fodder cattle can find. Deforestation is the result. The expanding deserts all over the world are a major problem for which solutions are not yet at hand.
These and many other lessons of the recent past have shown the compelling need for an economic policy that integrates environment with development. An environmental policy is not a luxury that only highly developed countries can afford. On the contrary, it is a necessity for all countries, and the report demonstrates this convincingly.
I have noticed that the report of the Commission has given rise to some concern in developing countries about the practical possibility of implementing its recommendations. Another concern is how the measures proposed will affect economic development. Is sustainable development another, new form of conditionality for development? Moreover, will sustainable development in the final analysis not lead to a slowing down of economic grew th?
NR/jpm/mh
(Mri Bukman; Netherlands)
I understand these questions; they are legitimate questions; but the answer is not to dismiss the concept of sustainable development. As the Commission itself has stressed, demands for a higher quality of more environmentally sensitive development should be coupled yd th increased flows of assistance. If one thing is clear from this report, it is that the donor community should accept the internationally agreed target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product, not only in theory but in practice. This debate, I hope, will lead to a recommendation which contains a programme of action for the coming years. Increasing the volume of aid should be a necessary feature to be included in such a programme if we take the recommendations of the report seriously.
(Mr. Bukman, Netherlands)
I should like to mention a number of elements which I think should also be incorporated in such a programme. In presenting these elements to the Assembly, I base myself partly on the Commission's report and partly on a policy paper which I presented to the Netherlands Parliament a few months ago.
First, proper management of the environment is an essential pre-condition to improve the quality of development. Quality improvement is very much the result of integrating environmental considerations in the overall process of design and appraisal of development projects.
Secondly, I firmly believe that integration of environmental considerations goes hand in hand with strengthening the environmental institutional capacity of developing countries. We must all realize that this calls for additional assistance in this field. The Netherlands is ready to respond favourably in meeting these needs. In this process Governments have an important responsibility. To achieve sustainable development, however, the participation of ordinary men and women is essential, in terms of both policy formulation and implementation.
A third element to be included is the need to address the critical issue of the balance between the population size and available resources and the rate of population growth in relation to the capacity of the economy to provide for the basic needs of the population, as the report states, "not just today, but for generations" (A/42/427, p. 109) . Population policies to this end should be pursued and the international community should assist more generously in support of these efforts. We, for our part, stand ready to do so.
As I have said, national action is a prerequisite for sustainable development, but will never be successful if it is not complemented by international support -support through international arrangements; support through multilateral and bilateral aid.
(Mr. Bukman, Netherlands)
The debt situation in Africa and Latin America is a serious impediment to sustainable growth. Alleviation of the debt burden relieves funds for an integrated development policy. We therefore need to mobilize all our imagination to find long-lasting solutions to this problem. In this respect we welcome the initiatives taken by the World Bank systematically to integrate environmental considerations in its operations.
To further the process of integration of environmental considerations in development policies I consider it important that the conclusions and recommendations in the World Commission's report be discussed throughout the United Nations system. In our view the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination should hold regular discussions on the measures taken by the various parts of the United Nations system in support of sustainable development policies in developing countries.
We, the Governments, have a primary responsibility to design, nationally and internationally, ways and means to achieve sustainable growth. The Brundtland report should be considered as a guideline for the coming years. As we gain experience in our endeavours to achieve the goal, some of the present recommendations will have to be modified and new recommendations will emerge. This process should be closely monitored by Governments.
In order to safeguard a continuous effort, I propose that every two years the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme should be preceded by a meeting at ministerial level which should evaluate the implementation of the recommendations and develop new recommendations for national, regional and international action. One may call this an environment security council, or any other name one likes to give it. What is important is that a body at ministerial level keep a close watch on the state of the Earth.
(Mr* Bukman, Netherlands)
Our common future is at stake. The message of the Brundtland report rings loud and clear in the debate today. We are privileged to live on this earth. We want everyone to feel it a privilege. Thus we have the duty to combat poverty and preserve the earth for future generations.
Mr, PETROVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian) : First, I wish to express my gratitude to Gro Harlem Brundtland and the other members of the World Commission on Environment and Development for the preparation of the report entitled "Our common future" . This document has aroused enormous interest. The problems of the pollution of the environment, the atmosphere and the oceans, as well as the depletion of natural resources, affect the very foundations of the existence of our civilization. And all this is happening when mankind, for the first time in its history, has the possibility of ensuring decent conditions of life for all the people on earth.
It is indeed dangerous, in the most direct meaning of that word, when streams of poison flow through the rivers and posionous rains fall from the sky on to the soil, when cities and entire regions suffocate in an atmosphere which is over-saturated with industrial and transportation wastes, and when the development of atomic energy is accompanied by unacceptable risks.
The interrelationship of man and nature has assumed a threatening character because of contradictions of global magnitude. The specific feature of these contradictions is that by posing risks to everyone, regardless of their wealth or poverty, they impel countries to rise above their political, ideological or other differences and join hands in the common struggle for the survival of mankind. We shall win this struggle together or lose it together. No other possibility exists.
AP/edd
A/42/PV.41
81
(Mr. - Petrovsky, USSR)
This conclusion not only reflected in the title of the report by the Brundtland Commission, but derives from the entire logic of the study conducted, in which environmental issues are dealt with not in isolation, but in close relationship with the problems of peace and security and economic and social development.
The realities of interdependence are such that it is impossible to unite only in the face of the environmental threat while remaining divided in the other areas of international life. As is pointed out in the report a nuclear war would end human development altogether. This conclusion, which is shared today both in the West and the East, the North and the South, is backed up by numerous scientific studies, including those carried out within the framework of studying the problem of nuclear winter and those which are part of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) on the arms race and the environment.
In their Declaration adopted on 1 October of this year, the Foreign Ministers of the developing countries members of the Group of 77 stated that nuclear weapons posed the main risk to the environment and to life on earth. They also reached the fair conclusion that the environment could be reliably protected only if -such global problems as poverty, external debts, injustice in international affairs and underdevelopment were solved concurrently. We should not forget these problems, which affect the lives of hundreds of millions people. Yet, we cannot use the burden of the problems of economic backwardness to impose on the developing nations, contrary to the choice of their peoples, development models that are alien to them. And it would be totally inhumane in so doing to engage in speculation about the lofty goals of the struggle against environmental dangers.
Therefore, the Soviet Union, together with other socialist countries, proposes dealing with the problem of protecting the human habitat as an integral component of the task of establishing a comprehensive system of international peace and
(Mr. Petrovsky, USSR) ecurity that would embrace all areas of inter-State relations. Environmental ecurity is an integral component of the programme which was offered to the nternational community in the article by the General Secretary of the Central ommittee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, ntitled "The reality and guarantees of a secure world".
The prospect of moving towards nuclear disarmament resulting from oviet-American agreements means the beginning of the building of the nuclear-free, on-violent world in accordance with the principles formulated in the declaration igned in New Delhi by Mikhail S, Gorbachev and the Prime Minister of India, ajiv Gandhi. The path to a world free of nuclear weapons and secure not only in he military bu't also in the environmental and all other domains is, we are deeply onvinced, primarily to be found through internationalizing and universalizing the fforts of States, and enhancing the results of the useful actions emanating from nternational organizations and negotiations.
Today, there is emerging an increasingly clear need for effective nternational procedures and mechanisms that would ensure rational management of he planet's resources as the heritage of all mankind. A great deal has already een done in this field. With the participation of the United Nations Environment rogramme (UNEP), the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Food and Jriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the world Meteorological cganizatlon (WMO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour 'ganisation (ILO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural ^ganization (UNESCO) and the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) more than 100 inventions and treaties designed to protect the atmosphere and preserve the ^osphere of the seas and oceans have been concluded. These international legal istruments, which concern individual aspects of the environmental problem, should ; strengthened and used actively.
The Soviet delegation was impressed by what was said by the representative of the Netherlands, who proposed that we consider the question of establishing an ecological security council. We are prepared to participate actively and constructively in consultations in that connection. A comprehensive approach is necessary to solve the environmental problem on a world-wide basis and study it in its linkage with other global problems. This implies joint efforts to implement in practice the theory of the development of the noosphere, as formulated by the French scientists P. T. de Chardin and E. Leroi and the Soviet academician V. Vernadsky. According to that theory what is needed is the reasonable organization of interaction between man and nature serving the needs of all mankind.
Our proposal for drafting a global strategy of environmental protection and rational management of natural resources is aimed in the same direction as the recommendation of the Brundtland Commission for the preparation of a declaration, and subsequently a convention, on the environment and sustained development. The development of such a strategy could be started in the framework of UNEP, using	.
everything useful that has been accumulated both within the United Nations	system	;
and outside it. In particular, use could be made of the experience of the	Economic	i
Commission for Europe, which is about to complete its work on the strategy	for	J
environmental protection in Europe to the year 2000 and beyond, as well as the	'
other ideas on co-operation in this field which are being discussed at this time at 1 the Vienna meeting of the countries participating in the Conference on Security and 4 Co-operation in Europe.
A global approach to the problems of the environment implies the establishment of a coherent system of co-operation that would extend to all regions and reinforce ^ all the sectors of ecological security.
One such region is the northern part of our planet. As part of the plan put forward by Mikhail Gorbachev to establish a zone of peace in the Arctic, the Soviet Union proposes now drawing up a unified comprehensive plan for the protection of the environment of the north. The experience of the joint measures to protect the sea environment of the Baltic, which are being carried out by the commission of seven littoral States, is worth extending to the entire ocean and sea area of the northern part of the earth. The northern European countries could reach agreement to establish a system of monitoring the.state of the environment and the radiation security in the region and agree upon steps to preserve their northern forests. I mention here the north of our planet, but I have in mind that work on environmental security in that region could serve to develop a policy which would be a good example and would strengthen similar work in other regions.
The expanding of glasnost in these matters should become a part of the global efforts to defuse the environmental bomb. Countries are already exchanging relevant information, inter alia through international organizations. We believe that this procedure should be institutionalized by introducing the principle of annual reports by Governments on their environmental activities and on environmental incidents, both those that occurred and those that were prevented, on their territory. We are empowered to state that the Soviet Union is prepared to consider with other countries the measures necessary, of course with due regard for the appropriate recommendations of the Brundtland Commission.
In embarking in the United Nations on work on environmental protection, we have no right to disregard the voice of the public forces, without whose participation it is difficult to expect real solutions to global problems, especially those of the environment.
The Soviet public has been increasingly involved in action to protect the environment on the basis of the idea of building a harmonious and peaceful planetary civilization. Non-governmental organizations have put forward numerous initiatives in this field, including, for example, the idea of promoting co-operation to ensure industrial safety, with due regard for its environmental aspects. Clearly this is something for the agencies of the United Nations system to think about, especially such agencies as the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, which is already studying the problem of the negative impact of the activities of transnational corporations on the environment of the host countries.
The report "Our Common Future" rightly raises the question of increasing financial support for co-operation in environmental protection, including providing assistance to developing countries in this field. It would be useful to discuss the possibility of setting up an international environmental security fund on the basis of the part of resources saved as result of reducing military expenditures. Such a step would substantially reinforce the environmental fund which operates in the framework of the United Nations Environment Programme.
The report of the Brundtland Commission, the work being done in the United Nations Environment Programme with respect to prospects for environmental protection up to the year 2000 and beyond and the activities of other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in this field provide powerful momentum to internationalization of the dialogue about preserving the Earth's nature for the present and future generations. We are confident that the Commission's activities and the forthcoming discussion of its recommendations will undoubtedly contribute to humanizing international relations and establishing common human criteria and values in those relations. The Soviet Union is prepared i
to engage in a concrete search for ways of building our common future through joint efforts^ in the interests of all.
Sir Crispin NICKELL (United Kingdom): I begin by saying how much my Government welcomes the report of the World Commission. We join others in thanking Mrs. Brundtland and the Commission most warmly. I take this opportunity to set out the British Government’s approach to the issues raised in the report, and I would add that it is the first detailed statement which my Government has made in this regard.
The good management of the environment is one of the most important problems facing the world today, and one of the best things about the Brundtland report is that its basic message is one of hope, for it shows ways in which solutions can be found. It has rightly generated more interest than some of its more sensational predecessors, which offered only gloom and helplessness. It sets us a difficult agenda. At the same time it offers the possibility of sustainable development provided we can cope with the problems of poverty and environmental degradation through long-term economic growth.
The report’s title, "Our Common Future", was well chosen. It represents a consensus - and I do not mean a string of paper compromises by committee. It is rather a consensus reached by 22 eminent Commissioners from persuasions and societies which span the world.
We particularly welcome the care taken by the Commissioners in listening to what people from the five continents had to say. By "people" I mean not only government leaders, representatives of voluntary organizations, educational institutions and the scientific community^ I mean also the less grand but ordinary People who in the first as well as the last resort must be the agents of the changes necessary to bring economic development and protection of the environment back into harmony. My purpose today is not to bewail the past, nor to repeat what
is in the report. It is to look forward in a practical fashion to where we all, industrial and other countries alike, go next. I shall have words to say about each.
The Commission asked whether industrial countries were doing enough to help, in particular in such areas as protectionism, agricultural trade and debt. We in Britain are aware of the feeling among the various non-industrial countries that while structural adjustment may be necessary it can be supported only if it is aimed at sustained growth. That needs an open trading system, and we share the Commission's view that it is imperative for such countries to enjoy access to industrial-country markets for non-traditional exports where they enjoy a comparative advantage. We shall play our part in the Uruguay round; but others across the whole spectrum of the world community, from the fully industrialized economies through the industrializing ones to the producers of agricultural goods, raw materials and other commodities, must play their part too.
We share the Commission's advocacy of measured change in trading patterns in agriculture. We take the point, made not only by the Commission out also by the World Bank in 1986, that improvement in the security of world food supplies will require two things: first, reduction of the incentives which led to non-competitive production and overproduction of food in the industrial market economies; and, secondly, enhancement of incentives which encourage such production in other countries. This may not be easy for either group of countries, but we must build rapidly on the start which has been made.
We share the Commission's recognition that Africa cannot pull itself out of the planet's most serious ecological and economic crisis without help. That lies 5 behind the initiative on debt taken by the British Government to help those poorest J and most heavily indebted countries in sub-Saharan Africa which are pursuing	3
(Sir Crispin Tickell, .	United Kingdom)
satisfactory adjustment policies. Our suggestion that aid loans be converted into outright grants and that there be longer repayment and grace periods for rescheduling official loans has already met with a good response^ but we still have some way to go in securing acceptance of our other proposal, that interest rates on such reschedulings should be set well below market levels. Even if we have not yet succeeded in persuading all our industrial partners, we were heartened by the support given at the recent meeting of Commonwealth Finance Ministers in Barbados.
The Commission rightly challenged all concerned to act at the sources by promoting an environmental reflex in all ministries, administrations and agencies which wield economic power. No one contests the Commission's conclusion that a prime source of environmental degradation is the pollution caused by poverty, a point made very eloquently by previous speakers this morning. Here we, as the human species, run the same risk as any other species in destroying the environment which has created us, which sustains us and which gives us hope for the future. In some parts of the world millions of poor and hungry people know this all too well, yet their options are extremely limited. For many it is more important to survive until next week than to think of the prospects for their children and grandchildren.
In this respect we greatly welcomed the recent work of the World Bank in seeking to devise policies for development which took better account of the longer-term needs of the environment. My Government is financing one of the 30 country studies to which the Bank has pledged itself. We are also responding to, and to some extent have anticipated, the three specific challenges which the Commission set for such bilateral donors as the United Kingdom.
First, the Commission called for donors to adopt new measures to ensure that all aid projects could be properly sustained. We are doing just that. Our Overseas Development Administration is preparing a rigorous but comprehensible methodology for routine use by all those planning and implementing projects. At the same time, it has examined and revised its existing economic appraisal techniques to ensure that they give due weight to such long-term considerations as the environment.
Secondly, the Commission called for special programmes to help restore, protect and improve the ecological process in development. In the past five years British aid spending on projects involving natural resources has increased by three quarters, and in forestry, to which the Commission drew particular attention, our spending has increased threefold.
Thirdly, the Commission called for special programmes td strengthen the institutional and professional capacity needed in aid-recipient countries. We here pledge our full co-operation. We particularly welcome the initiative taken by the Commonwealth Secretary-General on "Conservation for Sustainable Development".
Time does not allow me to dwell on the many other policy recommendations of the Commission which deserve our support: for example, those on the role of women, population, health, education, food security and urban growth. But I should like to underline our support for the Commission's views about the loss of species and habitats. Again, we have very practical measures that we should like to see undertaken. We support proposals to link conservation and development on the lines recommended in the World Conservation strategy, and the establishment of parks and reserves to safeguard critical species and habitats. That has already been done in some parts of the world. We agree that the destruction of tropical rain forests is a particular concern, and we have already shaped our policies to help sustainable
use of those important natural resources. We are ready to help others to do likewise through our aid programme. We have also pledged our support for the Tropical Forestry Action Plan and the International Tropical Timber Agreement, and have assisted research on tropical forest conservation and development both through our own programmes and by supporting those of international agencies.
We found the Commission's contribution to thinking on long-term energy prospects constructive and stimulating. We agree with the conclusion that future development depends critically on increasing quantities of energy from dependable, safe and environmentally sound sources, and that no single energy source or combination of them can be guaranteed to meet this need. The Commission was right to emphasize the central role of energy in development: those dependent hitherto on fuel wood need to use it much less intensively, if they are to look after themselves in their own interests.
So various a problem as shortage of energy has equally various answers. We can all improve our efficiency, and recent technical developments should help us to do so. Hydroelectricity still has further potential. So do other renewable sources of energy. But, as the Commission recognized, it will be some time before they can make a substantial contribution to world energy needs. Renewable resources have much appeal, but we have to be careful that they themselves do not adversely affect the environment. We found the Commission's assessment of the potential risks and benefits of nuclear energy generally fair and balanced. We agree that internationally accepted safety standards must be developed and applied to civil nuclear operations.
Fossil fuels will remain an important source of energy for the foreseeable future, and so too must be used in an environmentally acceptable fashion. We take the problem of atmospheric pollution very seriously. Over the last year my
Government has endorsed plans to instal flue gas desulphurization equipment at three of our largest existing power stations and at all new ones, to reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide. We plan to instal low nitrogen oxide combustion technology at our 12 largest coal-fired power stations and all future such stations. We participate in international air-pollution monitoring schemes, and support a major research programme on the environmental effects of reductions in emissions.
Our policies are not designed to penalize industry, which is essential to growth. We support the principle of "the polluter pays", and have already seen good results in Britain. But more work needs to be done on pollution control, and the Government has launched a scheme to encourage innovation. Industry has an important part to play in the development of pollution abatement and control equipment and works closely with the Government. British industry is participating fully in the current European Year of the Environment.
The Commission drew attention to the problems of chemicals and hazardous wastes. Guidelines have recently been agreed under the aegis of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in both respects. After recent accidents we are all better aware of the need to foster international co-operation to prevent the recurrence of such tragedies and mitigate the effects of any accidents in the future. Such problems may be at present of most concern to the industrial countries; but as and when others industrialize they should profit from our mistakes and set in place the necessary legislative and institutional framework to control pollution.
The Commission rightly devoted attention to the idea of the global commons -those areas beyond the jurisdiction of individual nations. We share the Commission's view of the importance of proper management of the oceans. North-East
(Sir Crispin Tickell, •	United Kingdom)
Atlantic fisheries are already subject to arrangements for effective international co-operation on conservation and management. We are active in monitoring the seas around us, and in November shall host the second International Ministerial Conference on the Protection of the North Sea. We pay a tribute to UNEP for its Regional Seas Programme and would welcome its extension. In Antarctica we agree that the way forward is to build on the Antarctic Treaty system.
On the problems of the atmosphere we recognize the effect which various forms of pollution may have on stimulating climatic change. We heard a particularly eloquent speech this morning from the Prime Minister of the Maldives on that very point. We fully support the need for further international scientific work on the whole subject. We welcomed and signed the agreement reached in Montreal last month on a Protocol to the Ozone Layer Convention to limit emissions of substances which deplete the ozone layer. We also support the need for further international discussion of the problems of debris in outer space.
It follows from the report that all countries should take steps to build the environmental dimension into national policies. This really is, I think, the key: to build the environmental dimension into national policies. We have started to do so. But of course no country can act alone. Countries need to work together on problems which cross national boundaries, cross the shores of continents and affect the good health of our planet as a whole.
For that reason we welcome the Commission's emphasis on environmental monitoring, and UNEP's role in this respect. We also support the proposal to expand the Global Environmental Monitoring System and to develop the Global Resource Information Database. The proposal for an independent international Programme for risk assessment is interesting. We shall have to think about how this might relate to UNEP and other bodies, and how it would be organized and
(Sir Crispin Tickell, United Kingdom)
financed. We also agree with the suggestion in the report that UNEP's role in catalyzing work in the United Nations system on sustainable development should be strengthened and the resources of the Environment Fund should be appreciably enlarged. But this could not happen overnight, and for the moment we would favour concentration by UNEP on fewer activities in order to produce better practical results in each.
Obviously, there are points in the report with which we cannot concur. For example, we would be reluctant to see any new institutions established before making sure they did not duplicate the work of others. We are by nature suspicious of declarations or new conventions until we know what practical purposes they are designed to serve. The proposal to channel revenue from the global commons to sustainable development would in our view create more difficulties than it could solve. The call for ending the disposal of waste at sea does not recognize that, this can in strictly controlled circumstances represent the best practical environmental option.
In conclusion, I repeat my Government's welcome of the report. It follows that we would be reluctant to see it go the way of some other such reports, which gather dust on some elevated shelf until the time comes for yet another report on the same issues. For these issues are among the most important of our time and of times to come. We hope therefore that its recommendations will be followed up at all levels - international, national and regional. We warmly support proposals to this end in the draft General Assembly resolution from the Governing Council of UNEP.	,
MLG/mh
Mr. HILL (United States of America): The United States joins other delegations in welcoming the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, "Our Common Future". When 22 eminent individuals from the four corners of the globe, from developing as well as developed countries, from divergent political and economic systems, can reach consensus on the outlook for the environment and for development well into the next century, it behoves the community of nations to sit up and take notice. As Chairman of the President’s Council on Environmental Quality, at the White House, I have been impressed with the scope of the report’s coverage, the tremendous amount of research and the care with which the report was crafted, which attest to the seriousness of purpose which the Commissioners brought to this effort.
The credits and acknowledgement list alone demonstrate the outreach of the Commission and the lengths to which it went to ensure that the best possible thinking went into its study. The Commission should be especially commended for offering the opportunity for public participation in its work. On behalf of my Government, I should like to express our deep appreciation to Prime Minister Brundtland and her fellow Commissioners for the personal efforts they have all put into this undertaking.
The United States shares the Commission's overall view, as expressed in "Our Common Future", that the nations of the world, working co-operatively and energetically, should continue the growing effort to resolve the most urgent problems of providing needed goods and services, while also safeguarding environmental quality for present and future generations. The Commission suggests that this be done by ensuring that the environmental implications of intended activities, and their long-term impact, be incorporated in the policy planning and economic decision-making processes at the local, national, regional and global levels, in the private as well as the public sector. Early in this century,
(Mr; Hill, United States) President Theodore Roosevelt said:
"... neither man nor nation can prosper unless, in dealing with the present, thought is steadily taken for the future."
That is the message of sustainable development, a message my Government fully endorses. The question is how best to do it. I am optimistic that there is a way.
Over the past 40 years an extensive network of international organizations has come into being. This network comprises not only the United Nations, its specialized agencies and the multilateral development banks, but other more narrowly-focused intergovernmental organizations such as the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) , the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and regional development organizations. Furthermore, since Stockholm we have seen the birth and maturing of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). At this point, I should especially like to commend the dedication of Mr. Mostafa K. Tolba, the UNEP Executive Director, for his tireless efforts to improve our work in preserving and protecting the quality of the global environment. A special note of thanks should be given to him for his most recent success in bringing Governments to agreement on the Ozone Protocol just completed in Montreal. All our Governments must now move forward quickly to ratify and implement that agreement in order to fulfil our responsib ilities.
In addition, we have a world-wide network of non-governmental organizations which is growing in strength and experience every day. Those organizations, some large, some small, have come into their own in the past decade. They often operate at the grass-roots level and provide a way for channelling the vital energy of citizen involvement. Finally, we have international industry's response to the challenge, most recently evidenced in the establishment of the international Environment Bureau.
(Mr; Hill, United States)
My Government believes that the required mechanisms are in place, and are steadily improving in their effectiveness. This, of course, is fortunate when we consider the fiscal realities that most countries - developing and developed alike - face today. Using existing mechanisms, most especially UNEP, reduces bureaucratic layering and avoids resources from being diverted from other needed activities. Rather than establish new programmes, bodies or activities, the challenge we face is conveying the message of sustainable development through the present network. This approach must be integrated into the policy formulation processes and operational practices of this existing network. To this end, we strongly support the proposal to have the General Assembly transmit "Our Common Future" to the governing bodies of the organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, with an invitation for them to take its analysis and recommendations into account, as appropriate, in their work plans.
Institutionalizing sustainable development in the United Nations system, however, is only part of the equation. The best efforts of UNEP and other United Nations agencies, of non-governmental organizations and of industry, will not achieve our goal if conditions essential to fostering sustainable development are not reflected in the national policies of the countries concerned. The countries of the world cannot realistically expect to achieve sustainable development when imposed government solutions impede the efficient allocation of limited resources, stifle creativity and innovation or reduce incentives to work productively.
I am convinced that if we are to be truly successful, we need a "bottom up" approach, not a "top down" approach. Rather than a "sustainable development programme", we need a sustainable development "movement", one which engages and indeed is created by individuals and institutions working in their businesses and in their communities. As President Reagan pointed out from this podium last month,
(Mr. Hill, United States) it is simple, ordinary people who make the difference and who are leading those of us in this room, not the other way around. He noted*.
"Around the world, new businesses, new economic growth, new technologies are emerging from the workshops of ordinary people with extraordinary dreams." (A/42/PV.4, p. 28)
Experience has shown that, given information and choice, people will make sound judgements and select the long-term sustainable route rather than squander the inheritance of future generations. Encouraging individuals at the local level is vital.
In order to ensure a framework for the integration of sustainable development, especially at the local level, it is important that support be available, as needed, for training, for access to information and to enable nations to draw on the experience of others. To this end, the United States continues to expand its bilateral co-operation with developing countries in the areas of environmental protection, conservation and natural resources management. The mechanisms for this collaboration include the Agency for International Development (AID) , the Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Department of Agriculture, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration and various programmes of the Department of the Interior. For example, AID is spending approximately	”
3300 million annually on environmental and natural resources projects, ranging from water quality improvement to forestry management, to pollution control. These ; projects have as their objectives the protection of human health, maintenance of ( the global ecosystem and the promotion of environmentally sound and sustainable j development. Théy manifest the commitment President Reagan made to international ( environmental co-operation in America's Agenda for the Future, in which he said:	1
(Mr. Hill> United States) Recognizing that environmental problems do not stop at national boundaries, we will collaborate closely with other nations ... The United States has long been the world leader in making its scientific talent, data and information, and financial resources available to the international community ... and we intend to maintain such a role."
In a comprehensive survey of this dimension, it is not surprising that there are approaches and assertions with which everyone cannot agree. For the United States, these include the notion of a linkage between decreases in defence spending and increases in development spending, automatic funding of environmental organization programmes and the report's treatment of the complex problem of transferring technology while protecting proprietary rights. We also disagree with some of the suggestions concerning nuclear energy, the Law of the Sea Convention, the Antarctic Treaty and management of outer space. On the other hand, there are many elements in the report reflecting principles and approaches to which the United States firmly adheres) for example, its emphasis on economic growth, especially in developing nations, as a means of enhancing the environment by attacking poverty, which is often at the root of environmental degradation, and the importance of new technologies in addressing environmental problems.
In this context the United States welcomes the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. Its theme of sustainable development is a powerful idea, and we look forward to collaborating on implementation of this approach. That being said, I must caution that we feel deeply that the United Nations and UNEP activities in support of sustainable development must be carried out within existing levels of resources and that care must be taken to ensure that programmes that might duplicate current activities are not undertaken. Also, the United Nations system should not be burdened with an excess of reporting requirements.
(Mr. Hill, United States)
It is clear that economic development is essential for the betterment of mankind and that, as pointed out in the report, technology is the mainspring of economic growth. While prudently managing the environmental risks we face, we should not be frightened of new technologies and such additional advances as biotechnology, new energy sources, new chemicals and new medical frontiers. We must remember that we shall never live in a completely risk-free world. Economies grow because of those who take risks and because those who succeed are rewarded for their efforts. We must recall that human genius, individual freedom and rewards for personal initiative offer the global society an opportunity for a better life -and a better environment.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Minister for International Development Co-operation of Sweden, Ms. Lena Hjelm-Wallen, who will speak on behalf of the Nordic countries.
Ms. HJE IM-WALLEN (Sweden): The World Commission on Environment and Development has in its report brought home to all of us its urgent message on the state of the environment and development, its forceful analysis of the ■ interdependence of environment and economic growth and its compelling call for political action to set the world on the right track of sustainable development. The Nordic Governments, on whose behalf I am speaking, are happy to endorse the Commission's reasoning and its general conclusions.
The report provides a comprehensive and challenging agenda for all of us, and I should like to bring out three themes.
First of all, we have to realize the urgency of dealing with the sources of environmental degradation. The present development patterns not only expose us to more and more direct environmental threats, but are seriously compromising even the possibility of future generations meeting their needs. The ways in which the
(Ms» Hjelm-Wallen, - Sweden) resources management of the nations of the world have developed are not sustainable. That is our present predicament.
/ Manipulation of vital biosystems today causes widespread environmental decay-The large emissions of carbon dioxide through the massive increases in the use of coal and oil threaten seriously to change climatic conditions. Acid rains are killing forests and other ecosystems, causing physical damage to constructions, as well as threatening human health. Hazardous chemicals are poisoning our environment. The earth's protective ozone layer has already been affected.
The mismanagement of natural resources is not only detrimental to the prospects of future development, but unjust. There is a stark contrast between the very high consumption in the richest countries and the utter poverty of so many of the world’s people. But even poverty is to a large extent caused by the mismanagement of natural resources. In many poor communities the peasants* struggle to make a living, or even survive, on already strained Lands leads to soil erosion, forest depletion, desertification and water shortage, thus making it even more difficult to survive. Where this happens people are often too poor to afford the necessary investments in the future that would make it possible for the land to support them. This is the poverty trap facing millions and millions of people, and their number is growing.,’ -......................1
The realization that poverty is the main cause of environmental degradation in developing countries leads directly to the second theme, the conclusion that only stronger economic growth can finally eradicate today's abject poverty and the environmental problems connected with it. In many developing countries the present growth rate is not sufficient and the environment is being continually and increasingly strained.
(Ms; Hjelm-Wallen, Sweden)
Economic growth in the developing world is closely dependent on strong growth in the developed world. It is important to keep up a strong demand for exports from the developing countries. The trade imbalances between large industrialized countries must not be allowed to cause a world recession. The growing protectionism must be resisted. The debt problems must be solved in a rational way. Development assistance must be increased, as must the general flows of resources, including private investment, to the developing countries. This is imperative if the difficult, but necessary, adjustment efforts that many developing countries today are making are to be successful.
Economic growth is a prerequisite for environmental improvements. This is equally true in both developed and developing countries. But the question is what kind of growth and how its benfits are distributed. Present methods of production consume far too much of non-renewable resources and make far too strong demands on the environment. They are not sustainable. We need innovative thinking and new approaches) we need new technologies. The current state of knowledge would make it possible to go a long way towards satisfying these needs if used, but we need also more research. This implies new, sometimes costly investments, but, in the concept of sustainable development, the point is that such investments pay and make economic sense.
Another way of looking at the same interrelationship of environment and development is to state that environment is not a sector of its own requiring a certain set of environmental solutions. Environment concerns the whole range of human activity. All sectors of society, including both Government and industry, must be made directly accountable for their influence on the environment. Specific action will be needed to arrest environmental deterioration where it is most threatening. But a genuine course of sustainable development requires changes that
JSM/edd
(Ms. Hjelm-Wallen, Sweden) affect the fundamental ways of production in our societies. As the Brundtland Commission put it, we need to get at the sources.
This brings me to my third theme. Many of the required changes will be not only technologically and economically demanding but, to an even larger extent, politically demanding. They will require a larger say for today's disadvantaged people and social reforms. They will require more knowledge, as well as institutional and legal initiatives. Some of the changes will be difficult to achieve since they strike at deeply entrenched customs and ways of life, at distribution of income and power.
The demands on political will should be seen primarily, however, not as restrictions, but as our opportunity to act. The fact that political will is so important means exactly that sustainable development is within our reach. The Nordic Governments therefore particularly welcome the realistic optimism in the Commission's report.
BHS/tg
(Ms. Hjelm-Wallen, Sweden)
This forum, the General Assembly of the United Nations, is the correct forum in which the nations of the world should declare this political will to act. We must now ensure that the analysis and the conclusions in the report have a real impact on the work programmes of the United Nations system. We must also review our national policies in this light.
The concept of sustainable development must be fundamental to the work of the United Nations for the future. The United Nations has already taken important steps. The most comprehensive expression of this is the environmental perspective of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). With this perspective and the report by the World Commission on Environment and Development an analytic foundation is laid and directions for action pointed out. The Nordic Governments strongly support the adoption of the two draft resolutions proposed by the Governing Council of UNEP.
Active steps must now be taken to promote sustainable development by reviewing policies, budgets and activities within the whole United Nations system, not only those of the organizations under the responsibility of the Secretary-General, especially the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) , but also the specialized agencies, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the united Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), as well as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We must further encourage a strong emphasis on the environmental aspect of development in the World Bank and the International Development Association (IDA) , in the regional banks and funds and in other international organizations.
BHS/tg
A/42/PV.41
107
(Ms« Hj elm-Wall en, Sweden)
The concept of sustainable development is central to national decision-making. Industry and non-governmental organizations should be encouraged to analyse and follow up the recommendations in the report. In pursuing their national programmes, Governments will need to keep in close touch. Existing regional bodies could be used. Regional and global conferences would also be warranted, to review and agree on action programmes for sustainable development.
The Brundtland Commission brings out very clearly that environment and development are of common concern. The Commission's report is a strong call for reinforced international co-operation and a strengthened United Nations. In the end this is what is demonstrated again and again: only by concerted action can the nations of the world achieve peace, security and sustainable development.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.