UNITED
NATIONS
s
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2706
19 September 1986
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND SIXTH MEETING
held at Headquarters, New York« on Friday« 19 September 1986, at 5 p.m.
President: Mr. BELONOGOV
(Union o£ Soviet socialist Republics)
Members: Australia	Mr.	HOGUE
Bulgaria	Mr.	TSVETKOV
China	Mr.	LI Luye
Congo	Mr.	BALE
Denmark	Mr.	BIERRING
France	Mr.	de REMOULARIA
Ghana	Mr.	GBERO
Madagascar	Mr.	RAKOTONDRAHBOA
Thailand	Mr.	KASEMSRI
Trinidad and Tobago	Mr.	ALLEYNE
united Arab Emirates	Mx.	AL-SHAALI
United Kingdom of Great Britain and		
Northern Ireland	Sir	John THOMSON
United States of America	Mr.	HALTERS
Venezuela	Mr.	PABON GARCIA
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English.and Interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Clief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the reco.
85-60871/A 0698V
S/W.270«
2
The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE BAST (a) SPECIAL REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS INTERIM FORCE IN LEBANON <8/18348)
(b) LETTER DATED 18 SEPTEMBER 1986 FROM THB PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF FRANCE TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/18353)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should like to inform members of the Security Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Israel in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the representative of Israel to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Netanyahu /Israel) took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Russian): The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them the special report (8/18348) of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
The Security Council is meeting today in response to a request contained in a letter (S/18353) addressed to the President of the Security Council on 18 September 1986 by the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations wishes to make a statement, and I
now call upon him.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The members of the Security Council have already received ay special report on the United Nations interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) which was circulated this morning as document S/16348. I therefore need not repeat the information and observations contained in that report.
X wish, however, to emphasize my deep personal concern at the difficult, indeed intolerable, situation now confronting UNIFIL. X regret to have to inform the Council that the seriousness of the situation was again underlined, about three hours ago, by a further rocket attack by unidentified armed elements against a position of the French battalio in the northern part of the UNIPIL area. According to preliminary reports, five French soldiers were wounded, one of them seriously. I repeat my condemnation of such attack on UNIPIL by extremist armed elements.
It is essential that effective measures be taken urgently to enable UNIPIL to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council, to ensure the security of the Force's personnel and, also, to resolve its financial difficulties.
As I have pointed out in my report, X believe that in the present situation the only hope of progress now lies in a determined effort by the Security Council itself. I have accordingly recommended that the members of the Council, both collectively and individually, should take urgent action to unblock the present impasse
and make substantial progress towards implementation of resolution 425 (1978), which will also be the best way of improving the security of the personnel of UNIPIL. But time is of the essence. If such progress is not achieved soon, It is my belief that the Council may be compelled to give serious consideration to an alternative which could involve many grave dangers.
I wish to take this occasion to express my appreciation to the troop-contributing countries for the support and co-operation they have extended to UNIPIL. Because of the deterioration of the situation in the UNIPIL area and the
worsening deficit in the UNIPIL budget resulting from the failure of some Member States to pay their assessed contributions, the troop-contributing countries not only must send their men on a dangerous mission, but also must do so at considerable financial sacrifice. And yet, despite these difficulties, they have continued to support UNIFIL and maintain their contingents in the area. The United Nations owes them an immense debt of gratitude.
I cannot conclude this statement without paying a special tribute to UNXPXL's Force Commander and his officers and men. They have carried out their important duties in difficult and dangerous circumstances with exemplary dedication and courage.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call upon the representative of Prance.
Mr. de KEMOULARIA (Prance) (interpretation from French): At the outset, I wish once again to convey my Government's gratitude to all those who have expressed their sympathy in connection with the repeated attacks in southern Lebanon that have resulted in the death of French soldiers serving under the United Nations flag. Our Irish and Nepalese friends know that we share the grief of their officers and soldiers.
I also thank the President of the Security Council for having convened this meeting so quickly at our request. I appreciate the efficiency with which the Secretary-General - whose messages of solidarity have moved us - Issued instructions to make sure that the mission that he had sent to the scene could submit a report very quickly.
This meeting, unfortunately, is an indication that a new phase has begun in the tragic deterioration of the situation in southern Lebanon.
8/W.270i 5
For several weeks now. Prance has been urgently drawing the attention of the United Nations to the ever-worsening spiral of events in UNIFIL1a area of operations. Everyone is aware of this accelerated, tragic chain of incidents and attacks: the incidents of 11 August, which for several days iaaobilised and paralysed several UNIFIL contingents} sporadic firing against elements of the Force} an attack by a resotecontrolled nine on 20 August against an officer of the Irish contingent, who was killed} a sinilar attack on 4 September against French soldiers, three of whoa were killed) a further nine attack on 13 September in which one soldier was killed and five were injured. This very afternoon, as the Secretary-General has just indicated, we have learned that there has been a new attack against a UNIFIL position held by the French contingent in which, as the Secretary-general has noted, five soldiers were wounded, two of the® seriously.
We eust once again see to it that the Council expresses the indignation o£ the community of nation* at these cowardly assaults and condemns then vigorously.
Over the last several weeks, we have accumulated a heavy toll. It has, alas, confirmed that our apprehensions and warnings were well founded, we brought the matter before the United Nations at an early stage and invited the international community to devote its fullest attention to the situation because these events on the ground seemed to us to be of exceptional gravity and likely to challenge the role, indeed the very existence, of the united Nations Pores.
In view of their repetition and nature, the attacks of the last several weeks, which have been deliberate and directed at pin-pointed targets, are indeed different from the cycle of incidents that have afflicted UNIPIL since 1978. The recent series of attacks, which were, as each of us knows, accompanied by demands and threats, is particularly alarming because it expresses the determination of sone fundasentally to call into question the very existence of DN1PIL, and, it aust rightly be said, most often through its largest contingent - that is the French contingent.
The united Nations cannot remain indifferent in the face of this tragic turn of events. It cannot remain passive when UNIPIL, unable to react, is pinned to the ground and condemned to retrenchment.
Meeting at our request on S September, the Council reacted immediately, as was appropriate, by dispatching a mission to propose immediate security measures and also to gather the appropriate fundamental elements that today enable us to consider the matter further and to take the necessary decisions. The time has cose for our Council to shoulder its responsibilities.
Security measures have been taken or have been suggested) they are inadequate. Almost all of them are in effect passive defence measures. Certainly
(Mr. de Kemoularia, France) the Force must protect itself, but that is not its role in Lebanon. Xf it iu not to lose its dignity and its very raison d'etre, the Force cannot possibly simply dig itself in. Above and beyond Inmediate security Measures, which are indispensable and require on-the-spot support from the entire UNXFXL hierarchy, we oust go to the core of the Matter and find out whether the mans available to UNIFIL are appropriate to its Mission or whether we Must take a fresh look at the mission itself. There you have the two parameters of the debate, and the Security Council must reflect upon them and take decisions.
Xn this debate we must ask ourselves the reasons for the outbreaks of brutal, deliberate violence in recent weeks. The reports that have reached us, the circumstances surrounding these incidents and the demands and sone of the things that followed lead us to this conclusion: there are those in southern Lebanon who are using criminal means to prevent UNIFIL from pursuing the activities in which it has been engaged since 1978, whereas the Force has not even attained its primary objective, namely deployment along the international border, when the international coomunity created UNXFXL its mair purpose was not to play the role of policeman in an area of Lebanon, or, however noble and efficacious that night be, to carry out humanitarian tasks there. It was created at the very request of the Lebanese Government to ensure respect for the integrity of a sovereign State.
The truth is that UNIFIL, which was created on Lebanese soil, and whose mission is first and foremost to ensure the sovereignty and integrity of Lebanon, cannot act there without the unanimous support of the Lebanese. It must foster and encourage such support, and that 1« >*y our Council »ust call upon ail parties concerned to offer their oo-operation to the United Nations and to UNIFIL. But in truth that support can be mobilised only around the sovereignty and integrity of
(Mr. de Kanoulatia, Prance) the country. That means that no foreign armed element not accepted by the Lebanese authorities can continue to exist in the southern Lebanon region, if we wish to see to it that UNIFIL once again enjoys the full support of the Lebanese population, it must be able to be deployed as quickly as possible, as was envisaged in 1978, along the international border, we feel that that would effectively restore the conditions necessary to enable the United Nations to bring about respect for its entire mission of peace and its humanitarian objectives in southern Lebanon.
We note from the report that the Secretary-General has today submitted to ue, with which we became familiar this morning, that our concerns are the same as his. The draft resolution that France will introduce a little later will invite the parties concerned to do their utmost to enable UNIPIL to carry out its mission. It will ask for the swiftest possible deployment of the Force along the International border in accordance with the mandate contained In resolution 425 (1978).
The French Government feels the united Nations should reconsider its mission in southern Lebanon if so essential an objective as the return of civil peace to the region is not speedily achieved. The president (interpretation from Russian)« As has been agreed, the Council will now conclude its work for today.
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue consideration of the item on its agenda will take place on Monday, 22 September 1986, at 4 p.m.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2709
3 October 1986
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND NINTH MEETING
Held at Headauarters, New York, on Friday, 3 October 1986, at 11.45 a.m.
President;	Mr. AL-SRAALI	(United Arab Emirates)
Members;	Australia	Mr.	WOOLCOTT Bulgaria	Mr.	TSVETKOV China	Mr.	LI Luye Congo	Mr.	BALE Denmark	Mr.	BIERRING France	Mr.	de KEMOULARIA Ghana	Mr.	GBEHO Madagascar	Mr.	RABETAFIKA Thailand	Mr.	KASEMSRI Trinidad and Tobago	Mr.	ALLEYNE Union of Soviet Socialist Republics	Mr.	BELONOGOV United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland	Sir	John THOMSON United States of America	Mr.	OKUN Venezuela	Mr.	AGUILAR
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 united Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
86-60889/A 1308V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 12 noon.
EXPRESSION OF THANKS TO THE RETIRING PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I should like at the outset of this meeting to pay a tribute on behalf of the Council to His Excellency Mr. Alesksandr Mikhailovich Belonogov, Permanent Representative of the union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council for the month of September. I am sure I speak for all members in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Belonogov for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's business last month.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ
LETTER DATED 30 SEPTEMBER 1986 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVES OF IRAQ, JORDAN, KUWAIT, MOROCCO, SAUDI ARABIA, TUNISIA AND YEMEN TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/18372)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Oman, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Tunisia and Zambia, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President» Mr. Aziz (Iraq) took a place at the Council tablet Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr» Salah (Jordan)» Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. Al-Ansi (Oman), Mr» Kabanda (Rwanda), Mr. Shihabi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Sarre (Senegal), Mr. Bouziri (Tunisia) and Mr. Mwananshiku (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRES ID PIT (interpretation from Arabic)t I should like to inform meubers of the Council that I have received a letter dated 3 October 1986 from the Permanent Representative of Oman to the United Nations, which reads as follows*.
"In my capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group for the month of October 1986, I have the honour to request you to invite Mr. Parouk Kaddoumi, Chief of the Political Department of the Palestine Liberation organisation, to participate in the Security Council’s meetings to consider the item entitled 'The situation between Iran and Iraq', in conformity with the Council's usual practice." That letter will be circulated as document S/18377.
The proposal by Oman is not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, but if approved by the Council the invitation to participate in the debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization the same rights of participation as those conferred on Mesber states when invited to participate pursuant to rule 37.
Does any member of the Council wish to speak on this proposal?
is. OKUN (united States of Ax tries): The United at»t*a has consistently taken the position that under the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council the only legal basis on which the Council may grant a hearing to persons speaking on behalf of non-governmental entities is rule 39. For 39 years the
(Hr. Okun, United States) United States has supported a generous interpretation of rule 39, and would certainly not object had this natter been raised under that rule. We are, however, opposed to special ad hoc departures from orderly procedure. The united states, consequently, opposes extending to the Palestine Liberation organization the same rights to participate in the proceedings of the Security Council as if that organization represented a Member State of the United Nations. We certainly believe in listening to all points of view, but none of that requires violating the rules. In particular, the United States does not agree with the recent practice of the Security Council, which appears selectively to try to enhance the prestige of those who wish to speak in the Council through a departure from the rules of procedure. We consider this special practice to be without legal foundation and to constitute an abuse of the rules.
Por those reasons, the United States requests that the terns of the proposed invitation be put to the vote. Of course, the United states will vote against the proposal.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation fron Arabic): Xf no other nenber of the Council wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it that the Council io ready to vote on the proposal by Oman.
It is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bulgaria, China, Congo, Chana, Madagascar, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
Against:	united States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Denmark, Prance, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
«3/1
S/PV.2709 S
The PRES ID ENY (interpretation froa Arabic) i The result of the voting is as follows: 10 votes in favour« 1 against and 4 abstentions. The proposal has therefore been adopted.
At the invitation of the Président« Mr. naddounl (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESTO ENT: I should like to infora members of the Council that I have received a letter dated 2 October 1986 from the Permanent Representative of Qian to the United Nations, which reads as follows:
"In ay capacity as Chair nan o£ the Arab Group at the united Nations for the non th of October 1986, 1 have the honour to request that the Security Council, during its discussion of the itea entitled 'The situation between Iran and Iraq', currently on its agenda, extend an invitation to Bis excellency Kr. Chedli Klibi, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, to participate, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.** That letter has been issued as document 8/18375.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Klibi under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting today in response to the request contained in a letter dated 30 September 1986 from the Permanent Representatives of Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and Yemen to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council. That letter is contained in document S/18372.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/183 76, which contains the text of a letter dated 2 October 1986 from the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the united Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General wishes to make a statement, and I call on him.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The extent and depth of International alarm over the continuation of the bloody conflict between Iran and Iraq into its seventh year have been evident from numerous statements in the General Assembly and are underscored by the Security Council's decision to meet today.
The war's devastation in lives and in material terms is known above all to the two peoples that must bear those losses, but it has also caused deep distress beyond their borders. The carnage alone would be sufficient cause for the repeated appeals for an end to this destructive war. But, further, the international community has a legitimate concern over the dangers of the expansion of the boundaries of the conflict, which could bring unpredictable and perhaps uncontrollable consequences.
This meeting of the Security Council takes on special significance because of this year's military operations. The sharp escalation in attacks on commercial vessels from third countries and the widening area in which they occur are perceived by neighbouring States in particular as threats to security in their region, with potential repercussions which could draw in Powers from beyond. Iran's declared intention to launch another major offensive to bring a military conclusion to the conflict gives renewed urgency to the situation.
The Council is aware that, with its support, I have spared no effort to bring this conflict to an end. Some of my initiatives have dealt with humanitarian aspects under international instruments designed to mitigate some of the worst features of warfare. All such moves are aimed at one goal - the early cessation of hostilities and an advance towards negotiations. The eight-point plan that I proposed to the two parties last year envisaged a step-by-step approach towards that end. Unfortunately, it is evident now that so far those efforts have not achieved substantive progress towards the intended goal - the ending of the war.

The vital Question, of course, is what new efforts can be deployed to secure a negotiated settlement. Six resolutions of the Security Council remain as part of the record, without satisfactory implementation. Iraq has stated that it is willing to comply with all of them. Iran has indicated that it la not prepared to accept them, on the ground that the Council has not dealt with Iran's fundamental grievances. I have repeatedly urged Iran to present its case to the Council. I did so again as recently as yesterday.
The Council will recall that after my talks in Baghdad and Tehran last year I reported on the position of the two parties, including Iran's complaints towards the Council, which are cited by its Government as the reason for its distancing itself from the Council. Since then both parties have made declarations of policy which are in the knowledge of Council members. Nevertheless, I would, of course, undertake a new assessment if the Council so wished.
I feel, however, in view of repeated requests from many quarters that I take new initiatives to end the war, that it has become increasingly necessary for the Security Council to establish a basis upon which both sides will find it possible to extend their co-operation to the united Nations in dealing with the threat to regional and international peace and security and to promote the prospects for a settlement.
For my part, I remain at the Council's disposal and will unstintingly attempt to carry out its wishes to the extent that the two states facilitate my endeavours.
The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is Mr. Chedli Rlibl, secretary-General of the League of Arab states, whom I Invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. KtBI (interpretation from Arabic): I personally wish »araly tn thank you. Sir, and through you to extend ay warmest thanks to the Council for being allowed to speak on the war between Iran and Iraq.
I welcoae the fact that you are presiding over the Council for this aonth, Sir. ^ are familiar with your wlsdoa and groat experience. You ably represent a fra ter «J «mbUj, the W’tsS Arab Beirates, thlch has node aany efforts to put an end to »k (v.r»iei. In keeping with international law.
(Hr. Klibi)
The Security Council is meeting today to resume consideration o£ Iran's continued aggression against Iraqi territory, and the renewed threats by Iran to launch another wide-scale attack cm Iraa. That is a very serious threat to the security of the region and international peace and security.
The Committee of seven, which is part of the League of Arab States and which is closely fallowing the developments in the Iran-Iraq war, has asked the Security Council to resuae its consideration of this explosive situation because it is aware of the dangers to that nerve centre of the world and because it believes that the international community will sincerely, firmly and effectively shoulder its responsibilities to achieve peace in the world.
Iran is determined to continue this deadly war and is deaf to all international initiatives on all sides designed to put an end to the conflict. That is a serious challenge to the international community and to the international Organisation. Iran's defiance is also clear from its refusal to abide by Security Council resolution 582 (1986), in particular paragraph 3, in which the Council "Calls upon Iran and iraa to observe an immediate cease-fire, a cessation of all hostilities on land, at sea and in the air and withdrawal of all forces to the internationally recognized boundaries without delay,, (resolution 582 (1986), para. 3)
In paragraph 5 of the resolution, the Council "Calls upon both parties to submit lanedlately all aspects of the conflict to mediation or to any other means of peaceful settlement of l..«>1><»4«> too flOMI m» at .	----....-------------,, r-------
I already had an opportunity of stating in the Security Council, at its meeting on 18 February 1986, that the League of Arab States, in keeping with its responsibilities to the Arab nation and the international coACU..lty and in keeping with its charter, has always, at all levels, supported efforts to achieve a
(Mt. Kitol) peaceful end just settlement of the conflict that would respect the legitimate rights of both parties and would confers with the requirements of harmony and co-operation that flow from the principles of good-neighbourliness and autual advantage, for that reason« and because of the special Importance that we attach to the Security Council's role« we believe that at this series of nestings the Council should go beyond the stage of speeches and hi^-sounding words and should very quickly agree on effective actions and the Im piemen tat ion thereof.
Article 2« paragraph 3 of the Charter provides that
"All Netoers shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a Manner that international peace and security« and justice« are not endangered”.
Therefore« the international oosnunity and all peace-loving forces throughout the world have the right to ask what happens if a Meaber of the United Nations does not abide by that principle« and what should be done in the particular case he continuing war between Iran and Iraq« which is causing death and desolation and« in addition, seriously threatening International peace and security.
We believe that it is higi tine for the Security Council to implement the previsions of Chapter VI of the Charter regarding the peaceful settlement of disputes, in particular Articles 33 (2), 34, 36 (1) and 37 (2). If« however, the Council's efforts do not achieve the desired results, the international community, as represented in the Security Council, should not become discouraged but should continue to ¿boulder its responsibility for the maintenance of International peace and security, so that a peaceful settlement preserving the rights of both parties can be achieved.
The experience of the Second Mor Id War, which caused untold suffering to mankind, prompted the drafters of the Charter to call on the international
(Mr. Klibi)
community to stand together and co-ordinate its efforts to prevent the use of force in inter-State relations.
We all know that war is not the ideal way of settling problems between States. Indeed, it can be said that war is the worst of choices, even when it appears to be the only one. In the case before the Council now, one of the two parties constantly demonstrates its willingness to solve the problem quickly, within the fraaework of the united Nations. I an of course referring to Iraq. There is no political. Military or Moral justification for continuing this war, which has already lasted longer than the Second World War and whose prolongation can only sow More death and desolation in both oom tries and Make it inpossible for either of then to devote its efforts to development and bringing an end to underdevelopment.
No one can doubt that the continuation of this conflict will threaten the security of the region and, at the sane tiae, the economic interests of the international oomnunity. There is therefore a risk of the internationalisation of the conflict. That would sorely test international peace and security.
That is why we believe that the international cooBunity has the duty to take whatever action is necessary now, before it is too late, to put an aid to the hostilities and thereby lay the groundwork for a just settlement under united Nations supervision.
The Security Council, now more than ever before, must examine the conflict between Iran and Iraq as a whole, as a prob Ion related to peace in the world and affecting the international «»unity as a whole.
In this atmosphere of hostilities, we have to make a choice between a world governed by chaos, by the rule that might makes ri^it and by aggression - where the supreme values of mankind would be placed in jeopardy - and a world in Wiich the values and principles contained in the Chart»' of our Organization are respected.
(Hr. Klibl)
At far as we in th« Arab nation ara concerned, we have always cherished international law - whatever the sacrifices and suffering involved. That is why we have had recourse to the Security Council, in an effort to put an end to this conflict. We are convinced that the Council will spare no effort to ensure that the peace so ardently desired is established.
(Mr. kllbi)
Th® conflict betmen Iran and Iraq has entered Ite seventh year, which is an indication of the level of suffering both peoples have endured. Once again« therefore« we call upon the leaders of Iran to give a favourable response to the appeals of the international camunity« to put an end to the bloodshed and to enter on a new cause that will return peace to the region and divert the energies of both countries to the service of development and national reconstruction, we urge the two belligerent parties to resume their efforts for the enrichment of world civilisation and add lustre to their cultural heritage.
The PHESXDgWT (interpretation from Arabic)! I thank Mr. Alibi for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq« upon whom I new call.
Mr. AZIZ (Iraq)(interpretation from Arabic)! Allow me to extend to you, Mr. President, and through you to the other members of the Council, our thanks for having acceded to our request to participate In this meeting. Xn view of your «mil-known wisdom and experience, I am confident that under your leadership the meetings of the Council will deal both seriously and effectively with the topic of which it is seized.
Today, we are once again here to discuss the conflict between Iran and Iraq at the request of the Committee of the League of Arab States entrusted with following the development of the war between Iran and Iraq. Seven months after the Council's discussion of this same issue following a similar request after the Invasion of the south of irao on the night of 9-10 Feoruary of this year and the subsequent occupation by Iran of the Iraqi port of Al Faw, we have to discuss the situation yet again.
I must remind members that Iraq has drawn the Council's attention to the fact that the Iranian invasion not only constituted a dangerous escalation of the
(Ht. Axis, Iraq)
situation in the area but «iso demonstrated several facts and explained many of the real!tier of the situation and the events of the past seven years. The Iranian régime has used in relation to that aggression phrases such as "the liberation of Iraq, and has threatened the Arab Gulf states, denanding that they "deal with the invasion forces as with a new neighbour". Thus the aggression and the expansionist tendency of the Iranian rfgiu have been laid bare. We have always drawn attention to that pasture and made it clear that the purpose of the Iranian regime's continued occupation of Iraq soil, particularly the region adjacent to the Gulf, is the creation of a new military, political and economic situation in the region that would make it possible for that régime to pursue its expansionist alas. Those very aims were the principal reason for the outbreak of war on 4 Septeifoer 1980 and are the reason it oontinues to this day.
The Security Council debated the question for several days. In the course of that discussion it reiterated yet again that the situation must be dealt with in accordance with the Charter, the rules of international law and the norms of international behaviour. We pointed out the futility of selective and partial solutions. We also stressed the dangers inherent in diverting our efforts from the focal point of the problem: namely, the necessity of putting an end to the war according to an internationally agreed procedure. In the meantime, the Iranian régime continued to wage a war of aggression that has threatened the safety and security not only of Iraq but of all the other States in the region for the pest six years, despite all the efforts at appeasement.
The outcome of the Council's discussions was the unanimous adoption of resolution 582 (1986), on 24 February of this year. That resolution was not based on an Iraqi or Arab-sponsored draft. The Council formulated resolution 582 (1986) free from the influence of either of the parties to the dispute and it was drafted in the conviction that a comprehensive framework for the peaceful settlement of
(Mr, Aziz, Iraq) th« dispute should take Into account the rights and Interests of both parties, in accordance with the United Nations Charter and the norms of international law governing relations between States.
Although resolution 583 (1986) did not satisfy all the requirements of Iraq, we stated our readiness to co-operate with the Council in implementing it, in good faith and on the basis of a clear understanding of its focal points, provided the Iranian régime also made a formal pledge to accept it and implement it unconditionally and in good faith. The Iranian régime, as members know, refused to apply resolution 582 (1986) and has claimed that it amounts to an endorsement by the Security Council of the military option.
The spokesmen for the Iranian régime have waged a fierce campaign in favour of continuing the war on the basis of what they call a "divine duty" to liberate the Iraqi people. They now declare openly and arrogantly that they are preparing for yet another invasion of Iraq to carry out that so-called duty, since September they have been carrying out a series of military attacks against Iraq, stating that such actions are merely a prelude to what they refer to as a final and decisive strike. Fortunately, all such attacks have been speedily and effectively crushed.
In Article 24 of the United Nations Charter the States Members of the Organisation clearly entrust the Security Council with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of International peace and security and agrae that in carrying out its duties in accordance with that responsibility the Security Council acts on their behalf in conformity with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. We bad hoped that Security Council resolution 582 (1986) - adopted unanimously and, as I have said, independently of any Influence exerted by either of the two parties to the conflict - would meet with approval and that its adoption would be followed by implementation. This, however, has not so far been the case
(Mr. Aziz, Iraq)
owing to the clear reluctance to put the onus of responsibility for continuing the war on Iran. This is the note regrettable in that the Council has been able to identify the essential differences which distinguished the positions of the two parties over the past six years and has becoae well aware of the differences in the positions they have taken with regard to the questions of security and stability in the region.
Equality in tares of state sovereignty mans equality not only in rights but also in shouldering the obligations imposed by the Charter and international law. For the first tim in this Organisation's history, the Iranian régime has declared that the military option is the only mans of solving a dispute with a fellow Meaber of the united Nations. It insists on that course, disregarding all legal and moral obligations. The Iranian régime has rejected this Council's mandate as provided in the Charter} it has treated the Council's resolutions with contempt and adopted an opportunistic approach in the search for peace, seeking only to serve its own plans to perpetuate the war and dominate Iraa and other countries of the region.
The Iranian régime has adopted a selective approach to the United Nations Charter and international law: it accepts only what serves its own selfish interests and its ala of continuing the war, and rejects those provisions that call for peace, justice, respect for sovereignty, good-neighbourliness, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, and renunciation of the concepts of hegemony, violence, terrorism and aggression.
In my statement to the General Assembly on 25 September I exposed the lies the Iranian régime is using to justify its abnormal stand. I have also explained the proposals we have put to it over the past six years here in the Security Council, in the General Assembly and at meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement, proposals calling on that régime to accept the mandate and arbitration of the international community, of the International organizations and of the rules of international lew. But that régime has turned a deef eer and persisted with its prevarications and with the flimsy pretexts it tries to use to explain its abnormal stand and its insistence on continuing the war. All the proposals that we have put forward during the years of the conflict have been based on our acceptance of the
Security Council's mándate to solve the dispute and our readiness to settle it by peaceful means, in accordance with the Charter and the rules of International law, on respect for sovereignty and for the right of each and every people to choose its own political and social systems.
The essential difference between the two positions of the parties to the conflict is very clear in their stance on the question of security and stability in the area. Representatives must be well aware that all the countries of the area have now been complaining for several years about the approach adopted by the Iranian rigime, which is designed to destabilise the whole region. Let us not forget that security Council resolution 532 (1984) was adopted as a result of the corolaint to the Council by the States of the Gulf Co-operation Council against the Iranian rigime for its acts of aggression against commercial vessels heading for ports of the countries of the area, and let us bear in mind the statements made by those States In March and August of this year.
The essential differences between the positions of Iraq and the Iranian regime need no further demonstration in the Council) they have become only too clear, and all the members of the Council are well aware of them. On the basis of the experience of over six years, all the members know full well that the only obstacle to a just and honourable peace that would safeguard the rights and interests of the two parties in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the rules of international law governing the relationship among States has always been the abnormal stand adopted by the Iranian riglee, which is in total contradiction with its legal obligations.
In view of the foregoing observations, the Council should not and must not remain silent or adopt a neutral attitude towards the two positions adopted: the position of a country which accepts the Council's mandate and believes in the
(Mr. Azi,, Iraq) United Nation, Charter and it, principles; and that of a country which reject, th, Council', Mandate and resolutions, treats the Organization with contempt, use, its rostrum for the purposes of lies, prevarication and deceit in order to be able to continue th, war, and endangers the stability and security of the area in its pursuance of openly aggressive and expansionist aims.
It is not only a moral but also a legal obligation imposed by the Charter on the Council and on both the parties to the dispute to conduct the discussions in the Council on the conflict between Irag and Iran on the basis of a clear awareness of those differences between the positions taken by Iraq on the one hand and Iran on the other. To adopt that approach does not mean the Council is taking sides, for whoever takes the side of peace and works seriously to achieve peace is Merely taking the side of the ¿narter, and upholding its provisions and the authority of the Organisation.
Only thus can the Council fulfil the responsibility for ending the war that the international community has so often called upon it to shoulder, for instance, at the summit Conference held at Harare, Zimbabwe, at the beginning of September, and in the general debate at the current session of the General Assembly. The international community as a whole, and the States which have requested the Council to consider the natter on this occasion, have a right to call upon the Council to Intensify its efforts to bring about peace.
We call upon the Council today - and we have a right to do so as a founding Member of the United Nations - to assume the responsibility of ii^lcnsneiRg the resolution, for peace that it has adopted in the interests of peace and in accordance with the united Nations Charter. If it does so, we can justify to our people - which has been heroically standing up to Iranian expansionist aggression for six years in defence of its independence and sovereignty, and yet has been
(Mr, Azis, Iraq) billing to extend the hand of peace once more - the Council's existence, the effectiveness of the Charter and the need to trust the united Nations.
On this occasion I should like to affirm once again our readiness to co-operate with the Council in reaching a just, comprehensive and permanent settlement of the dispute.
I should also like to reaffirm Iraq's appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General and our readiness now, as in the past, to co-operate with him to facilitate his task of reaching the goal that we all desire, namely, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Xraq for the kind words he addressed to ne.
The next speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs °f Egypt, Mr. Ahmed Bernat Abdel Meguid. I welcome him to the Council, invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I should like first to congratulate you sincerely. Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of October. The Egyptian delegation is happy to see the representative of the United Arab Emirates, a sister country, occupying the Chair. 1 am absolutely convinced that your great competence is a guarantee of the success of the Council's deliberations.
I wish also to congratulate your predecessor. Ambassador Belonogov, on the highly skilled way in which he conducted the Council's work last month. He was for a long time the Ambassador of the Soviet Union in Cairo.
The Security Council has often met to consider the armed conflict between Iraq and Iran and has adopted a number of resolutions on the subject, the most recent being Security Council resolution 582 (1986), which was adopted unanimously on 24 February 1986 and which contains all the elements of a just and lasting settlement of the conflict. The resolution calls for an inraediate cease-fire, a cessation of all hostilities on land, at sea and in the air and withdrawal of all forces to the internationally recognized boundaries without delay. It also calls upon the two parties to submit immediately all aspects of the conflict to mediation or to any other means of peaceful settlement of disputes, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his ongoing efforts to assist the two parties to give effect to the resolution.
A few months have elapsed since the adoption of that resolution but the situation remains explosive and new threats are constantly being made that a large-scale military attack Is to be launched against Xraa. These meetings of the Security Council have been convened to consider this very dangerous situation.
EMS/1	S/PV.2709
27
(Mr. Abdel Meguid, Egypt)
It is regrettable that the Security Council resolutions have so far had no effect while the Iran-Iraq conflict is in its seventh year and the blood of those two neighbouring Muslim peoples, so closely bound by their religious beliefs, continues to flow. The media report every day not only a resumption and intensification of hostilities, which take a heavy toll of life and cause much material damage, but also bellicose declarations that there will be new acts of aggression despite the appeals of this Organization.
The consequences of the conflict between Iraq and Iran have spilled over the borders of these two countries and into the entire Gulf region. It is now clear that the economic and security interests of the region, the world in general are threatened. Speakers at previous Council meetings have emphasized the seriousness of this explosive situation and urged the Security Council, the supreme organ charged with maintaining international peace and security, to shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter. We assure those speakers that Egypt shares their great concern at the worsening of the conflict, which means that we must all redouble our efforts at all levels to put an end to the conflict. Efforts to this end have been dragging on for more than six years now without any progress, but we must not be discouraged and must continue our efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict and re-establish peace, security and stability throughout the Gulf region.
Ever since the outbreak of war between Iran and Iraq, Egypt has taken a clear, consistent and public position: it deplores the shedding of the blood by the two peoples and the draining of their precious economic resources, and asKs that prudence and moderation be shown to bring about a climate conducive to the solution of this problem by peaceful means.
Egypt has also given a warning against the spreading o£ this military confrontation to the entire region, a situation which Egypt could not tolerate. Egypt has never spared any effort, here in the United Nations or outside it, within the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of the Islamic Conference or in the framework of its bilateral contacts, to mobilize all efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict, which would restore the rights cf those properl-' entitled to them with full respect for the basic principles of international law, the United Nations Charter, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and, above all, the right of each State to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and to non-interference in its internal affairs.
Egypt has reaffirmed its position by subscribing to all the resolutions adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly in connection with the Iraq-Iran conflict, and to the decisions adopted by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference. Today, we again ask that the content of these resolutions and the elements of a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement of the conflict set out therein be respected.
Egypt fully endorses the sustained efforts being made by the Secretary-General and asks him to continue his contacts with the two parties in order to reach the desired objective.
We listened to the statement made by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, who said that his country is anxious to put an end to this lethal war and that it is the sincere wish of Iraa to respond to any initiative, whether within this Organization or outside it, to put an end to the bloody, lethal conflict, and to have recourse to the principles of international
(Mr. Abdel Meguid, Egypt) law to reach a settlement by peaceful means. Furthermore, Iraq has made peace offers to the Iranian authorities. In fact, last August the President of Iraq, Mr. Saddam Hussein, sent them a letter setting out the essential principles of a comprehensive settlement of the conflict by peaceful means.
Iraa has therefore taken initiatives and made proposals to ease the burden of war. In 1983 Iraa proposed the conclusion of a special agreement between itself and Iran, under the auspices of the United Nations, not to attack civilian targets. The Iraqi Government also welcomed favourably the appeal of the Secretary-General that no attacks be made on civilian targets, and permanent observers of the United Nations and a special mission of inquiry into the conditions of detention of prisoners of war were welcomed in Baghdad.
Nevertheless, Iran is still unwilling to respond to the efforts being made by the international community and is boycotting the Security Council, stepping up its attacks and continuing to occupy Iraqi land, thus violating international law, the united Nations Charter and the principles of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
In conclusion, it is high time for Iran to review and to reconsider its position and respond to the desire expressed by Iraa since the beginning of the conflict that it be ended.
I wish to associate myself with all those who have already asked the Security Council to adopt all possible measures likely to result in the implementation of resolutions previously adopted by the Council on the ending of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq, and above all resolution 582 (1986).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt for the kind words he addressed to ne.
In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend to adjourn the meeting now.
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue consideration of the item on the agenda will take place at 3.30 this afternoon.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2750 20 July 1987
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on 20 July 1987, at 3 p.m.
President:	Mr. RAIMOND	(France)
Members:	Argentina	Mr. CAPUTO
	Bulgaria	Mr. GARVADOV
	China	Mr. HUANG Jiahua
	Congo	Mr. ADOUKI
	Germany, Federal Republic of	Mr. GENSCHER
	Ghana	Mr. GBEHO
	Italy	Mr. ANDREOTTI
	Japan	Mr. MURATA
	union of Soviet Socialist Republics	Mr. BELONOGOV
	united Arab Emirates	Mr. ABDULLAH
	United Kingdom of Great Britain and	
	Northern Ireland	Sir Geoffrey HOWE
	United States of America	Mr. SHULTZ
	Venezuela	Mr. PABON GARCIA
	Zambia	Mr. ZUZE
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. Th& final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should he submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature Of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
87-60436/A 5957V
The meeting was called to order at 3,10 p.m.
EXPRESSION OF WELCOME TO FOREIGN MINISTERS OF STATES MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL ■	z
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)! I should like at the beginning of this meeting to acknowledge the presence at this table of the following Ministers for Foreign Affairs, to whom on behalf of the Council I extend a very warm welcomes His Excellency Mr. Dante Caputo, Minister of Foreign Relations and worship of Argentina; His Excellency Mr. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany; His Excellency Mr. Giulio Andreotti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy; His Excellency Mr. Rachid Abdullah, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Emirates; His Excellency the Rt. Honourable Sir Geoffrey Howe, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; and His Excellency Mr. George Shultz, Secretary of State of the United States of America . I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Ryohei Murata, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan. EXPRESSION OF THANKS TO THE RETIRING PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Before we proceed to take up the item on the agenda, I wish' to pay tribute to my predecessor, Ambassador Adouki, Permanent Representative of the Congo, who presided over the Council's work during the month of June with talent, far-sightedness and courtesy. I am sure I speak on behalf of the whole Council when I say how much we appreciated his personal qualities and his considerable diplomatic’ experience. It is a particular pleasure for me in that the Congo and France have relations of trust, friendship and co-operation, which are developing to the mutual satisfaction of both our countries. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
JP/NH
THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided. ,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittani (Iraq) took a place at the Council table.	(
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting today in accordance with an, agreement reached in the course of previous consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document S/18983, containing the text of the draft resolution drawn up during those consultations.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is ready to proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. HUANG Jiahua (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset. Sir, allow me to warmly congratulate you, the Foreign Minister of the Republic of France, on your presence here to preside over the current meeting of the Council. Your rich diplomatic experience, outstanding wisdom, concern for international affairs and work in that field are known to all. I feel sure that under your presidency the current meeting will be successful.
I wish also to take this opportunity to express our sincere thanks, Sir, to your predecessor, Ambassador Martin Adouki of the Congo, who won acclaim for his contributions to carrying out the Council's onerous tasks last month.
EMS/3/JK	S/PV.2750
6 "	'	■
(Mr. Huang Jiahua, China)
The war between Iran and Iraq has lasted nearly seven years. That most unfortunate war has inflicted deep wounds on both countries and has caused inestimable losses of life and property to the two peoples, thus casting a dark shadow on international peace. The Chinese Government and people have watched all this with pain and anxiety. Recently, there have been new developments in the situations not only has the war itself continued to expand and escalate, but the volatile situation in the Gulf has become even more complicated and strained, with the danger of the war’s becoming internationalized ever more imminent. China cannot but be seriously concerned about th1,8 worrying trend.
Both Iran and Iraq are countries friendly to China. Their peoples are brothers of the Chinese people. The Chinese position regarding the Iran-Iraq war has, therefore, always been one of strict neutrality and active promotion of reconciliation. Ever since the outbreak of the war, China has called upon the two parties to cease fire immediately, end the bloody conflict as soon as possible, and settle their disputes through peaceful negotiations. The Chinese Government and its leaders have used every possible opportunity to try in a friendly and patient manner to persuade the two parties to reach reconciliation.
China has also consistently advocated that the United Nations, including the Security Council and the Secretary-General, make earnest efforts and useful contributions in that regard, and we have actively supported this. That principled position of China is not only well known to both Iran and Iraq, but is also universally acknowledged throughout the world.
In the face of the grave situation of the Tran-Iraq war and the growing tension in the Gulf, it is but natural for the international community to demand that the United Nations, and the Security Council in particular, take practical
(Mr. Huang Jiahua, China) steps to put an end to the war, thereby bringing peace, stability and tranquility to the entire Gulf region.
As one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, China is deeply aware of its important responsibilities, and is ready to do its utmost to discharge its duties. It is on the basis of this position that, in response to the initiative of the Secretary-General, we have participated in an active, earnest and serious manner in the consultations among the five permanent members of the Security Council. We have done so out of a genuine desire to seek a just and effective way to achieve an early end to the war, with a keen sense of the Council's responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and with profound feelings of friendship towards the peoples of Iran and Iraq.
During the entire course of the consultations, we have maintained that any Security Council resolution on this subject must be just, reasonable, practical and effective. It should be conducive to winning the co-operation of both Iran and Iraq with the Council and should help the Secretary-General in his further mediation efforts. We have always maintained that the primary objective of the draft resolution is to encourage Iran and Iraq to agree to an immediate cease-fire and to the beginning of peace talks with a view to achieving, at an early date, a just and reasonable settlement of the Conflict, and lasting peace in the Gulf region.
It has always been our belief that although the five permanent members bear a special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, their endeavours must be consistent with the important principle that the Council is an organic whole. The permanent members should heed and respect the views of the non-permanent members and other interested parties and be accommodating to their reasonable demands and proposals, with a view to pooling the broadest possible
(Mr. Huang Jiahua, China) wisdom, thus ensuring that the draft resolution to be adopted truly embodies the common will and aspirations of the Council as a whole.
As members may remember, in his statement at the Security Council held at the Foreign Ministerial level to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the Foreign Minister of China, Mr. wu xueqian pointed out explicitly that the Security Council should reflect the just demands of the great majority of United Nations Member States, particularly the third-world and small and medium-sized countries.
The permament members should consult the other members of the Council on an equal footing and co-operate with them closely. That has always been our position, and it will remain so in the future.
China's just position, as stated above, and its serious and responsible attitude towards the issue of ending the Iran-Iraq war and maintaining peace in the Gulf are in full conformity with the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations Charter, with the fundamental interests of the two belligerent', and their peoples, and with the common will and desire of the international community» they are consistent and disinterested.
The draft resolution before us represents a positive result of the prolonged serious consultations among and the concerted efforts of the five permanent members and other members of the Council. It is our sincere hope that Iran and Iraq will take broader overall interests into account, end the war as soon as possible, and try to solve their disputes in a just and reasonable manner through peaceful negotiations. War brings destruction to both sides, while peace leads to prosperity for all» facts have proved and will continue to prove this.
We believe that following the adoption of this draft resolution the
(Mr. Huang Jiahua, China) Secretary-General should be afforded sufficient time and opportunity to mediate further so as to ensure full implementation of the draft resolution. We also expect that other countries concerned, the major Powers in particular, will exercise restraint and refrain from doing anything to exacerbate the situation, thus making a concrete contribution to an early end to the Iran-Iraq war and to the realization of peace in the Gulf region.
RM/4	■	S/PV. 2750
'	'	' 11	.	. '
■	(Mr. Huang Jiahua, China)
I should like to reiterate here once again that China favours and supports any initiative that would be conducive to a peaceful settlement of the Iran-,Iraq conflict. China endorses and supports the Secretary-General in his continued mediation efforts and in any other endeavour in this regard. What China wishes to see is none other than peace, stability and common prosperity in the entire Gulf region.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the representative of China for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. ABDULLAH (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to express to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere congratulations upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. The bonds of friendship between our two countries, as well as France's deep interest in peace, make us confident that, under your wise leadership, our business will be conducted in an exemplary manner.
We should also like to convey our thanks to Ambassador Adouki, Permament Representative of the Congo, for his wise leadership of the Council last month.
The conflict that has been raging between Iraq and Iran for the past seven years constitutes a source of constant concern to us as one of the countries of that region. It is with great distress that we have witnessed the destruction and loss of life inflicted on those two neighbour countries. We are concerned by the constant threat this war has posed to the security of the region, by its grave future consequences for peaceful coexistence among its peoples, and by its continuing, threat to international peace and security.
Mindful of the possible effects of the conflict, my country has directly and indirectly made consistent efforts to establish an atmosphere conducive to the achievement of a just and peaceful settlement. Our contribution to the efforts of
(Mr. Abdullah, United Arab Emirates) the international community, through the Security Council, have been devoted to that end: my country participated in the adoption of Security Council resolution 582 (1986) and, in the same spirit, participated in all the Council's debates and efforts. Our support for the draft resolution now before the Council is therefore a natural result of our consistent policy and our profound awareness of the destructive dimensions of that war.
We consider the present draft resolution as an expression of international positions that reject continuation of the war. It also represents an important attempt to lay the proper foundations for a peaceful settlement. We believe that a cease-fire between the two belligerent countries is the sine qua non for the initiation of negotiations to discuss the conflict in all its aspects. The present draft resolution reaffirms certain basic aspects of the settlement of disputes, such as respect for international humanitarian law, the inadmissibility of the occupation of territories, respect for civil navigation, the cessation of attacks against civilian targets and the release of prisoners of war.
We believe that the draft resolution is so balanced that it does not prejudice the legitimate sovereign rights of either country. It attempts in a practical manner to establish the mechanism for a settlement through the United Nations, headed by the Secretary-General, whose efforts we appreciate and support.
The draft resolution, therefore, does not and must not aim at prejudicing the right of either country to live in peace within its internationally recognized borders. Both countries have suffered greatly from the scourge of this war. This makes it necessary that both look rationally to the future of their peoples. It also makes it necessary for both of them to seize this opportunity in a serious and positive manner in order to allow their peoples to overcome the destruction caused by the war, to concentrate on socio-economic development efforts and to act in an
(Mr. Abdullah, United Arab Emirates) atmosphere of confidence and co-operation with the other States in the region, so as to avoid threatening international peace and security.
We look to the future with great optimism with regard to the establishment of peace and the rehabilitation of both countries. Our optimism is based on the potential of both peoples. At the same time, we call upon the international community to continue to do its utmost to achieve that noble goal and to assist both countries in their rehabilitation efforts. My country will continue to exert its utmost efforts in that regard.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Emirates for the kind words he addressed to me.
Sir GeoEfrey HOWE (United Kingdom): It is a particular pleasure to take part in this meeting today under the presidency of a close and valued colleague. You and I have many opportunities to see each other, but this is the first time we have come together in New York in this particular way. Your skills are a great asset to the Council in dealing with the historic business on its agenda today. My delegation would also like to pay tribute to the way in which Ambassador Adouki of the Congo conducted the Council's business in June.
The last meeting of the Council at which I spoke was the one, at which I had the honour to preside, that was held to mark the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. At that meeting, it is worth recalling, all members of the Council pledged themselves
"to fulfil their individual and collective responsibility for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace with renewed dedication and determination." (S/PV.2608, p. 127)
Alas, the Security Council has not always lived up to the high expectations of its founders. Today, I think, is different, because it is precisely in order to underline the need for peace - for peace between Iran and Iraq - that so many of our ministerial colleagues have come to the Council today.
We are here together because we all see this as a bloody and senseless conflict. It has taken untold lives and has devastated both countries over a period of nearly seven years - longer than any major war this century.
The past year has seen major offensives on land, renewed air strikes against economic and civilian targets and more and more attacks on shipping, right down the Gulf. These last pose an unacceptable threat to freedom of navigation and have produced a dangerous increase in tension in the whole area. We have again seen the use on the battlefield of chemical weapons, which we unreservedly condemn and which are a reminder, if one were needed, that progress in our efforts at Geneva to obtain a total ban on those ghastly weapons is long overdue.
The draft resolution we are now discussing is the culmination of many months, efforts, first by the permanent members and later by the Council as a whole. My Government and our delegation at the United Nations have been proud to play from the very beginning a prominent part in those discussions. I should like if I may to pay tribute in particular to the energy and dedication of the former Permament Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John Thompson, in initiating and promoting the work that has produced this draft resolution.
(Sir Geoffrey Howe, United Kingdom) The draft resolution is based solidly on Security Council
resolution 582 (1986) and it aims to build on the important step the Council took in adopting that resolution unanimously last year. It is a balanced draft resolution which both parties should be able to accept. Indeed it is a tragedy that one of the parties did not take advantage of the opportunity for peace that was offered by resolution 582 (1986), Yes, we should ask how the conflict started and how we should apportion blame; indeed that is recognized in operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution we have before us. But that is no excuse for delaying moves to put an end to the bloodshed. That is why the Council is ordering a mandatory cease-fire using the powers conferred upon it under Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter.
The adoption by this Council of mandatory action under Chapter VII of the Charter should send a clear signal to both sides. The international community is resolved to do all in its power to bring this appalling conflict to an end.
I want to draw particular attention to the unanimity of view amongst the permanent members of the Security Council. In promoting this draft resolution we are fulfilling the special responsibilities laid upon us under the Charter. Clear consensus of this kind has been all too rare in the history of the Security Council. It is a sign of hope not only for the resolution of this conflict but also for the future in a broader sense. I believe that this is a historic day, and I am proud to be here.
We call on both parties to abide scrupulously by the provisions of this carefully balanced draft resolution. Indeed we demand, in the name of the United Nations and of the cause of peace, that they do so. The Secretary-General, who is no stranger to such things, has a heavy burden on his shoulders to ensure compliance with this resolution. It is up to all of us - every single member of
(Sir Geoffrey Howe, United Kingdom) the international community - to avoid any action which might increase tensionin the region and to give this resolution our full support. Any State which fails to do so, or which stands in the way of its implementation, takes a heavy responsibility on itself.
Tension in the Gulf threatens directly or indirectly the interests of many nations and undermines the stability of the whole region. In particular, attacks on shipping, in contravention of established international law, are a cause of deep concern. We are committed to the principle of freedom of navigation. Once the attacks on shipping have been halted, we must make a special effort to ensure that there is no resumption and that the drift towards military conflict in the Gulf is reversed.
This draft resolution is not an end but a beginning. It is our strong hope that both parties to the conflict will respect the authority of the Security Council, accede to the demand for a cease-fire and withdrawal, and co-operate with the Secretary-General in a spirit of compromise to achieve a negotiated settlement of the conflict. If they do this, they will not find the international community lacking in encouragement and support.
But if one or both of them choose to disregard their obligations under the Charter, then let the world hear this, and hear it clearly: this Council will use all its powers under the Charter to make the resolution effective.
We are not here to take sides, but to end this bloody war.
Here are two countries, both grown from ancient civilizations, that are now making the world ugly, dangerous and ashamed - two countries that will have to face the next half century, each with a lost and buried generation of its children. Already it will take as long as that to recover the energy, skills, love and laughter that those children would have brought to their peoples.
Today we challenge the leaders of Iraq and Iran to master their anger and their pride? to agree to disengage? and together to bring lasting peace to their despairing peoples.
The world has never been so united in its demand that this war must stop if its participants are to remain in the comity of nations. Let that message be heard by those to whom it is addressed. Let them accept it, whether as a warning or a plea. But let them act upon it now.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. SHULTZ (United States of America): Like my colleagues who have spoken before me. Sir, I welcome the opportunity to meet under your presidency. Since the beginning of my country, our two countries have had relations that have been close and constructive: I know you as a man who seeks solutions to problems, and certainly we are here today to look for solutions.
I have come here today for a compelling reason: to take part in the decisive action of thè Security Council to bring an end to the devastating war between Iran and Iraq. This conflict should never Kave been started. It should not be permitted to continue. My Government simply cannot see how the interests of either Iraq or Iran, or the international community, would be served by prolongation of this dangerous, destructive conflict.
September marks the eighth year of the war. The bloody fighting has now lasted longer than either the First or the Second World War. It has taken an extraordinary toll in human life. Mòre than a million people - civilians as well as military personnel - have been killed or wounded. Cities have been razed by artillery and aerial attacks. Chemical weapons have been used, and they honour no
(Mr. Shultz, United States) distinction between combatants and non-combatants, adding another gruesome element to the enormous human suffering.
The economic infrastructures of both countries have been laid waste. The conflict has frayed the social and cultural fabric that binds the Iraqi and Iranian peoples to their ways of life. Grievous damage has been done to the rich cultural legacies of both nations. Neither combatant can win this war, and both sides are destroying their most precious resource, their youth.
Despite years of bitter struggle, neither side can break the tense stalemate. Its continuation and the danger of further escalation threaten the wider international community. The conflict poses new and serious dangers to regional stability, to the welfare of non-belligerent nations and indeed to world peace, witness the increasing number of attacks on international shipping in the Gulf. Witness stepped-up terrorist attacks and other forms of aggression directed at non-belligerent States in the region. This widening threat must not be countenanced.
Too many have suffered; too much is at stake. In the name of humanity, in the interests of the belligerents and the non-belligerent States of the region, in the name of world peace and security, the international community joins together today to say "Enough. Stop the war - now."
The Security Council was designed to quell precisely this kind of conflict. The draft resolution to be passed today represents a forceful action by the international community to bring about an immediate cease-fire and establish a framework for peace. The Secretary-General played a crucial role in catalyzing the unprecedented process that led to the proposed adoption of this draft resolution under the terms of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. He called upon the
S/PV.27S0 20
(Mr. Shultz, United States)
permanent members of the Security Council to shoulder their special responsibilities. This we have done, and the Council as a whole has functioned in the collegial spirit envisioned by the founders of the United Nations at its creation.
(Mr. Shultz, United States) Through this binding resolution the international community seeks systematically to create the framework for an equitable and lasting peace, with neither victor nor vanquished, without loss of national territory by either of the combatants. The draft resolution is scrupulously evenhanded. I therefore call upon the Governments of the Republic of Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran to comply fully and immediately with its terms - in their own interests and in response to the clear mandate of the global community.
The draft resolution demands an immediate cease fire, the discontinuance of all military actions, and the withdrawal of all forces to internationally recognized boundaries without delay. The draft resolution also initiates a healing process, calling for an early exchange of prisoners and an international effort to assist in post-war reconstruction. The draft resolution confers a special responsibility on the Secretary-General to help arrange for thé cease fire and withdrawal, to dispatch an observer team to confirm and supervise the cease fire and to oversee implementation of other provisions of the draft resolution. Importantly, the draft resolution records the Council's decision to meet again to consider further steps to ensure compliance. First and foremost, the killing must stop - immediately.
The draft resolution is being adopted pursuant to Articles 39 and 40 of Chapter VII, the United Nations Charter's most forceful provisions. Compliance is therefore mandatory under international law. The very adoption of this obligatory resolution is an historic step; yet its adoption is only a start. Responsibility for compliance rests fundamentally with Iran and Iraq, The Secretary-General, with support from members of this Council and all other Members of the United Nations will, we are confident, follow through with effective action to facilitate its
(Mr. Shultz» United States) implementation. President Reagan has assured the Secretary-General of his personal help in the crucial weeks ahead. The United States Government is prepared to join with others in supporting him in his efforts.
My Government is determined that this mandatory resolution not become an empty effort, casting doubt on the efficacy of the United Nations as an organization for peace. We hope and trust that today’s decision will be honoured. At the same time we also support the decisive application of enforcement measures should either or both parties reject the call of this body.
The Governments of Iraq and Iran owe it to their peoples, to their children, and to the rest of the world to find a way to say "yes", rather than "no", to this global injunction. If they say "yes" many things are possible, including a United Nations role in helping to maintain peace in the region. My Government strongly supports such a role for the United Nations and other international efforts leading to a reduction in violence and the re-establishment of peace, stability and good relations in that vital area of the world.
Let me also say a word about the views of my Government towards the parties in the conflict. In the past we have had serious differences with both Iraq and Iran. We now have good: relations with Iraq. We have grave concerns about policies and practices of the Iranian Government outside its borders. While we respect the right of the Iranian people to determine their own form of Government, the actions of the Government in Tehran - including support of terrorist activities - are inimical to the interests of our country and citizens, as well as to other countries and their citizens. We remain ready and willing to discuss with Iran the serious problems which continue to divide us. A positive Iranian response to this draft resolution and an end to aggressive actions against other States and their
(Mr, Shultz, United States) citizens would do much to make possible a mutually beneficial bilateral relationship in the future.
In adopting this draft resolution the international community will take a bold stride forward. Together we must follow up this action with other determined steps until our goals of peace and stability in the Gulf have been secured. If ever there was a need for the Security Council and the United Nations to act, this is it. We have an opportunity to realize a primary purpose for which the United Nations was created: to resolve a major breach of the peace that endangers the stability and economic well being of our global community.
In conclusion, we support the draft resolution before us because it is our responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council to seek peaceful solutions to violent conflicts. We support it because it addresses, fairly and comprehensively, the interests of both Iran and Iraq. This draft resolution is anti-war; it is pro-peace. The war must stop. The healing must begin.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the Secretary, of State of the United States of America for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. GENSCHER (Federal Republic of Germany)(spoke in German; English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me first of all to offer you, Sir, my warm congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. The friendship and co-operation between France and the Federal Republic of Germany are exemplary; they are the foundation for the development of our European Community. It is a happy circumstance that the Security Council meets today to shoulder its great responsibility for peace under your presidency.
I wish also to extend my thanks to your predecessor, the Permanent Represenative of the Congo, with which we have friendly ties, for his-skilful management of the Council’s business in June.
The principal task of the Security Council under the Charter is to maintain world peace. To that end it has been endowed with extensive powers which it is called upon to use to fulfil its responsibility. The Council is today carrying out that task by seeking to end a war which has brought great suffering on the nations concerned and could drag the world into the most awful catastrophe.
The bitter, internecine war between Iraq and Iran has now lasted almost seven years. My country has condemned this tragic war from the very outset; we have since been following it with great concern. Many people have lost their lives, abominable chemical weapons have been used, bombs have been dropped on the civilian population, and both nations are making great material sacrifices which are detrimental to their future.
The continued escalation of this war, which has particularly intensified in recent weeks, is a growing threat to international peace and security. In particular, it seriously affects international shipping in the Gulf; it also poses great danger of a widening conflict. A clear signal is therefore needed. The conflict must not be allowed to spread; other Powers must not be drawn into its perilous maelstrom. The Gulf region and its states need stability.
The foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is directed first and foremost towards the safeguarding of peace. To us, war and the use of force are not acceptable means of pursuing political goals. We are wholly convinced that this should apply everywhere - notably to the war between Iran and Iraq.
An early cessation of the military conflict is in the interest of those two great and ancient civilized nations, with which we maintain close/ friendly relations - but not in their interest alone. The war must be stopped as quickly as possible: a political solution to the underlying conflict must be found. The Security Council is called upon to make a determined and constructive effort to end the war and to lay the foundation for a comprehensive, just and durable solution by peaceful means.	.
It was in that sense that the Declaration of Venice, issued in May this year, appealed to the parties to the conflict to cease their hostilities» The members of the European Community - four of which are currently members of the Security Council - reiterated that appeal in their Copenhagen Statement of 13 July. As neighbours of the South West Asia region, we Europeans have an immediate interest in a negotiated settlement of the conflict. My participation in today’s meeting of the Security Council emphasizes that.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we support the initiative of the five permanent members which has now finally come about. We see in this unison an encouraging trend within the Council which will enable it to assume its responsibility for world peace even more effectively. We also regard this co-operation as an important step promoting joint and co-operative responsibility for peace between East and West. We hope that this co-operation will have a favourable influence in bringing about solutions to other regional conflicts as well.
Mr. President, permit me as Foreign Minister of a country that is a close friend of your own to express the hope that, following the severance of diplomatic.
BCT/sm	S/PV.2750
27 (Mr. Genscher, Federal Republic of Germany) relations, the fate of the diplomats concerned will be settled responsibly in accordance with the recognized rules of international law.
There can be no doubt that only in its entirety will the Security Council be able, in the long run, to live up to its responsibility. The non-permanent members of the Security Council can also render an important contribution. The Federal Republic of Germany, which has from the beginning maintained strict neutrality in the Iraq-Iran war, is bearing its share of responsibility as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, to the best of its ability. It has therefore been in contact with both parties to the conflict, and here in the Security Council, as soon as this became possible, helped draft the resolution before us.
This resolution is only the third in the life of the United Nations to exhaust all the means envisaged in the Charter. For the first time ever, the Security Council is mandatorily deciding a cease-fire and the withdrawal of troops. This resolution will therefore hold a special place in the history of the United Nations and the Security Council. That makes it all the more necessary, in our view, that such a fundamental resolution should take account of the legitimate interests of both sides. The Security Council is also acting in its own interest in striving to ensure that its resolutions show the necessary degree of balance, impartiality and fairness. Neither side must be furnished with a plausible argument for refusing to participate in the efforts to end the conflict on the ground that the Security Council is biased.
We see in the draft resolution important new elements capable of paving the way for a peaceful settlement of the conflict by negotiation. That applies in particular to the matter of clarifying the question of war guilt, to war damage, and to regional security. We consider the binding call for a cease-fire followed
by the withdrawal of troops to be imperative and in conformity with .the Charter. We welcome the Secretary-General’s mandate to study the question of reconstruction.
That is why we shall vote for the draft resolution. We appreciate the fact that it has been possible to supplement the original draft with some, proposals from the floor of the Security Council and thus to improve it. The cease-fire, the ending of all military actions, and the withdrawal of troops cannot take place simultaneously; they will follow in succession. I feel it is important and urgent that as soon as this draft resolution has been adopted the weapons on both sides should become silent and that the bloodshed should first actually be stopped without qualification. At the sme time, both sides should make it unequivocally clear that they will cease all attacks on vessels in the Gulf - irrespective of nationality - so as to eliminate the danger of widening the conflict. That would make it possible for the Secretary-General of the United Nations to discuss with both parties, and in contact with them decide on, the necessary observance of all other aspects of the resolution.
The point of this resolution, as we see it, is to stop the bloodshed and to make it easier for both parties to tread the path to a negotiated settlement.
The resolution should, in our opinion, serve to strengthen the hand of the Secretary-General, who deserves credit for having been able to gain the trust of both parties. We have great respect, Mr. Secretary-General, for your diplomatic and statesmanlike skill. You have shown an ability to convince both sides, with; their highly conflicting interests, of your impartiality, trust and understanding, with the result that you have been listened to by both sides and, at least during some periods, have been able to achieve limitations of the hostilities.
It is important that this asset built up by the Secretary-General should now be used on the way to genuine peace. The Secretary-General has already drawn up plans for a settlement that is both gradual and comprehensive. The Security Council and both parties to the conflict should now enable him to proceed.
We appeal to all other countries to exercise the greatest restraint. It is important to ensure that the present tensions in the region are not exacerbated. With this resolution the international community has endeavoured to render an unprecedented contribution towards a peaceful solution to the conflict. This Objective must remain the focal point of all subsequent actions. It is imperative to take joint action for peace» it is imperative to set the world an example of the new conception of global responsibility for peace and to strengthen the role of the United Nations and its Secretary-General.
ThejPR^WENT’ (interpretation from French): I thank the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. ANDREOTTI (Italy) (interpretation from French): It is a source of special satisfaction for me also, Mr. President, to see you conducting the work of the Security Council. I am convinced that your personal qualities and your experience will greatly assist the Council in its deliberations.
I would take this occasion, too, to extend sincere compliments to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of the Congo, on the skill and political sense he demonstrated in presiding over the Council last month.
It is in clear awareness of its responsibilities that my delegation intends now to state its view on the continuing war between Iraq and Iran.
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy)
This war has now continued for seven years. It has lasted longer than any conflict of the contemporary era and the result of the current stalemate is trench warfare in which the destructive effects of the advanced technologies of our time add to the horrors and miseries which characterized the First World War. In fact, this conflict combines the worst aspects of past conflicts. Once again we witness the indiscriminate bombing of civilian targets. Once again we witness the use of Chemical weapons, the prohibition of which we thought had been considered a great and precious accomplishment of our civilization, since that weapon had not even been used in the Second world War.
There are two aspects of this tragic situation which strike us: on the one hand, this war continues even in the absence of specific claims on the part of the belligerents - in particular, territorial claims. Secondly, the international community has been unable from the outset of the conflict to find effective means to put an end to the hostilities. It is not among the least of the contradictions at this time that a large part of international public opinion seems to be more worried about the negative effects of the war on trade relations and oil supplies than about the costs of the conflict in terms of human lives and suffering.
There is also the ever-present danger of the conflict's shifting towards other areas and extending to neighbouring regions. It is precisely that concern, as well as fear of the risks involved in the iniatives that could be taken outside the framework of the United Nations to ensure the security and protection Of the interests of one or another State, that has led us to support the draft resolution: before us, which expressly refers to the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. That reference, incur view, demonstrates that there is a serious intention to enhance the image of the United Nations and vigorously uphold its role in the
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy) maintenance of international peace and security. That is why we are meeting here today.
The Security Council has been repeatedly seized of this conflict. It has dealt with it unsuccessfully because of the different approaches that were followed on previous occasions. Consequently, military operations continue. Not a day passes without some disturbing news of additional civilian casualties, of innocent victims of violence and of the use of chemical weapons. Even in the past few days a number of innocent young people were wounded by these heinous weapons and have been hospitalized in Rome. Investigations and inquiries have been carried out with respect to these tragic and illicit aspects of the war. Condemnations have been issued.
But is there any point in condemning single acts, however unlawful or heinous, «ben the conflict which generates those acts cannot be ended?
The purpose of our Organization is to preserve peace. The Charter requires all Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means. It is certainly proper to condemn specific acts of violence. However, the real decision which is expected of us is to condemn the initiation and continuation of the war, particularly since it no longer relates to any realistic, well-defined objective. In this regard, Italy, together with the other members of the European Community, has taken a very clear stand.
Therefore, it seems to us that the time has come to take a step forward - a bolder initiative than has been taken in the past. We therefore welcome the appeal made last January by the Secretary-General to the Security Council, and in particular to its five permanent members, to seek the consensus necessary to put an end to this tragic conflict.
(Mr. Andreotti, Italy}
The present draft resolution is the result of long and difficult consultations that have taken place over the last few months, principally among the permanent members of the Security Council, following a procedure which must not become the rule but which can be considered as justified in this case, given the extreme complexity of the problem and the importance of the objectives at stake. This draft resolution, in our view, attempts to meet some fundamental requirements: it takes into account, to the maximum extent possible, the basic political positions of the parties to the conflict? it gives due importance to the problem of the security of the States of the region? it paves the way for the resumption of action by the Secretary-General, who enjoys our full support and trust. No less important, in our view, are the provisions of the draft resolution which address the humanitarian aspects of the conflict, such as the problem of the prisoners of war and of the international collaboration that will be necessary for the reconstruction of the areas struck by the war. In that regard, I take this occasion to state my country’s determination to participate palpably and significantly in that task as soon as the situation permits.
The conflict between Iran and Iraq constitutes a breach of the peace? it threatens the security of the entire region and is the cause of repeated and serious violations of the fundamental principles of international law, including Article 2 of the Charter of our Organization, the Geneva Protocol of 1925, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the norms which regulate freedom of navigation.
It is therefore clear - and the international community has to be unanimous; on this point - that this state of affairs must be halted. My country maintains relations of friendship and mutual respect with both Iran and Iraq. Our judgement is therefore objective and impartial. At the same time, Italy cannot shirk the
(Mg» Andreotti, Italy) responsibilities incumbent upon it, particularly those which derive from its membership in the Security Council. Events have shown that Iran and Iraq are unable by themselves to put an end to the hostilities and to set out on the road to peace. It is therefore up to the international community - notably the Security Council , to use the means provided by the Charter for restoring a just and equitable peace in a situation which poses an increasingly grave threat to international security.
The Security Council has the right to expect the parties to give their full and unconditional co-operation to the Secretary-General, However, if it is to be effective, this appeal, which we support unreservedly, must be accompanied by a willingness on the part of each one of us to act within the framework of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, whose specific Articles are directly or indirectly referred to in the draft resolution.
We are called upon to take a stand on a package of principles which could be decisive in the sense that it could set in motion a process which, with God’s help and with the good will of men, may lead to peace.
For those reasons, my delegation will support both the draft resolution before us and the follow-up action.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)x I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr, GBEHD (Ghana): Mr. President, the Ghana delegation would like to welcome you to this meeting of the Security Council. Your long history of political service to France is well known and revered by us all. We know you will bring to bear on our delicate deliberations today your wisdom and vast diplomatic skill. My delegation wishes you well in this onerous task.
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana)
I wish also to extend to Ambassador Adouki of Congo my delegation’s congratulations on his conduct of the Council's business during the month of June.
The Security Council has convened once again to consider the war between Iran and Iraq, a war which has brought untold tragedy and hardship to the peoples of two friendly countries. States Members not only of the United Nations, but also of the Non-Aligned Movement, organizations to which Ghana belongs. My delegation is therefore ready to participate in the deliberations with responsibility and fairness to both parties so that the tragedy of the war can end as soon as possible.
We convene today painfully aware of the anguish and trauma that the war exacts, not only from the belligerents in the conflict, but also from neighbouring countries in the region. The international community is compelled to bear witness unnecessarily to death and destruction on a massive scale. We believe that in the circumstances the time has come for the Council to employ all wisdom and skill in bringing this painful chapter in the history of Iran and Iraq to an end.
In this regard, it must be recalled that the Security Council's resolutions of the past, especially resolution 582 (1986) of 24 February 1986, have had little or no impact on the conflict, even though the consensus was clearly in favour of bringing the war to an end. Those countries that are best placed to influence the two parties in the direction of peace have openly taken sides and provided resources for the continuation of the war, in spite of the Security Council resolutions.
It is only right, therefore, that the Security Council has reconvened at this time with urgency and renewed resolve seriously to consider ways and means of bringing the war to an end. Faithful to our commitment to the Charter and its. principles, the Ghana delegation is pleased to participate in the current debate in support of the present initiative. I must at this juncture place on record our gratitude to the permanent members of the Council for their collective and historic
(Mr. Gbeho, Chana) enterprise, which has finally enabled the Council toconvene with greater determination than before to end the conflict between Iran and Iraq.
It will be recalled that in many speeches, that my delegation has made recently in the Council we have expressed grave concern about the unfortunate image that the Council continues to bear on many issues, through the repeated reluctance of some of its most powerful members to act firmly and in accordance with the Charter in order unequivocally to underpin international peace and security. It is with relief and hope, therefore, that we see a departure from the old practice and are happy to support the present initiative, whatever the circumstances of war, it is destructive to life and property, and brings untold pain and misery to peoples and nations. For these reasons alone, if for no other, all wars must be brought to an end. We have no reason to make an exception of the one currently raging between Iran and Iraq. We are gratified to be part of the Council's new initiative, which will, we hope, enhance the Council's reputation.
Since the Ghana delegation became involved in the negotiations leading to the present draft resolution before the Security Council, we have taken the view that an end to the war would be better guaranteed if the Council was even-handed in addition to being firm in its decisions in the matter. We have also been sensitive to the fact that the parties to the conflict are fellow Member States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. We cannot hide our satisfaction: that, through tolerance and understanding among members of the Council, thedraft resolution now before the Security Council better represents than at any time in the past the international consensus on the war. Even though it does not answer all the legitimate concerns that could be raised, we will support it as the best that can emanate from the Council at this time. The Ghana delegation is of the Strong View that the war must be brought to an end and that negotiations must be initiated
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana) simultaneously under the auspices of the United Nations to bring a just and durable peace not only to the parties to the war, but also to the subregion as a whole.
The conflict between Iran and Iraq has lasted too long and has consumed too many resources on both sides. It is a war which should never have been started in the first place, and its continuation is in no one’s interest. During the seven-year course of the war, the requirements of international humanitarian law and the prescriptions regulating the conduct of States in times of war have been repeatedly and brutally violated, violations which have extended the theatre of death and destruction beyond the battlefront into villages, towns, cities, centres of civilian habitation and even international commerce. Mustard gas and other chemical weapons have been used with premeditated frequency. The imperative to a humane prosecution of war, established from bitter experience,, and crystallized into law by the Geneva Protocol of 1925 prohibiting the use of asphyxiating, biological and neurological weapons has been perniciously disregarded, it behoves the Security Council in such circumstances to do its utmost to halt the war as well as find a comprehensive, just and durable solution to the conflict. Let me also take this opportunity to voice my delegation’s view that the Geneva Protocol to which I have referred is no longer effective, and that perhaps the time has come for the United Nations to redouble its efforts in reviewing it, with a view to plugging its many loopholes,
The draft resolution under consideration represents a compromise among the members of the Council, and as such it is understandably not as forthright as it could be in some of its important parts. Let me therefore state, in all humility, but in accordance with our principles, the clear understanding of my delegation of some of its key provisions.
The Ghana delegation strongly supports the demand for a ceasefire as well as the cessation of all other military actions in the Iran-Iraq conflict»; but we also understand by the language of the draft resolution that these necessary measures are but a first step towards a negotiated settlement of the conflict. The two requirements are very important, and the Security Council must accept a role in their fulfilment. To concentrate on one at the expense of the other would, in out view, sow the seed of failure in the handling of the conflict.
My delegation understands all the elements of the current draft resolution to be integral to achieving a negotiated peace through the mediation of the Secretary-General, as mandated by the Security Council. In effect, the requirements of operative paragraphs 1 and 3 must be read together with operative paragraphs 2 and 4, and they can only be so read, if a beneficial and durable solution is to be achieved between the parties to the conflict«
Secondly, the Security Council must not ignore the difficult and real circumstances prevailing in the region of the conflict as it adopts the draft resolution. The aim of the Council or any of its members, as my delegation understands it, is to reduce tension in the area and not needlessly to heighten it. Indeed, operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution expresslycalls upon all States to exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from any act which may lead to further escalation and widening of the conflict. Therefore, the Ghana delegation believes that the resolution that the Council adopts today Should in no way constitute the basis for premeditated aggression or any unilateral action by any State or group of States or major Powers against Tran or Iraq, Any follow-up action that may be required after the adoption of the present draft resolution should be within the framework of the United Nations and should first be discussed and agreed upon by the Security Council.
It would be unfortunate if the present exercise of the Council’s powers were to be interpreted as giving licence, however obliquely, to the despatch of punitive expeditions by one or another of the Members of the United Nations to pacify the area. There should be no room for unilaterally imposed solutions nor any mandate for concerted action by a few States not under the aegis of the Security Council.
Thirdly, it is the understanding of the Ghana delegation that the determination of responsibility for the war, in accordance with the procedures mentioned in the draft resolution, will be accomplished expeditiously, and that the outcome will be taken into account in the allocation of resources for reconstruction after the cessation of hostilities. We believe that this determination and its consequences will not only constitute an act of justice, but will be a useful precedent in deterring future aggression by any country.
. Fourthly, my delegation would like to underscore the Council’s recognition of the magnitude of the war damage to both sides and of the need for reconstruction with appropriate international assistance. We believe that an unequivocal commitment to that intention should induce the parties to the conflict to lay down their arms and approach the negotiating table. It is the Ghana delegation's understanding that this commitment to reconstruction is real, and not merely pious. We also hope that, soon after the mandated study by experts of the question of reconstruction, the major Powers especially will make substantial resources available for the purpose, particularly in the light of the need to compensate whichever party is determined to have been a victim of aggression. We express this understanding not in a bid to impose a burden for its own sake on the major Powers, but rather recognizing that the international community also must share the cost of bringing this unfortunate war to a close: this is a part of the responsibility
(^Gbeho^Jhana) members of the Council must recognize if the words of the Council! are to mean anything in such circumstances.
It is with those considerations in mind that my delegation views the onus for achieving the purposes of the current draft resolution as resting not only on the belligerents in the conflict, Iran and Iraq, but also on States members of the Security Council, which are called upon to handle this crisis with wisdom, firmness and justice. My delegation urges the two parties in particular to seize the means rendered by the current draft resolution to co-operate in negotiations towards achieving a comprehensive, just and durable settlement to the conflict. The price for insisting on one side's conditions for an end to the war is too costly in human and material terms to be acceptable.
In the unfolding of this immense tragedy there can be no victor and no vanquished. If anything, we all stand to lose as a result of the dangerous proportions the conflict, in its current drift, has assumed. Peace is within grasp; let us take it, for a better world.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)s I thank the representative of Ghana for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr.  ZUZE (Zambia): On behalf of the Zambian delegation, I wish to congratulate you most sincerely. Sir, on France's assumption of the office of President of the Security Council for the month of July and on the able manner in which Ambassador Blanc has conducted the delicate consultations on the issue'now before the Council.
May I also commend his predecessor, my brother and colleague Ambassador Martin Adouki of the Republic of Congo, for the inspiring leadership he provided to the Council during the month of June.
(Mr. Zuze, Zambia)
The conflict between Iran and Iraq, both of them members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, is a matter of grave concern to my country. The efforts of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countties and the United Nations have produced no change in the status of this senseless and ruthless bloodbath. We in the delegation of Zambia know of no other war in the history of conflicts between nations that has been propelled by such meaningless and dubious operational objectives. We are now witnessing a self-perpetuating situation whose momentum is maintained only by the desire of both parties to settle a score.
Repeated appeals by the international community to both countries to co-operate with the United Nations in its efforts to find a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement to the conflict have gone unheeded by one of the parties to the conflict.
The situation obtaining in the Gulf as a consequence of this bloody conflict has heightened tension in the region and now poses a serious threat to international peace and security. It is thus incumbent upon the Security Council, in the discharge of its primary responsibility under the Charter - that of maintaining international peace and security - to do everything in its power to end the war. The conflict cannot and should not be left to continue indefinitely. All efforts aimed at ending the war are in the interest of both Iran and Iraq, and of the international community at large. An end to the Iran-Iraq war will not only bring peace and stability to the region but will also ensure freedom of navigation in the Gulf.
The draft resolution before the Security Council is, in our view, a balanced text which has, to a large extent, taken into account the concerns of both parties to the conflict. Its unanimous adoption would testify to the seriousness with
which the Council views the prolongation of the Iran-Iraq war. It is our sincere hope that the two parties to the conflict will co-operate in its implementation so that peace and stability may be restored in the region. It is also our sincere hope that both parties to the conflict will co-operate also with the Secretary-General in his mediation efforts.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the representative of Zambia for the kind words he addressed to me.
Hr. CAPUTO (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish first of all. Sir, to express to you the warmest greetings of the Argentine delegation and our great pleasure at seeing you presiding over the work of this important body on this most important occasion. The excellent relations between our two Governments have encouraged fruitful personal co-operation between us, and I have found you to be a truly valued colleague. I take this opportunity also to congratulate Ambassador Blanc on the efficient way in which he has conducted the work of the Council this month. I repeat to him and to the other menbers of the Council our firm determination to co-operate.
I wish also to express my delegation’s thanks to Ambassador Adouki for his outstanding work as President for the month of June. The ties between us and Congo, both members of the Non-Aligned Movement, facilitated my delegation’s work.
We support the draft resolution introduced by the President on behalf of all“ members. We are firmly convinced of the merits of the text and of the important contribution it can make to ending the war between Iran and Iraq. We believe that, as no solution to the conflict has been found, this decision will satisfy the legitimate and genuine concerns of the entire international community.
Our support is actually a corollary of my Government's firm commitment to the Purposes and Principles of the Charter. The preservation of international peace and security is a primary objective of Argentina's foreign policy. The peaceful settlement of disputes is, therefore, an obligation that no country is entitled to evade.
Because of the important bonds between my country and Iran and Iraq, we view this tragic conflict with special concern. In his address to the Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare in 1986, President Alfons in .stateci!
"The Republic of Argentina, which is a friend of both parties, will continue to support efforts in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of non-alignment likely to enable both sides once again to enjoy full exercise of their right to life and peace."
That is still our goal.
The international community must not through inaction tolerate the use of non-peaceful means for the settlement of disputes. This war has gone on far too long. The toll in human life is unacceptable and must cease. There is nothing more balanced than the appeal for an immediate cessation of hostilities. That call was voiced by the members of the Non-Aligned Movement in the declaration issued after their most recent summit Conference. The parties must heed it and withdraw their troops to internationally recognized boundaries, in keeping with the provisions of operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution.
We believe it to be indispensable that such a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement be achieved, acceptable to both parties in all respects and in keeping with the principles of the United Nations Charter. We know that for
Wil	S/PV.2750
47 (Mr. Caputo, Argentina) this to occur the necessary conditions must be created for negotiations between Iran and Iraq. The draft resolution we are now considering establishes an ' appropriate basis for the achievement of that objective. Among other things it requests the Secretary-General to undertake a series of measures to enable the parties to come together. It urges the parties to release and repatriate prisoners-of-war without delay and calls upon third parties to refrain from any act which may lead to further escalation and widening of the conflict.
The Council has also taken into account the arguments put forward by the parties concerned, including the fact that it might be appropriate to inquire into the sources of the conflict and necessary to respect the norms of humanitarian international law. We are also aware of the fact that once the conflict is over it will be necessary to work for reconstruction. All these things are set forth in the draft resolution.
By this measure the Council will fulfil the primary responsibility entrusted to it by States Members of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. We are convinced that the Council should have taken this action long ago. We are not unaware of the complexities of the conflict. There are many aspects that merit special attention. We are certain, however, that both Iran and Iraq will correctly interpret the constructive spirit in which the Council demands, that, as a first step towards a negotiated settlement, they observe an immediate cease-fire, discontinue all military actions and withdraw all forces to the internationally recognized boundaries without delay. We are confident that Baghdad and Teheran will respond positively to this important decision by the Council.
In its first paragraph the Charter of the Organization expressly reflects the determination of the peoples of the United Nations to save succeeding generations
(Mr. Caputo, Argentina) from the scourge of war. It is that lofty objective that inspires our support for the present draft resolution. It is high time that the war between Iran and Iraq came to an end,
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Religionf of Argentina for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr, ADOUKI (Congo)(interpretation from French): Mr. President, it is customary in my country to use the expression "the right man' in the right place". That expression is, I am sure, the most fitting one to describe the close relationship that exists between the subject before the Security Council today and its president, Indeed, at a time when the Council is preparing to take an important, if not historic, decision, the role that your country, France, has played in the process that led up to it, first acting as spokesman for the five permament members of the Council - a role that Ambassador Blanc performed last month - and, today, as President of the Council, takes on a particular significance. We wish you every success. We are convinced that your experience and your personal qualities,- as well as your country’s long diplomatic tradition, will ensure us that success. My country and delegation would like to assure you of their full support in your performance of the presidential duties.
I should like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to everyone who expressed congratulations to the delegation of the Congo, which endeavoured last month to respond to the best of its ability to the constructive attitude and evident trust each member of the Council expressed in the Council’s work.
Together with other members of the Council, my delegation is today responding to an appeal made by the five permanent members of the Council to put an end to the conflict that for seven years has pitted Iran against Iraq. Who would not subscribe to such a noble goal? we are therefore gratified to have this
opportunity to meet with a number of members of Governments who have come to. New York especially for this meeting to set into motion the system of collective, security laid down in the Charter. However, because the elements of that system are sometimes ambiguous in their formulation, it is difficult today to appreciate why some questions were not raised. These can be articulated as follows: the disruptive war between Iran and Iraq has in fact been going on now for seven years. This year the Security Council seemed to be in a state of paralysis and irresolution and unable to provide any effective solution to the conflict that, would be acceptable to all parties concerned. That ambivalent stance is the result of a kind of behavior based on power that is often alien to interests and procedures of the Security Council. It is in order to provide a maximum guarantee that law will prevail over force, diplomacy and equity over partiality» that my delegation worked within the group of non-aligned countries to improve the draft resolution now before the Council.
It is a pity indeed that our Council did not see fit to open a detailed debate, which would have made it possible for many delegations of Members of this Organization to evaluate the arguments often adduced, to the effect that it would be counter-productive in principle, or because of convictions held, to resort to sanctions and other coercive measures laid down in Chapter VII of the Charter and that such measures have never been fruitful and would, in the case of South Africa for example, only serve to increase its stubbornness, its system of apartheid and, undoubtedly, its ongoing illegal occupation of Namibia.
Adherence to the virtues of Chapter VII today is, for that reason, rather a happy surprise to us, and we are very gratified. The mutations of history are sometimes easier to understand than those of biology. About three years ago, I think, in one of his annual reports on the activities of the Organization, Mr. Pérez de Cuéllar asked the great Powers to undertake each year to settle at least one existing conflict in order to bolster the credibility of the United Nations.
The situation in South Africa; the implementation of the United Nations plan of action for Namibia, as envisaged in Security Council resolution 435 (1978); the situation prevailing in the Middle East; and the situation in Central America - to name just a few such problems - are undoubtedly the kinds of conflicts to which the Secretary-General referred as warranting the mobilization of efforts by the Security Council.
No matter how perplexing we may find those situations, we are optimistic that the Security Council will move towards being less selective in dealing with the important problems facing the world. To that end, the usefulness and role of the. Security Council - and above all of the Organization - should be strengthened. Wé hope our good faith will not be betrayed and that in its pursuit of peace in the
Gulf the Security Council will be able to secure the confidence and co-operation of the parties directly concerned, for in our opinion that is the only way to guarantee good results.
In this connection I believe the role of the Secretary-General is fundamental, and nothing and no one should impede the exercise of his functions, particularly as regards the prerequisite of agreement among the parties to determine the ways and means of application of the cease-fire and the entire process that should lead to the final settlement of the problem.	■
Finally, Iran and Iraq are two countries that belong to the Non-Aligned Movement, and we know how much that Movement's contribution has been valued. It was the relationship existing between Congo and those two countries that led my delegation to make its own modest contribution to the negotiations that produced the draft resolution now before us, by whose adoption we intend to facilitate the advent of peace and dialogue between Iran and Iraq.	5
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)s I thank the representative of Congo for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr, PABON. GARCIA (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): I am very pleased to welcome you, Sir, to the presidency of the Security Council at this most important meeting and to wish you every possible success in the delicate mission you are now pursuing. The bonds between our two countries are strong indeed, and the future of our relations is very promising.
I should like with equal warmth and gratitude to congratulate the representative of the Republic of Congo and his delegation on the skilful way in which the functions of the presidency were carried out during the month of June.
The Security Council is meeting once again to consider formulas for the halting of an immense conflict that has for seven years been raging between two Members of the United Nations, inflicting untold suffering on both peoples.
Venezuela is conscious of the increasingly urgent need to seek ways and means of finding practical solutions. The human and material cost of that war necessitates persistent ongoing efforts to ensure the attainment of peace, so necessary for the peoples of Iran and Iraq, the region and the whole world.
Unfortunately, so fat the appeals of the Organization, particularly those of the Council, the body entrusted with the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, have not been heeded. It is with great concern that we have seen the inability of the international community to find any formula likely to bring the two parties to the conflict to the negotiating table.
The most recent resolution, adopted on 24 February 1986 with the participation of Venezuela, resolution 582 (1986), which requested an immediate cease-fire, contains elements which my delegation believes could significantly contribute to the creation of conditions for the return of peace. A number of those elements have been reproduced in the present draft resolution.
The delegation of Venezuela prays that the draft resolution now before us, which incorporates certain new initiatives, is truly a step in the right direction. It is the result of long, difficult negotiations aimed at producing a consensus. It is our devout hope that it will be acceptable to the parties to the conflict and will bring about the restoration of peace between those parties, with which Venezuela has close relations of co-operation and with which we promote the defence of our common interests.
(Mr. Pabon Garcia, Venezuela)
We shall vote in favour of the draft resolution in the belief that it. is a balanced text that takes into account the rights and interests of both parties» It will, however, be to no avail if the two parties do not find it to be an acceptable basis for an agreement.
We know that the implemenation of this Security Council decision will entail difficulties and sacrifices for both the parties involved, but we are convinced that it is the only way to bring about a cessation of the conflict. These sacrifices, however great, will always appear small compared to the loss of life and the destruction on both sides during this prolonged war.
It is absolutely necessary that the parties to the conflict heed this further appeal by the competent United Nations organ; but it is also necessary that no other State, under any pretext or in any circumstance, intervene in this conflict. The most powerful nations have certain international moral obligations owing to their position, and the Organization’s Charter requires that they make a common effort to bring about a just peace, a very encouraging sign is the presence at this Security Council meeting of several distinguished Foreign Ministers.
Once again we find it necessary to define the role being played by weapons-manufacturing and exporting countries in the escalation and continuation of this and other existing conflicts. While this inhuman trade in weapons continues little can be done. No country must be allowed to turn its back on peace.
It is obvious that any situation endangering international peace and security, which takes a toll in human life, consumes vast amounts of resources and prevents creative and positive activities cannot promote the kind of solidarity needed among the developing countries.
My delegation would also like to emphasize the importance of strict respect for the tenets of international humanitarian and other laws governing armed conflicts:. That is Venezuela's traditional position of principle, and we therefore condemn the use of chemical weapons, because such practices violate the provisions of the 1925 Geneva Protocol, to which Venezuela is a party.
Venezuela is a country committed to peace and understanding among all. nations.. We have not been, are not, nor could we be indifferent to conflicts which disrupt international concord. To the fullest extent of our ability we have devoted ourselves to the promotion of peace and understanding at the bilateral, regional and international levels.
Those are the main reasons why we have participated in various United Nations bodies from the very beginning and are now taking part in this Security Council meeting.
As we discharge our responsibility in the Council we wish to appeal both to the international community and to the parties to the conflict to show flexibility and genuine good will in putting an end to this situation which has already disrupted world peace and, unless halted, might have even more unpredictable consequences. Because of the events underlying this tragedy, the international community must, more forcefully than ever before, appeal to both parties for a just, honourable and lasting settlement.
We have placed our trust in the Secretary-General’s tireless activities, throughout these long years and are confident of a speedy, solution. My: delegation reiterates its confidence in the role that the Secretary-General can play in this process and hopes that he will have the co-operation of the parties as he discharges his responsibilities as set forth in the draft resolution.
It should be emphasized that not only international peace and security is at stake: the authority of the Security Council and the image of the United Nations will suffer irreparably if our attempts to end the war between two Member States should fall.
We wish only to contribute in a balanced way to all peaceful efforts to end this confrontation between two countries which are our friends. We hope that a solution can be found through dialogue and negotiation and that the international conununity's opinion will be heeded without delay so that the peoples of those two countries can devote their efforts to the task of national reconstruction and emerge from the ruins resulting from this war.
Th^JPRESroaiT (interpretation from French): I thank the representative of Venezuela for the kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
We are meeting here today in the name of the entire international community to endeavour to end a war that has been going on for nearly seven years. The Security Council has long, been seized of the tragic conflict that is devastating Iran and Iraq. Despite the implacable nature of this war and the failure of attempts to bring about peace, hope of a settlement has never faded. Such hope comes from the lessons of the past. I am thinking in particular of the history of Europe where certain peoples, once considered hereditary enemies, have now decided to unite their destinies.
My country has repeatedly expressed its concern at the escalation of a tragic conflict and its distress at the misfortunes of two great nations which history, civilization and reason invited to remain at peace.
France is also aware of the danger which this conflict represents for the security of neighbouring States and of the Gulf. Its concern is to avert the risk Of the war's extending to a region of the world that is particularly sensitive and threatened. For this reason the time has come to demand that hostilities cease and to repeat, with even greater emphasis and conviction than before, our appeal for
(The President)
the observance of international law and to find a settlement acceptable to both sides. I want to emphasize that the demand and the appeal come not from France alone, nor even from the 15 members of the Council; they come from the entire international community.
We sincerely desire a lasting settlement that is comprehensive, just and honourable. It must be founded on respect for the sovereignty of the two States, within their internationally recognized boundaries. How is such a Settlement to be approached? The text before the Security Council meets the conditions; it is indeed the result of the serious and thorough work undertaken following the Secretary General’s initiative.
Its provisions áre balanced in that the text takes into consideration the Opinions and concerns of all. Whatever their political systems, whatever their reference values, all the members of the Security Council, aware of what is at stake and determined fully to assume their responsibilities, have participated in a constructive manner in drafting this resolution.
As it stands, the resolution is realistic and balanced. It demands in concrete terms that hostilities cease and that the forces that have been fighting each other for so long be withdrawn without delay. It also paves the way for a political solution, without victor and without vanquished.
It is my hope that this resolution will be accepted by all. It is imperative that the two Powers that have worn themselves out in an unending war should devote their energy, with the assistance of us all, to the positive tasks of a peace settlement, reconciliation and reconstruction.
Let no one be deceived:1 Our hope is the unanimous hope of peoples everywhere. Our resolution embodies all the weight that the United Nations Charter, in its key chapters on peace and security, has conferred on our Council. It must not go unheeded by the leaders of the two countries. The Council addresses itself to their sense of responsibility and their intelligence. In that spirit France will vote in favour of the text submitted to our Council today.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.
I put to the vote the draft resolution in document S/18983.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Argentina, Bulgaria, China, Congo, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Italy, Japan, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Zambia
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The result of the voting is as follows: there were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has therefore been unanimously adopted as resolution 598 (1987).
I now call on the secretary-General, who wishes to make a statement.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): The resolution that has just been unanimously adopted is the culmination of the joint efforts by the members of the Security Council, as representatives of the international community, to establish the basis for a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement between Iran and Iraq. Nevertheless, their work has only just begun. In order to end the war in the region, it is necessary that the national policies and actions of all Member States be harmonized with the declared will of the Council» In this respect, operative paragraph 5 of the resolution assigns concrete responsibilities to each State in the Organization.
It is only too evident that a first step is necessary in order to advance on the way to a negotiated settlement. We all rely firmly on the co-operation Of the two belligerents to establish the cease-fire immediately and thus to facilitate the implementation of other provisions of the resolution.
indeed, the aim is to implement the various aspects of the resolution, utilizing the most rapid and efficacious approach. The members of the Council may be assured that I shall keep them promptly informed of the course of my efforts.
In addressing the various aspects of the resolution in which I have been entrusted with specific responsibilities, I shall avail myself of the long experience of the Organization. Once a cease-fire is established, the first priority for the United Nations must be to ensure that it holds. It would be my intention, should the need arise during my consultations with the parties, pending the making of the arrangements envisaged in the resolution, to draw upon the
resources of existing United Nations operations, which would ensure the earliest possible deployment of observers. As the Council may recall, similar arrangements were effected in the past, through an exchange of letters with the President of the Security Council, when I detached officers from the truce supervision organization in the Middle East to verify compliance in Iran and Iraq with a moratorium on attacks on civilian targets.
A general cease-fire would entail a halt to the deplorable practice of deliberate attacks on merchant shipping in the region. It would be essential, however, to develop, in consultation with the two parties and other, regional States, arrangements for the long-term security and stability of the region such as are envisaged in the resolution. Further, since the assignment of the responsibility for the conflict has been an obstacle to progress toward a settlement, it would be my endeavour speedily to explore, in consultation with both sides, the possibility of entrusting an impartial body with the task of inquiring into this matter. On another aspect, the International Committee of the Red Cross can depend on my full support when it undertakes the repatriation of thousands of prisoners of war. As regards reconstruction efforts, I shall proceed with care toward the preparations required, utilizing the best expertise available.
Aware as I am of the; urgency inherent in this resolution, I intend to enter into consultations with the parties as soon as this meeting concludes.
While I shall exert every effort to fulfil the heavy responsibilities placed upon me by the resolution, I cannot emphasize too strongly that full co-operation by Iran and Iraq is indispensable for progress toward peace. This can make possible the achievement of a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement, acceptable to Iran and Iraq, and ensure security and stability in the region, Those are the common goals of all who sincerely wish for peace.

I shall not he able to fulfil the mission assigned to me by the Council without the firm and sustained support of its members. Their work, I repeat, certainly has not ended. I shall be able to complete my task successfully if the international community, which all of you represent, maintains its support for my efforts. International solidarity has been given an opportunity: Let us work together - you the members of the Council, Iran and Iraq, and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Let us work in unity; there will only be victors.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I shall now call on those members of the Council who have asked to be allowed to make statements after the voting.
Mr. BEIDNOGOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): First, I wish to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France. Relations with that country have traditionally been regarded by the Soviet Union as an important: component of world politics. I wish also to express my gratification at the fact that, under his presidency, the Security Council has just adopted - and adopted unanimously - a resolution on one of the most acute problems besetting the international situation.
I wish also to express my gratitude to the Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador Blanc, under whose guidance the resolution just adopted was prepared.
I should also like to take this opportunity to express words of thanks to Ambassador Adouki, the Permanent Representative of Congo, one of the African States with which we enjoy friendly relations, who successfully guided the Council's work in June.
The Soviet delegation would like to express its particular gratitude to. the Secretary-General, who has undertaken considerable effort to make today's meeting of the Council possible and has put forward a number of valuable ideas which are reflected in the resolution adopted by the Council.
The convening of this meeting of the Council is an indication of the deep concern felt by the international community at the ongoing armed conflict between Iran and Iraq. The Soviet Union fully shares this concern and desires to remove a source of tension that is in direct proximity to our own boundaries. The Soviet Government position regarding the Iran-Iraq conflict and the situation in the Gulf was once again set forth in detail on 3 July this year (S/18970), as well as on 9 January this year (S/18575).
The Soviet Union has constantly favoured the immediate cessation of hostilities between Iran and Iraq and the settlement of their disputes not on the battlefield but at the negotiation table. That is our fundamental position and it is one that we have followed since the very outset regardless of how the conflict has evolved, including its military aspect.
In our view, the entire course of the war demonstrates that relying on the continuous use of military means will yield no solution and in fact will make a settlement even more remote. We are persuaded that despite the difficulty and seriousness of the problems that have accumulated, there are, in fact, no insuperable obstacles to putting an end to the war and establishing peace. Indeed, this is obvious from the history of the relations between Iran and Iraq.
As we see it, the most important requirement is for both sides to demonstrate political will and good sense, a desire to reach mutually acceptable agreements that would take into account the legitimate interests of both Iran and Iraq. Common sense would indicate that they should focus not on the past but on the future, which means first and foremost the goal of ending the war. Only that will provide both States the prospects for normal economic, social, cultural and intellectual development. Quite clearly, it is not in the interests of the Iranian or the Iraqi peoples that the national wealth of both countries should be wasted on mutual destruction. The sooner the representatives of the belligerent States sit at the negotiating table, the better it will be for both Iran and Iraq; indeed, the international situation as a whole stands to gain.
The Soviet Union favours recourse to the most effective available measures and full use of the possibilities offered by the United Nations Charter, the potential of our Organization - primarily the Security Council.
In many respects today’s meeting of the Security Council is of particular significance: the initiative to draw up a'draft resolution was taken by the five permanent members of the Security Council because of the particular responsibility they bear under the United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security. The consultations among the five permanent members of the Security Council in order to explbre ways and means of settling the conflict are, in our opinion, a practical embodiment of one of the Purposes of the United Nations, namely, to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the common goals of the organization - the main one, according to the Charter, being the maintenance of peace.
Those consultations, in the interests of peace, have created an excellent precedent for the creation of conditions in the Security Council conducive to finding solutions to conflict situations in other parts of the world as wells in particular, in the Middle East and in southern Africa.
The Soviet delegation, in its efforts as one of the five permanent members and in the Council as a whole, has consistently endeavoured to tap the potential of the United Nations Charter, to make the most of the possibilities open to the Security Council as the body entrusted by United Nations Member States with primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, and find ways to put a speedy end to the war.
We believe that the resolution that we have just adopted is responsive to that task and provides the necessary and just basis for a settlement of the conflict. The Security Council cannot fail to be deeply concerned that the Iran-Iraq conflagration has been biasing for more than six years now and that it has meant and each day continues to cause, profound human suffering, that many hundreds of thousands of human lives have already been lost and that an even larger number of people have been mutilated - not to mention the tremendous material damage to both countries. The dangerous aspect of this situation is that a further escalation and widening of the conflict could take place. As far as we are concerned, we profoundly wish to avoid a degeneration of this regional conflict into an international crisis.
(Mr. Belonogov. USSR)
For all those reasons it was absolutely essential for members of the Security Council,, including the Soviet delegation, to adopt a resolution calling upon the belligerents to observe an immediate cease-fire, discontinue all military actions on land, at sea and in the air, and withdraw all forces to the internationally recognized boundaries without delay. That is a necessary first step towards settling the conflict by means of negotiation.
The draft resolution lays down the general parameters for such a settlement -namely, that it must be comprehensive, just and honourable, acceptable to both sides, and in accordance with the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations.
I would particularly single out one further extremely important aspect of the resolution adopted by the Council. As we worked on the draft it was Our constant belief that if this lengthy war between Iran and Iraq continued it might promote a dangerous growth of tension in the Persian Gulf, where events have recently drawn nearer to the danger level. International waters, which are traditionally for the use of peaceful shipping, are being plied by a sharply increased number of warships, including ships belonging to States thousands of kilometres from the area. The concentration of the armed forces of third parties in the Gulf area continues. We cannot but conclude that such activity is dictated not least by an attempt by one party to use the present alarming situation in the Gulf area to realize long-held plans to acquire new military strongholds for its air force and navy.	•	,
It is obvious that if the processes to which I have referred are not halted and brought under control in time they may even, despite the desires and intentions of the States involved, result in a serious threat to international peace and security. We believe it is important to refer to the dangerous conséquences of
(Mr. Belonogov, USSR) increased foreign military activity and presence in the conflict area, but obviously there should be no activities that would constitute a threat to international shipping. We are convinced that the security of some cannot be guaranteed at the cost of the security of others. There is no alternative to political steps in the area, because any kind of military step, any attempt to intimidate, to rely on the military fist, on force, entails the risk of the conflict's proliferating,
We advocate resolute steps to improve the situation in the Gulf area. In the opinion of the Soviet Union, the Security Council took very far-sighted action when it adopted a comprehensive, multifaceted approach to the settlement of the Iran-Iraq conflict. It is important not only to guarantee the resolution's implementation by the parties to the conflict, but also to ensure that other States assist in its implementation. In today's conditions, particular significance attaches to that part of the resolution containing an appeal by the Security Council to other States - everybody knows to whom it is primarily addressed - to show the maximum restraint and refrain from any action that might lead to a further escalation and broadening of the conflict.
On 3 July this year the Government of the soviet Union made concrete proposals intended to improve the situation in the Persian Gulf. They envisaged that, inter alia, all warships that did not belong to the area should be withdrawn from the Gulf as soon as possible and that Iran and Iraq should in turn refrain from any acts that would create a threat to international shipping. Such steps, to be carried out in the context of a comprehensive settlement of the Iran-Iraq conflict, would help to calm the situation and eliminate the threat of enlarging of an explosive source of military tension. We had hoped that the States concerned would show a readiness to subordinate their national interests to tasks of relevance to
JP/JK
all mankind, to be mindful of the interest of all countries and peoples in not only living for the present day but looking to the future. We can only express our regret that so far those proposals have not been supported.
The resolution recognizes that preparing measures to enhance the security and stability of the region is the prerogative of the States of the region. The principles set out in paragraphs 5 and 8 make it abundantly clear that the problems at present besetting the Gulf can be resolved through the Gulf States, themselves reaching agreement on ways to strengthen the security and stability of the region without any outside interference. In that connection, it is of great practical importance that the Security Council has requested the Secretary-General to consider, in consultation with the States of the region, ways and means of strengthening security and stability in that part of the world. We wish the Secretary“General every success in that responsible mission.
It should be stressed that one important aspect of the resolution is that the Security Council also places other heavy responsibilities on the Secretary-General. Owing to the comprehensive nature of the resolution, they are extremely varied, but their implementation has one objectives through mediation to ensure a turning towards a peaceful solution and settlement of the conflict through negotiation. The complexity of the tasks that the Secretary-General has to undertake will require a prudent, circumspect approach, to ensure that the solution to each problem is balanced and totally acceptable to both sides. Naturally^ the Secretary-General will require some time.
In that connection, we wish also to place special emphasis on the importance of constructive and business-like co-operation between Iran and Iraq and the Secretary-General in the peace-making mission with which the Council has entrusted the Secretary-General. We welcome the statement just made by the Secretary-General, in which he assured the Security Council that he intends to take immediate steps to carry out the responsibilities entrusted to him.
The Soviet Union regards the resolution, which resulted from a collective effort by all members of the Security Council, as an excellent, balanced basis for channeling the Iran-Iraq conflict towards a peaceful solution and for ending the ®any years of senseless warfare. As emphasized in a Soviet Government statement:
"Imbued by a feeling of respect and friendship for the Iranian and Iraqi peoples, the Soviet Union sincerely hopes they will overcome the existing tragic stage as soon as possible and establish relations of peace and good-neighbourliness." iS/18575. p. 3) For our part, we have always been and shall continue to be active in our pursuit of that goal, both in our bilateral relations with Iran and Iraq and as part of our multilateral efforts. Our position is an integral part of the Soviet Union’s principled policy of eliminating tension and easing conflicts through negotiation, taking account of the legitimate interests of all parties, free from foreign intervention, and with a view to laying the foundations for security in Asia as a major component of the overall system of international security.
Full implementation of the Security Council resolution should demonstrate the ability of the world community to take practical steps towards renouncing confrontation and the use of force and to move international relations towards a new kind of political thinking in keeping with the realities of the end of the twentieth century.
The Soviet Union is prepared to co-operate with all who genuinely share those goals.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. MURATA (Japan): On behalf of Foreign Minister Tadashi Kuranari, who very much wanted to attend today’s meeting but who was obliged for compelling reasons to stay home, I should like first to take this opportunity to congratulate you. Sir, on presiding over the Security Council today. I should like also to express nty delegation’s appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Martin Adouki, who so skilfully guided the work of the Council last month.
Ever since the. conflict between Iran and Iraq broke out, the United Nations, the non-aligned countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as many countries, including my own, have made serious efforts, jointly or individually, to bring about a settlement. In spite of those efforts, however, the conflict has continued for nearly seven years, taking a heavy toll in loss of human life and material destruction on both sides. Moreover, the conflict has resulted in heightened tension throughout the Gulf region and has seriously affected countries outside the region as well by disrupting free and safe navigation in the Gulf.
The international community is demanding, more strongly than ever before, the prompt and peaceful settlement of the conflict through negotiations. The resolution just adopted was prepared in full awareness of that demand. Japan has been in close consultation with the countries concerned in order to ensure that the resolution: would be acceptable to both Iran and Iraq. It is our firm belief that it provides a framework for a comprehensive, just, honourable and durable settlement of the conflict.
It is gratifying to note that the resolution has been adopted unanimously. We believe that the close co-operation demonstrated among the permanent members and all the other members of the Security Council in preparing and drafting the resolution will serve as a valuable precedent in future efforts for the peaceful settlement of disputes and the strengthening of the peace-keeping functions of the United Nations.
It is my Government's earnest hope that all Member States, and particularly Iran and Iraq, will faithfully observe and implement this resolution, thereby putting an end to this protracted and tragic conflict.
The Secretary-General, who has been in close contact with both Iran and Iraq, should continue the serious efforts he has been making towards settlement of this conflict. Now that the Council’s resolution has been adopted, it is incumbent upon all of us - all Member countries, including Iran and Iraq - to extend even greater support and co-operation to his endeavours. Japan, for its part, is determined to redouble its efforts towards that end.
Japan has maintained close contact with Iran and Iraq. Availing itself of every opportunity, Japan has been pursuing its diplomatic efforts towards an early and peaceful settlement of the conflict from the very beginning. We shall continue to make every effort to realize the objectives of the resolution and achieve durable peace, in particular, Japan, together with other countries, will spare no effort to support and co-operate in the reconstruction of both Iran and Iraq, and in the achievement of lasting security and stability as well as economic development in the region.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. GARVALOV (Bulgaria): May I congratulate you. Sir, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, on your conduct of the proceedings of the Security Council today and also on France's assumption of the Council presidency for the month of July. I trust that under your most able and wise guidance the Council will discharge its responsibilities in an outstanding manner.
I should like also to avail myself of this opportunity to convey my gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Congo, Ambassador Adouki, President of the Council for June, who, with his great professional qualities and diplomatic experience, conducted the'Council's work in an exemplary manner.
The delegation of the People's Republic of Bulgaria voted in favour of the resolution the Council has just adopted in the firm belief that it is a step in the right direction - that is, a step towards bringing an end to the war.
Over the past seven years the People’s Republic of Bulgaria, like the overwhelming majority of States of the international community, has followed with real concern the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq, two countries with which the People's Republic of Bulgaria has always maintained friendly relations and mutually advantageous and steadfast co-operation and for whose peoples we have feelings of friendship and respect. This war has resulted in heavy loss of human life and in material destruction for both Iran and Iraq and will benefit neither of them.
Since the very outbreak of the conflict Bulgaria's position has been a clear and consistent ones outstanding issues and disputes among States should and could be settled by peaceful political means only, without recourse to the use or threat of force, on terms acceptable to both sides, duly taking into consideration the legitimate interests of the States and peoples involved in the conflict and in accordance with the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations. I should like to reiterate today that my country, Bulgaria, has always called for and, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, has spared no efforts to help bring about, a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement of the conflict between the two neighbouring countries.
In today’s nuclear and space age of the world it is becoming increasingly evident that the elimination of hotbeds of conflict and tension is an indispensable prerequisite for the maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security. This is equally true with respect to the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The latest events in the Persian Gulf, with the involvement of certain interests, serve to show once again that this conflict could well pose a grave danger to international peace and security, in this respect it is appropriate that the resolution calls upon all other States to exercise the utmost restraint and to
(Mr. Garvalov, Bulgaria) refrain from any act which may lead to further escalation and widening of the conflict.
The People’s Republic of Bulgaria welcomes as an important development the unanimity of the permanent members of the Security Council - and ultimately of all members of the Council - in sponsoring the present resolution with the aim of putting an end once and for all to the tragic and costly war between Iran and Iraq.
Now that the resolution has been adopted we must not fail to observe that its provisions are a sine qua non first step, a step long overdue, towards a negotiated settlement of the disputed issues. I should like to state here the position of principle of Bulgaria that, given goodwill and mutual respect for each other’s legitimate interests and for the Charter of the United Nations, there are no problem^ that cannot be resolved at the negotiating table between the two countries, Bulgaria calls upon the two neighbouring countries to adopt precisely such an approach in implementing the resolution.
On behalf of my Government I should like to convey to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, our deepest gratitude for his tireless mediation efforts between the parties to the conflict. We have always supported him and will continue to do so. We are confident that the Secretary-General will continue, in conformity with the Security Council resolution, to spare no efforts in contributing to the elimination of tensions in that part of the world and to the search for a conclusive solution of the conflict,
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I thank the representative of Bulgaria for the kind word he addressed to me.
The Council has now concluded its voting procedures. I shall now call upon other speakers who wish to make statements.
I call upon the representative of Iraq.
Mr. KITTANI (Iraqi (interpretation from Arabic): Before making a statement on behalf of my country's delegation, I should like to express to you, Mr. president, and, through you, to all the members of the Council, my country's deep thanks and appreciation for allowing us to participate in the Council'-s deliberations today. I am honoured to attend this meeting and tp address the Council on this historic day.
Iraq, which never wanted the war that has been imposed on it since 4 September 1980, has always called for the establishment of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace between Iraq and Iran. It has always called for settlement of the conflict by peaceful means, on the basis of the United Nations Charter and the rules of international law.
Iraq has from the very beginning recognized Security Council jurisdiction over our conflict with Iran: it has accepted previous resolutions on the conflict adopted by the Council and has made clear its complete willingness to implement those resolutions in good faith. I refer especially to resolution 582 (1986), adopted by the Council in February 1986, and to resolution 588 (1986), which confirms the aforementioned resolution.
In the name of the Iraqi Government I should like to express our high appreciation for the concern shown by the Council throughout the past seven years vis-à-vis this grave conflict and for the efforts made by its permanent and non-permanent members, and by the Secretary-General, with a view to finding a just, comprehensive and durable solution to the dispute. I should also like to refer, in particular, to the efforts made in recent months on the basis of the Secretary-General’s initiative. Those efforts have stressed the need for a new level of concern to be shown, one that would reflect the seriousness of the conflict and the grave threat it still poses constitutes to the security
(Mr^jittanbjrag) and stability of our region and of the world at large, as well as the huge human and material losses it has brought about.
The world has become deeply convinced that the Council should step up its measures to the extent of adopting a binding resolution capable of employing the means provided in the United Nations Charter to bring this conflict to an end and to lay the foundations for a just and comprehensive settlement to the dispute based on Charter principles and the rules of international law.
We welcomed - as, indeed, did a broad segment of the international community, the Arab League, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement, the European Community and other international gatherings - the consultations conducted by the Council during these past months urging that practical and earnest results be reached.
The call for peace, which is international and comprehensive, is being voiced every day, not only in the countries of the region, but on every continent. It has not been limited to political bodies, but has become for some time now a major concern for popular organizations, parliaments and associations of different colours.and political orientations.
Today, the Council has adopted a resolution based on the United Nations Charter, containing comprehensive elements and possessing a binding power provided by the. Charter. As a representative of the Iraqi Government I have received the resolution, and I will immediate convey it to the higher authorities in my country.
On this occasion I can assure the Council that Iraq, which has always responded positively to the Council’s resolutions, and which values the importance the Council attaches to a comprehensive settlement, will study the resolution with great care and attention. The Iraqi Government’s official position on the resolution will be determined in due course, after the political and constitutional bodies of the country have had a chance to study it.
In conclusion I should like once again to stress our appreciation of the Council's efforts and to reaffirm that we, together with the peoples of the region and indeed of the whole world, look forward to seeing the Council fully shoulder the responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter to establish a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): There ate no further names on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
Security Council
JUN 1 6 1933
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2816 15 June 1988
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REOORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 15 June 1988 at 10.30 a.m.
President«. Mr. DELPECH
Member st Algeria
Brazil China
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Italy
Japan
Nepal
Senegal
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Yugoslavia
Zambia
(Argentina)
Mr. DJOUDI
Mr. NOGUE IRA-BATISTA Mr . YU Mengj ia Mr. BLANC Count York von WARTENBURG Mr. BUCCI Mr. KAGAMI Mr. JOSSE Mr. SARRE Mr. BELONOGOV
Mr. BIRCH Mr. WALTERS Mr. DJOKIC Mr. MFULA
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in ^e Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
88-60648/A 5344V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m. EXPRESSION OF THANKS TO THE RETIRING PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Since this is the first meeting of the Security Council in the month of June, I should like, on behalf of the members of the Council, to pay a tribute to Mr. Hocine Djoudi, Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations, for his services as President of the Security Council for the month of May 1988. I am sure I speak for all the members of the Council in expressing to Ambassador Djoudi deep appreciation for the great diplomatic skill, tact and unfailing courtesy with which he conducted the Council's business last month. In my capacity as representative of Argentina, I also wish to express my personal thanks to him because of the close bonds of friendship that exist between us and our two countries. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted. THE SITUATION IN CYPRUS
REPORT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS OPERATION IN CYPRUS (S/19927 and Add.1
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to inform the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant Provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
, There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr. Zepos (Greece) and Mr. Turkmen (Turkey) took places at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish) % I should like to recall that in the course of the Council’s consultations members of the Council agreed that an invitation should be extended to Mr. Ozer Koray in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the Council decides to invite Mr. Koray in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the appropriate moment I shall invite Mr. Koray to take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period 1 December 1987 to
31 May 1988, contained in documents S/19927 and Add.1. Members of the Council also have before them a draft resolution contained in document S/19936, which has been prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.
it is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put it to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour? Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Italy, Japan, Nepal, Senegal, union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia, Zambia
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): There were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 614 (1988) The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.
Mr. MOUSHOUTAS (Cyprus): I should like at the outset to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the high post of President of the Security Council. We are particularly pleased to see that a most talented and seasoned diplomat of Argentina is presiding over this important meeting. Having been accredited for the past six years as Ambassador to your beautiful country, I find it an opportune time to reiterate our full satisfaction at the friendliest relations and co-operation that exist between our two countries and peoples.
I should like to commend you, also, for the excellent manner in which you conducted the consultations on the draft resolution that has just been adopted renewing the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a further period of six months.
Our congratulations are extended also to my valued colleague and friend Ambassador Hocine Djoudi, Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations, for the outstanding leadership he provided in presiding over the deliberations of the Council during the month of May.
I should like to take the opportunity to express our warmest appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his untiring efforts to find a Solution to the Cyprus problem. We fully support his mission of good offices on Cyprus and express the hope that his efforts will lead to a just and lasting solution. We again pledge to him our full and sincere co-operation, I should be remiss if I were not to record our appreciation and thanks for the important contributions of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
NR/bg
Mr. Oscar Camilion, as well as Mr. Marrack Goulding, the under-Secretary-General, and to Messrs James Holger, Gustave Feissel and Giandomenico Picco. Special thanks also go to the Commander of the united Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), Major-General Greindl, and to his officers and men, who continue to carry out their duties with objectivity, dedication and commitment to the cause of peace, as well as to all the Governments which, through their voluntary contributions in personnel and funds, continue to support the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations in Cyprus.
BG/3	S/PV. 2816
■ Ù 6 ■	'
(Mr. Moushoutas, Cyprus)
The Council has just adopted another resolution renewing the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICÏP) , a renewal to which my Government had given its prior consent. We welcome this resolution and express support for all its provisions.
Fourteen years have elapsed since the Turkish invasion and occupation of nearly 40 per cent of the territory of Cyprus. Our people still remain forcibly divided by occupation troops and barbed wire; our lands are being distributed to settlers from Turkey; our people are denied their basic and inalienable human rights; our refugees are prevented from returning to their homes and lands; the fate of 1,619 missing persons is still unknown; and the call of this august body to transfer the town of Varoshâ to United Nations administration still remains unheeded. 
Meanwhile, the process of Turkification of the occupied areas continues unabated through the change of geographical and placé names and the destruction of our religious and cultural heritage. The report of the Secretary-General in document S/19927 of 31 May 1988 contains ample references to those developments in paragraphs 27, 28 and 29.
I do not intend to elaborate here on all the aspects of the question of Cyprus, a problem which is well known to the members of the Council from previous statements in this and other competent forums. The Cyprus problem is in its essence, a major international problem of invasion, centinuing military occupation, and gross violation of human rights. This is how the General Assembly and this august body have all along perceived and described it, and hence their decision to remain permanently seized of this grave problem. Against this grim background and record of events - well documented by repeated, unanimous or nearly unanimous Security Council and General Assembly résolutions - I -shall understandably limit my
(Mr. Moushoutas, Cyprus) remarks to certain developments which took place during the six-month interval between the deliberations of the Council and the present.
Since the beginning of the new year, Turkey has continued its policy of promoting the secession and division of the Republic of Cyprus. The Turkish provocations climaxed on 15 April 1988 with the decision of the illegal entity in the occupied areas to demand that persons wishing to enter those areas produce passports to be stamped by the so-called TRNC.
This new illegality is a serious development, because it violates the United Nations resolutions on the question of Cyprus and more specifically Security Council resolutions 541 (1983) and 550 (1984). The Secretary-General, in his report, fully shares this view. This serious development constitutes also an affront to the very authority and prestige of this body, which has unequivocally condemned the attempted secession of part of the Republic of Cyprus, termed it invalid, demanded its withdrawal, and called on all States hot to recognize or give any assistance to this offspring of aggression.	.
The obvious intent to undermine the ongoing good offices mission of the Secretary-General should of course be clear to all. All too clear also is the fact that Turkey bears full responsibility for this and all other actions taking place in the occupied areas. The presence of 35,000 Turkish troops and 65,000 Turkish settlers renders Ankara's guilt manifest. .
The demand for the stamping of passports and the introduction of so-called "State borders", taking place at a most sensitive period, obviously aim at undermining the favourable climate that has been created in the area and internationally with regard to the solution of the problem of Cyprus and purport to "establish ... procedures appropriate to an international frontier" (S/19927, para. 26), as the Secretary-General so cogently puts it in his report now before the Council.
It is by now a pattern that each time Turkey is called to order by international authorities and reminded of its obligation to respect the United Nations Charter and international law, and specifically to comply with United Nations resolutions on the question of Cyprus - such as that of the European Parliament, which calls on Turkey to present a precise time-table for the withdrawal of its troops and settlers and the restoration of a state of justice in Cyprus - the reaction of the Turkish Government is typically negative, resorting to statements such as, "Turkey does not succunb to pressure."
Characteristic examples of such intransigence are the statements of the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr. Yilmaz, who said on 18 April of this year in a meeting of the Turkish Grand National Assenbly, "It is out of the question for the Turkish armed forces to withdraw from Cyprus": and that of Mr. Ozal that "not a single Turkish soldier will leave Cyprus under pressure". The Turkish Government's notion of "national" pride, I am afraid, appears to be more construed as persisting to violate United Nations resolutions rather than as complying with them.
It should be recalled that Security Council resolutions have called repeatedly for the immediate withdrawal of the Turkish troops. No qualifications were provided with regard to their withdrawal other than that the withdrawal had to be immediate. Because of the Turkish pretext of so-called security reasons, the international community is asked to accept elements which are not within the provisions of the United Nations General Assembly and Security Council resolutions on Cyprus.
How else could one describe the statement of the Foreign Minister of Turkey on 11 June 1988 that "the Turkish troops will remain in Cyprus as long as they are needed" and that "it is nobody’s business but Turkey’s to determine the degree of this need"? Is that not clear evidence of Turkey’s complete disregard of United
Nations resolutions and a negative reply to the Secretary-General's call on Turkey to start by reducing its troops in Cyprus, as stated in paragraph 60 of the Secretary-General's report?
It clearly follows that the litmus test for Ankara's willingness and sincerity to agree to a just and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem should be none other than its readiness to solemnly declare and commit itself to withdraw all its troops and settlers from the Republic of Cyprus.
The Turkish occupation is compounded by the forcible segregation of our people and the division of our island through the Attila Line. Ankara rejects the universal and sacrosanct right of the people of Cyprus, irrespective of ethnic background, to move about freely in their own country. This inalienable right is exemplified and best spelt out in the form of the three freedoms, that is, freedom of movement, freedom of settlement, and freedom of ownership of land.
It should not escape our attention that the bulk of the Turkish Cypriots, and in particular daring political leaders, continue severely to criticize Turkey’s separatist policies in Cyprus and recently called on the Turkish Cypriot regime to abandon efforts to achieve recognition of the separatist state and to revoke the attempted secession as soon as possible. Mr. Alpay Durduran strongly criticized the policies of the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Denktash, and called on the Turkish side to abandon its intransigent stand and, instead, work on measures to increase trust between the two communities on the basis of a federal solution in Cyprus.
Turkish propaganda presents the Turkish Cypriot community as a monolithic entity that does not wish to live in harmony with the Greek Cypriot community, and on this distorted premise tries to justify Turkey's divisive and anachronistic policies. Turkey, on the one hand, pays lip service in international bodies to its support of the 1977 and 1979 high-level agreements, which provide for a territorially integral Federal Republic and, on the other hand, it ruthlessly pursues policies on the ground aimed at the partition of our island and the separation of our people.
I would like new to dwell on the menacing issue of settlers, which we consider as one of the most serious aspects of the Cyprus problem.
"[Their] presence", as the Secretary-General reports, "... continues to be a matter of great concern to the Government of Cyprus..." and he urged "that nothing be done to change the demographic composition of the island." (S/19927, para. 25)
In this regard I wish to remind the Council of the recent Communique of the Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Aligned Countries, held in New York from 5 to 7 October 1987, which, after expressing concern over the substantial increase of the occupation forces and the continued influx of foreign settlers in the occupied territory, "demanded the immediate withdrawal of all occupation forces and colonist settlers as an essential basis for the solution of the Cyprus problem". (A/42/681, para. 102)
The importation of settlers has been deplored not only by a series of United Nations resolutions and non-aligned declarations, but also by the Turkish Cypriots themselves. This is natural because the over 65,000 settlers and the 35,000 Turkish troops in Cyprus are now equal in number to the Turkish Cÿpriot population, which, tellingly enough, has been reduced from 120,000 in 1974, the year of the Turkish invasion, to less than 100,000 today.
The Turkish Cypriot newspaper Kibris Postasi recently wrote in a front-page editorial that the rights of the Turkish Cÿpriots are being trampled upon. The day will come, it continued, when we will not be able to see Turkish Cypriots in the Assembly just as we no longer see Turkish Cypriots in the streets.
The Turkish Cypriot opposition leader, Ozker Ozgur, has recently warned that the integration with Turkey of the areas of Cyprus occupied by Turkish troops since 1974 is continuing and the ideal of a Federal Cyprus Republic will gradually fade away if this process is not stopped. Mr. Ozgur , speaking at a seminar held in Minich between 29 and 31 January 1988, said that if the process of integration with Turkey is not ended, the demography of the occupied areas would change in favour of the settlers imported from Turkey and given citizenship, and warned the Turkish Cypriots that their identity would be destroyed.
The Cyprus problem is, in this seemingly encouraging world climate, ripe for a just and lasting solution. My Government believes that we must grasp the present opportunity offered by the amelioration in the international climate and use it as a springboard for positive results. It was in this spirit that the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. George Vassiliou, proposed to meet, without any preconditions, as soon as possible, with the Turkish Prime Minister, Mr. Ozal, at a place and on a date of his choice. It was also in the same spirit that the President proposed to meet, without preconditions, with the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community, Mr. Denktash, provided that suitable preparations and a reasonable timetable were envisaged for the completion of the negotiation process. The objective of any new negotiation process should be a comprehensive solution to the Cyprus problem, as envisaged by United Nations resolutions. Dialogue must not be for the sake of dialogue but must be substantive and result-oriented and must deal with the central elements of the problem of Cyprus.
The solution of the international aspect of the Cyprus problem is of utmost urgency. In this context we reiterate that we support the convening of an In ter nation al Conference within the framework of the United Nations.
Furthermore, President Vassiliou, speaking on 2 June 1988 in the General Assembly on the occasion of the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, solemnly declared the Governments,s position for the complete demilitarization of Cyprus.
"We propose" - he stated - "to dismantle the military forces of the Republic of Cyprus if all Turkish troops and settlers withdraw from the island and the armed elements they have fostered are disbanded. Part of our proposal concerns the establishment of an international peace force, under the auspices of the United Nations, the composition and terms of reference of which would be agreed upon and endorsed by the Security Council.
"The acceptance and implementation of this proposal would be the greatest single contribution towards the unity, prosperity and security of Cyprus and would have wider positive repercussions in the region. I strongly believe that such a course would also serve Turkey's own best interests.
"If we bear in mind that the Turkish occupation forces on the island are several times larger than the forces of the Republic of Cyprus, in terms both of manpower and of equipment, the total savings from the demilitarization of Cyprus would run to hundreds of millions of dollars per year. ...
(Mr. Moushoutas, cyprus) "Demilitarization would not only create the conditions for resolving the Cyprus problem but also offer a further opportunity. One of the negative consequences of the continuing occupation of part of Cyprus has been the lagging behind of the Turkish Cypriots in economic development, despite the fact that they have been concentrated by the Turkish occupation forces in the part of Cyprus which before 1974 had the greatest resources and production potential.
"We therefore undertake new to use the funds to be saved through the demilitarization of Cyprus for the development of areas of Cyprus which have fallen behind economically and primarily for projects the benefits of which will be derived mainly by the Turkish Cypriots. Part of the savings could also be used for financing the international peace force to be established." (A/S-15/PV.4, pp. 8-11)
We reiterate that solemn proposal before the Council today.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish) s I thank the representative of Cyprus for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, upon whom I now call.
Mr. ZEPOS (Greece) I wish first to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the current month and express our deepest conviction that your wide experience and diplomatic skill will be of enormous benefit to the work of this body. It is pertinent for me to add that the close ties of friendship and co-operation which exist between Greece and Argentina include the special dimension of their participation in the Six-Nation Initiative for Peace and Disarmament, an issue which in its wider concept is most relevant to the subject of this debate.
I wish equally to congratulate warmly Ambassador Hocine Djoudi of Algeria for his leadership and the excellent and efficient manner in which he discharged his duties as President of the Security Council during the past month, and to assure him equally of the close ties of friendship and co-operation Greece maintains with his country.
My Government concurred in the renewal for another six months of the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), following the agreement to that effect of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, which retains exclusive jurisdiction in the matter.
The Secretary-General in his report gives ample reasons to support his recommendation for the renewal of the mandate. He eloquently reminds us of the tensions and hopes which exist at this time with regard to Cyprus. The continuation of the presence of Turkish occupation forces on the island is the primary cause of the tension. But equally, what gives hope to the Secretary-General adds to the importance of his appeal to Member States to rescue UNFICYP from the financial difficulties it is facing. It has been stated time and again that there is no greater cost than that of war. And if the Cyprus problem has been before the Security Council for a quarter of a century, as the Secretary-General pertinently reminds us, it is because the military threat of an imminent invasion and finally its realization have been the dominating elements during the last 25 years as far as Cyprus is concerned. A final settlement of the problem, in accordance with the principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the United Nations, has not been reached as yet. More than ever, we should take into serious consideration the Secretary-General's appeal to place the financing of UNFICYP on a more equitable basis and share the costs of the Force through assessed contributions.
At this juncture, I take the opportunity to reiterate my Government's deep appreciation to the countries which, by providing military and civilian personnel, equipment and financial support throughout previous years have made possible the continuation of the peace-keeping operations of UNFICiP. I wish also to pay a tribute in particular to Major-General Greindl and to the officers and men of UNFICyp who, often under difficult circumstances, have been carrying out their delicate duties.
I would not wish to comment extensively upon issues or points which have been amply and clearly dealt with by the representative of Cyprus and with which I fully concur. I shall confine myself to comment on just one crucial issue, which for the Greek Government remains the first priority, that is, the imperative question of the total and definitive withdrawal of all Turkish forces from Cyprus. I cannot stress enough that this issue, as I have previously implied, does not only relate to the credibility of the United Nations in its ability to implement fundamental principles of the Charter and provisions of relevant resolutions. It also relates to the success of the mission of good offices entrusted to the Secretary-General -a mission which has the full support of the Greek Government. Finally, it affects fundamental aspects of security, as far as my country is concerned.
But beyond that aspect, I wish also to underline the international dimension of the requirement that no solution of any regional problem arising out of a conflict, the cause of which has been the military intervention in and the occupation of the territory of a sovereign State, can be envisaged without the withdrawal of all foreign troops. In this context, and consistent with the same requirement, my Government firmly supports the proposal of the; Government of Cyprus for the complete demilitarization of the territory of the Republic and the establishment of a joint police force under the auspices of the United Nations,
which should be in a position fully to meet the security concerns of both the Greek and the Turkish communities. This proposal, which has been amply presented by the President of the Republic of Cyprus at the current special session of the General Assembly on Disarmament, will, if accepted, also certainly meet the security concerns of all countries in the area.
I should not fail also to note that after the appointment of the Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Oscar Camilion, certain specific suggestions were presented to the President of the Republic of Cyprus and the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community.
According to the Secretary-General's suggestions, the high-level agreements of 1977 and 1979 should form the basis of an overall settlement. This is the right approach. I should add, however, that it is self-evident that the relevant decisions and resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assenfoly form equally the basis of such a settlement, and it would certainly be preferable if this had been explicitly stated in the report.
The report submitted by the Secretary-General in its main observations should be further commended because it reflects an awareness of the new possibilities that exist for a breakthrough of the existing impasse. Indeed, developments in the relations between Greece and Turkey which should positively influence the course of events, but mainly the will of the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Vassiliou, for a new departure to a just and viable solution, have prompted the Secretary-General to place new emphasis on building confidence between the two communities. It is only consistent with these expectations that the Secretary-General, in the framework of his mission of good offices, should state that?
"great benefits would be derived if Turkey would make a start by reducing its troops in the northern part of the island." (S/19927, para. 60)
Still, the picture given by the Secretary-General’s report remains bleak, and I cannot fail to stress the gravity of the problem created by the settlers in Cyprus from the Turkish mainland, in an attempt by Turkey to change the demographic composition of the island. The presence of the Turkish troops, whose armaments, as the report itself confirms, remain at the same high levels - indeed most of the tanks that were to be withdrawn are still on the island - continues to be a source of deep concern.
Finally, without wishing to prolong this statement, I cannot fail to express deep concern at the fact that the Turkish Cypriot leadership continues to engage in various illegal practices aimed at changing the status quo, such as its requirement for the stamping of passports, pretending to establish procedures appropriate to an international frontier - which does not exist. The Secretary-General’s report rightly reminds us in this instance of Security Council resolution 541 (1983) , which again has been ignored and met with utter contempt by the Turkish Cypriot leadership.
The Greek Government has not failed to contribute, through initiatives recently taken for a rapprochement with the Turkish Government - in actual fact the Prime Minister of Turkey is concluding today an official visit to Athens - to the creation of the best possible conditions for a settlement of the Cyprus problem, in particular by the acceptance of the proposal for the demilitarization of the territory of the Republic, a proposal which is in accordance with the United Nations Charter and the relevant decisions and resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. The gesture made by Athens was clear; it was just and friendly, it remains to be seen whether Ankara will respond with equal willingness to find a just and viable solution to this international problem.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I thank the representative of Greece for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is Mr. Ozer Koray, to whom the Security Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. KORAY; I should 1 ike to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of the Security Council for giving me this opportunity to address the Council on the question of the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) and on other matters of primary significance in the context of the Cyprus question.
The Secretary-General is trying to arrange a meeting between the leaders of the two sides in order to see if the negotiations for the establishment of a bicommunal, bizonal federation can be resumed. We, as the Turkish Cypriot side, stand for a peaceful settlement and coexistence between the two sides. That is why we accepted the proposals made by the Secretary-General on 29 March 1986 for a comprehensive settlement. The evasion and the rejection of those proposals by the Greek Cypriot leadership brought the negotiating process to an impasse. That is the situation with which the Secretary-General is trying to deal. l£t me note here that his recent suggestion for a new summit meeting has already been accepted in principle by President Denktas.	.
Against that background, I should like to turn to the current state of affairs in Cyprus and to the present status of the search for a negotiated settlement.
There are in Cyprus two separate and independent States, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction over their own respective territories. That is a fact, regardless of the political attitude of third parties. The acknowledgement of that reality, however, is a must since a federation in Cyprus can be established only by two political entities enjoying equal status vis-à-vis each other. The
(Mr. Kor ay) political equality of the two peoples is a fundamental condition for a just and lasting solution in Cyprus.
The latest stalemate in the negotiating process was created by the fact that the Greek Cypriots did not accept the Secretary-General’s draft framework agreement of 29 March 1986, which envisaged the establishment of a bizonal, bicommunal federal structure in Cyprus. That document clearly outlined, as an integrated whole, the parameters of a settlement in a balanced and workable framework which was formulated as a result of extensive talks between the two sides under the auspices of the United Nations.
To overcome the difficulties arising from the Greek Cypriot side, some circles had pinned their hopes on a possible change in the Greek Cypriot leadership as a result of the elections held in South Cyprus last February. Those hopes at first were enhanced by the elimination, in the first round of the elections. of Mr. Kyprianou, who had pursued for the last decade a hard-line and intransigent policy throughout the negotiating process and had in fact at least twice during the last four years rejected United Nations initiatives for a settlement.
Following the election of the new Greek Cypriot leader, President Denktas called upon Mr. Vassiliou to meet him at the Ledra Palace. This invitation, which was made in sincerity and with good will, was rejected by Mr. vassiliou, who chose to pretend that he was the "President of the whole of Cyprus", that he could receive Mr. Denktas only as the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community at his presidential palace and that he was prepared to negotiate instead with the Prime Minister of Turkey. That reaction lacked political realism or wisdom and clearly fell short of all initial expectations. Furthermore, after being sworn in, Mr. Vassiliou declared that the Turkish Cypriots were his subjects. That was simply a
(Mr. Koray) provocation. I need hardly emphasize that under a bizonal, federal solution, neither people will be the subjects of the other.
The Turkish Cypriot side, with a view to facilitating the re-establishment of trust and confidence between the two sides, proposed on 3 March 1988 a set of good-will measures captaining various areas in which possibilities of co-operation might be explored. The areas to be explored, on an ad hoc basis, included trade, municipalities, environmental and health issues and cultural, sports and scientific exchanges, as well as co-operation between the two police organizations on related issues. The full text of the Turkish Cypriot good-will measures may be found in document S/19578, dated 3 March 1988.
The object of those proposals was to build good-neighbourliness, based on mutual trust and confidence between the two sides. However, the Greek Cypriot side rejected those proposals as well, and forfeited yet another opportunity for establishing purposeful contact between the two sides.
Substantial amounts of money have been spent by the Greek Cypriot administration over the years on new military equipment, including helicopters, armoured vehicles, personnel carriers and modern anti-aircraft guns, on the pretext of increasing its defence capabilities.	.
The Greek Cypriot dally, ^jgrus Mail, of 6 May 1988 reported that: "According to the International Institute of Strategic Studies based in London ... the number of the (Greek Cypriot] National Guard forces is 13,000 with 60,000 reservists ... The Institute also says there are now 3,000 Greek soldiers on the island, 500 more than 1987. A total of 750 Greek officers from the 3,000 man the [Greek Cypriot] National Guard ...".
The Turkish Cypriot side is closely monitoring recent reports that the Greek Cypriot administration is planning a joint venture with Greece for the production of arms in South Cyprus. That would further aggravate the already potentially dangerous situation created by the accumulation of troops and weaponry in southern Cyprus.
Although President Denktas, in his letter dated 6 June 1988 addressed to the Secretary-General and distributed as a united Nations document (A/S-15/33), stated clearly the position of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus on the views expressed by Mr. Vassiliou regarding the demilitarization of Cyprus, I nevertheless find it pertinent to reiterate our position on this issue.
The bicommunal republic established in 1960 was already demilitarized with the exception Of a mixed Greek and Turkish Cypriot army of only 2,000 men and a similar
(Mr. Koray) police force. Greece and Turkey had military contingents of 950 and 650 men respectively. For all practical purposes this was a demilitarized State.
It was the Greek Cypriots and Greece who unilaterally militarized Cyprus. They first formed secret armies composed of former gangs advocating the annexation of Cyprus to Greece and used those forces from 1963 onwards against the Turkish Cypriots. After the partnership between the two communities had collapsed, they established a so-called national guard. That unconstitutional military force was placed under the command of Greek Officers - as it still is - and armed with weapons purchased from abroad - as is still done today. Under a secret agreement with the Greek Cypriot leadership Greece sent an army of 20,000 men to Cyprus in 1964. These unlawful acts led to a grave security problem for the Turkish (ypriots between 1963 and 1974. UNFICYP was formed and sent to the island in 1964, but that did not resolve the security problem of the Turkish Cypriots.
That is how Cyprus was militarized by the Greek camp. The use of military force against the Turkish Cypriots became a daily affair, and on 15 July 1974 reached a, climax when Greece engineered a coup in Cyprus in order to annex the island. Turkey had no alternative but to react, under its treaty rights and obligations, to that state of affairs, after years of restraint.
Now, those who militarized the island preach demilitarization. We would only have rejoiced if that had signified a change of heart and mentality on their part, but the rejection of the Secretry-General’s proposals while reinforcing the military build-up in South Cyprus hardly reflects any such inclination.
Only the two sides can decide through negotiations how to reconcile their interests, including the security aspect of their relations, within a federal partnership) but the Greek Cypriot side is not entitled to decide how much security the Turkish Cypriots should enjoy.
During the last two weeks we have been witnessing a new trend, a new approach on the part of the new Greek Cypriot leader. This trend has been to project everything in terms of economics, gains or losses, dollars, and so on. That may be only too natural for Mr. Vassiliou, who is an economist and a businessman, but he should know that there are certain things that cannot be traded - among them are the right to life and security. I should like to assure the new Greek Cypriot leader that he cannot find even a single Turkish Cypriot who would trade his or her right to life and security for all the money in the world.
The reasons for the economic disparity between North and South Cyprus are well known. They are, first, the economic embargo imposed on the Turkish Cypriots by the Greek Cypriot administration for the past 25 years and, secondly. the usurpation by the Greek Cypriot administration of all the foreign aid given to Cyprus as a whole and its utilization in South Cyprus only. Mr. Vassiliou should not seek any other reason for this disparity.
I should like now to refer to a sensitive issue which is of crucial importance to the Turkish Cypriot side and which has a direct bearing on the efforts being exerted to find a solution to the Cyprus problem. This concerns the basic and most important principle of the impartiality which is expected from UNFICTP and from the countries which contribute troops to that force. Needless to say, the success of the peace-keeping efforts of UNFICYP depends largely on the conduct of its relations with the two sides on an equal footing.
I regret to say, however, that two recent fatal incidents in the no man’s land have raised many serious questions about the conduct of UNFICYP in the discharge of its duties and obligations in this respect.
The first incident involved two UNFICYP soldiers who shot and killed a Turkish Cypriot citizen who was at the time attending to his daily farming activities on his own property located in the no man's land. It is disturbing and unacceptable
(Mr. Koray) that UNFICYP should engage in police activities incompatible with its mandate. Such conduct met with the strongest protest from the Turkish Cypriot authorities and aroused a deep sense of resentment among the Turkish Cypriot people.
The second incident involved the slaying of a Turkish soldier by the Greek Cypriot National Guard inside the no man's land aid in the presence of UNFICYP troops, who refrained from taking any action to prevent that atrocity. The local UNFICYP commander had previously been informed and requested to co-operate with the Turkish Cypriot authorities in an effort to locate a missing Turkish soldier and to guide him safely to the North. UNFICYP failed to do that. When in fact the missing soldier was located UNFICYP failed to inform the Turkish Cypriot side and stood by and watched the cold-blooded murder of that Turkish soldier by the Greek Cypriots, instead of taking the necessary measures to prevent the Greek Cypriot armed elements from entering the no man's land and taking armed action. It is regrettable that UNFICYP has confessed that it has no power to prevent such intrusions by the Greek Cypriot side.
We find UNFICYP's behaviour during those incidents deeply disturbing, to say the least. It is our ardent hope that the Secretary-General will take all the necessary measures to prevent the recurrence of such deplorable incidents.
These two incidents and the reaction and decision of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus Government on them have been explained orally to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, both by President Rauf Denktas and by Foreign and Defence Minister Kenan Atakol, and our views have also been conveyed to the Secretary-General in writing. I wish to state here that the Turkish Cypriot side stands by those views and that position.
We have seen that there are certain important omissions in the present report of the Secretary-General. In expressing the need that:
"every effort must be made to overcome existing distrust and to build confidence between the two sides" (S/19927, para. 60), the report disregards President Denktas' offer to meet the Greek Cypriot leader soon after his election, and above all fails to make mention of the good will proposals made by the Turkish Cypriot side on 3 March 1988.
Furthermore, paragraph 59 of the report refers to:
"the impasse which has blocked (the Secretary-General's) mission of good offices for the last two years" (S/19927, para. 59), without pin-pointing the well-known reasons for the current deadlock. The responsibility for the lack of progress in negotiations lies with the Greek Cypriot side which has failed to accept the document of 29 March.
We have some other serious observations about the report of the Secretary-General, but in order not to take more of the Council's time we shall communicate these to the Secretary-General separately.
Turning now to the issue Of the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP, I should like to underline once again that the resolution which has just, been adopted by the Security Council in this regard is totally unacceptable to the Turkish Cypriot side for the same established and fundamental reasons. The resolution ignores the existing realities in cypras and undermines the principle of political equality between the two sides. The Turkish Cypriot side unequivocally rejects any resolution which purports to endorse the Greek Cypriot side as the so-called "Government of the Republic of Cyprus", whereas this illegitimate entity totally lacks the competence and authority to represent the whole of the island.
Notwithstanding its unavoidable rejection in toto of the present resolution for the reasons outlined, the Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is nevertheless favourably disposed to accept the presence of UNFICYP on the territory of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus on the same basis as that stated in December 1987. Thus, our position continues to be that the principle, the scope, the modalities and procedures of co-operation between the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and UNFICYP shall be based only on decisions to be taken solely by the Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
In concluding, allow me to reaffirm our support for the continuation of the good-offices mission of the United Nations Secretary-General entrusted to him by the Security Council under resolution 367 (1975). In this connection, we continue to support a bi-communal, bi-zonal federal framework as stipulated by the 29 March 1986 draft framework agreement of the Secretary-General, which also contains every other aspect of a final settlement in Cyprus. The reactivation of intercommunal negotiations depends largely on the commitment to, and respect for, the agreements reached between the two sides since 1975. I will not go into the details of these agreements, which provide the foundations of a possible comprehensive solution. Suffice it to say that a solution should take into full account the equal political status of the two national peoples in Cyprus and the security requirements of the Turkish Cypriots. The efforts of the Greek Cypriot side to single out certain aspects of the Cyprus question for discussion runs counter to the mutually agreed integrated whole approach of the United Nations Secretary-General and the 29 March 1986 document, which is still on the table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next speaker on my list is the representative of Turkey, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): Mr. President, I am grateful to you and the other members of the Security Council for this opportunity to participate in the discussion of the situation in Cyprus.
I should like to extend to you my warm congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of June, and my best wishes for success. We are happy to see as President of the Security Council the representative of a country with which Turkey has traditionally maintained excellent relations and we know we can fully rely on your diplomatic skills, wisdom and constructive spirit.
I also wish to pay a tribute to Ambassador Djoudi of Algeria, who guided the Council with dedication and diligence during May.
The procedural resolution just adopted by the Council unfortunately continues to contain a number of controversial elements to which we have fundamental objections. We are therefore unable to consent to a renewal of UNFICYP's mandate on this basis. Mr. Koray has just explained the position of his Government on the modalities of UNFICYP’s presence in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. That position enjoys our support.
This debate comes at the aftermath of two sad incidents which have taken place in the buffer zone. Both incidents have resulted in tragic loss of life Which we and the Turkish Cypriot authorities believe could have been avoided. The way UNFICYP conducted itself during and after these two incidents calls for serious examination and appropriate action. Both incidents are under investigation. But many regrettable facts have already surfaced. One cannot but feel that there is something utterly wrong when a Turkish Cypriot civilian can be shot on his own
MT/bg	S/PV.2816
(Mr. Turkmen, Turkey) property by UNFICYP and left to die with seven bullets in his body while UNFICYP casually calls this self-defence. There is something wrong when UNFICYP remains totally ineffective and helpless as Greek Cypriot National Guard and police violate the buffer zone and execute a Turkish soldier by repeated shots while he was, it transpires, in the act of surrendering.
The attitude of the Greek Cypriot side in the second incident is an ominous sign of sanguinary tendencies. The fact that these reflexes could be let loose under the observation of UNFICYP only compounds the situation. There are valid grounds to take a very serious look into this deeply disturbing episode. Whatever the outcome of the ongoing investigations, it is obvious that a question of credibility and confidence has arisen in the island in the aftermath of these incidents as a result of the attitude of the UNFICYP command. We hope, therefore, that the Secretary-General will take the appropriate measures necessary to restore the Spirit of confidence that the UNFICYP Command has enjoyed for so long in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
I wish to reaffirm the firm support of my Government for the Secretary-General’s mission of good offices. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for taking the initiative of arranging an informal meeting between the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot leaders. It will be recalled that this was in fact President Denktas, idea. In February, he called on the newly elected Greek Cypriot leader for an informal meeting on the basis of equality and without prejudice to the respective positions of the two sides. This offer was then rejected in a very disappointing manner. We hope now that the Greek Cypriot leader, despite the questions he has created about his consistency, will have the wisdom to accept the Secretary-General's call.
There is a positive atmosphere in the circumstances surrounding Cyprus. I am referring to the development in Turkish-Greek relations. As my Greek colleague has pointed out, the Turkish Prime Minister is at present in Athens. We hope that this and subsequent meetings will lead to a growing understanding and co-operation between the two countries. But the influence of such an evolution on the Cyprus problem can only be indirect. The Cyprus question has to be resolved between the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots. However, it is clear that both Turkey and Greece should encourage the two parties to make greater efforts to reach a solution under the good offices mission of the Secretary-General.
PKB/td
To hope to take advantage of the new atmosphere in Turkish/Greek relations for unilateral gains in Cyprus would only be indulging in self-deception. What should be done is to take advantage of this positive atmosphere for sincerely working towards a comprehensive political settlement within the parameters whidi have already been established in the course of the negotiations since 1974. We hope that the Greek Cypriot side under a new leader will leave the intransigence and propaganda rhetoric prevalent during the term of office of his predecessor behind and adopt a reasonable position which will enable the two sides in Cyprus to normalize their relations on the basis of mutual respect and to strive for a federal partnership. Now is the time for the Greek Cypriot leadership to commit itself to a path of reconciliation and compromise with the Turkish Cypriot side. Such a genuine change of heart would certainly not remain unacknowledged.
It is always useful to stress basic facts and positions, even at the expense of being repetitious. I will therefore briefly recall where we stand with regard to the negotiating process which the Secretary-General hopes to revitalize.
I wish to note that regarding most international problems there are documents which define the framework within which a negotiated settlement can be sought. It is not possible to conceive of a settlement to such problems by discarding these basic documents which are the products of serious and impartial efforts for a peaceful solution. In the Cyprus question, the Secretary-General has been entrusted with a mission of good offices since 1975. After years of negotiations between the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots, proposals have been exchanged and agreements reached, some of which have been implemented while others have led to new rounds of talks and new documents. In August 1984, the Secretary-General undertook, with the agreement of both sides, a major initiative based on these
(Mr. Turkmen, Turkey) previous efforts. The Secretary-General’s initiative resulted in the drafting of a framework agreement which incorporated all the elements of a comprehensive settlement as an integrated whole. This is the 29 March 1986 Draft Framework Agreement.
It is easy to prove that the document is not just another piece of paper in an endless process. On the contrary, that proposed framework agreement has a very particular status as the basis for final negotiations.
First, each point in the document is the result of detailed discussions over a period of two years between the Secretary-General and the representatives of the two sides.
Secondly, while preparing the document the Secretary-General briefed Security Council members and received their strong support. The Council, through a presidential statement issued on 20 September 1985, called upon all parties to make a special effort, in co-operation with the Secretary-Gen er al, to reach an early agreement. The result of that special effort was the Draft Framework Agreement of 29 March 1986.
Thirdly, after presenting the draft agreement to the two sides on 29 March 1986, the Secretary-General took the unusual step of giving the Draft Framework Agreement and his covering letter to the Security, Council President with a request that copies be given to the members of the Council. In his own words, the Secretary-General took this step "because of the significance of the stage we had readied". (S/18102, Add.1, para. 8) Furthermore, at the invitation of the President of the Council, the Secretary-General briefed Council members on 24 April 1986 on the status of his efforts.
I ask the indulgence of the Council to read put once again from the letter of presentation the Secretary-General addressed to President Denktas and Mr. Kyprianou on 29 March 1986. He said,.
"I wrote to you on 24 January with my assessment of the point we had then reached and my proposals about how we should proceed. I have now carefully studied reports on the discussions that took place with each side during the lew er-level meetings. It is evident that both sides have made a real effort to overcome the remaining differences. I would like to take this opportunity to express to you my appreciation for the constructive approach taken by your representatives.
"The talks that took place with each side in Geneva and in Nicosia proved most useful in bringing into clearer focus their respective concerns and indicated points of convergence on the substance of the issues which remained to be resolved. This has made it possible to draft a framework agreement which preserves all that has been achieved since August 1984 and endeavours to reconcile the outstanding differences in a manner that protects the interests of both communities.
"I am pleased to present to you herewith the draft framework agreement as it has emerged from our joint efforts. When considering this text, I would urge both sides to keep the following in mind:
"This framework agreement is an indispensable step in an ongoing process. Both sides have agreed on the matters that will be negotiated after the framework agreement is accepted, and to do so in good faith and with a willingness to consider each other's concerns.
"These negotiations will provide each side with ample opportunities to assure itself of the good intentions of the other. While the text commits the two parties to proceed towards an overall solution within an agreed framework, its ultimate implementation will depend on both sides being able to negotiate to their mutual satisfaction the matters on which agreement has yet to be achieved.
(Mr. Turkmen, Turkey) "Acceptance of the draft framework agreement will allow, for the very first time, all the outstanding issues to be tackled in earnest and in a decisive manner as an integrated whole." (S/18102/Add «1, annex lit, P- 18)
The 29 March document was accepted by the Turkish Cypriot side. It was rejected by the Greek Cypriot side. That is where the negotiating process was left off. There is a twisted logic which attempts to portray the side which has accepted the 29 March document as intransigent and the side which has rejected it as conciliatory. To accept such logic will lead us nowhere and. will throw the parties into confusion whenever they have to react to proposals by the Secretary-General.
The rejection of the 29 March document is a problem for the Greek Cypriot side. It does not affect the position of the Turkish Cypriot side or the fact that this document remains on the table. The 29 March document contains and compiles all the points of agreement that had been developed between the two sides through long years of efforts under the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General. It is not possible selectively to approach these points of agreement while at the same time disregarding the general framework within which they have been formulated. It is only obvious that these have to be taken into account as a whole in order to arrive at a comprehensive settlement.
I wish now to take up a few points raised by the representative of Greece and Ambassador Moushoutas.
Much has been said on the so-called settlers issue. I think it will be useful if I repeat here what I said to the Council at its last meeting.
(Mr. Tuckmen, Tur key) I quote what I said then?
"May I remind [Ambassador Moushoutas] that for many years the Greek Cypriots had forgotten this issue. They had not raised it during the two years of discussions with the Secretary-General that led to the draft agreement of 29 March 1986. Since then, nothing has happened to sharpen the Greek cypriot concern. Therefore, this lamentation over so-called settlers is totally artificial.
"But there is one fact which should not be forgotten. Turkey has a population of approximately 55 million. If the Turkish side had indeed wanted to change the demographic structure in Cyprus, it could have easily done that long ago. It is clear from the population figures in Northern and Southern Cyprus that the Turkish side has not pursued such a policy. Indeed, we do not need such a policy, because the political approach of the Turkish side to the Cyprus problem has never been based on numerical considerations but on the concept of the political equality of the two sides, regardless of the population ratio.
"The Greek Cypriots know very well that throughout the past years immigration to Northern Cyprus has remained at an insignificant number. The fact that the population ratio between the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots has not changed during all these years testifies to the falsity of Greek Cypriot propaganda.
"To conclude my remarks on this issue, I have to emphasize that the acceptance by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus of immigrants or labour from abroad is not subject to any restriction but, rather, to its own laws and regulations in this regard. Pending a settlement which will ensure a shared sovereignty, the Turkish part of the island is as sovereign as the Greek side." (S/PV.2771, p. 57)
Let me add, in this regard, that we know that there is a large immigration in the south of the island. We know it because of the repeated acts of political violence caused by this influx. As the Turkish Cypriots do not raise any objections to this immigration, the Greek Cypriots should equally stop this nonsense about the settlers in the north. They know that the population in the north has remained more or less stable for the past 10 years, but it is true that the political violence in the south and the support given by the Greek Cypriot administration to terrorists of all kinds and nationalities have given concern to the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, and this might be one of the reasons which have led to the adoption of more stringent control measures at the border.
I should like also to comment on the proposal for demilitarization, presented as the only cure for all the problems in Cyprus. Mr. Koray has already clarified the subject, but I wish to add a few comments.
In our opinion, this is not an issue that can be discussed in isolation. It directly concerns the security interests of the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots within a prospective federation. Therefore it can be meaningfully addressed only within a comprehensive settlement. Anyone listening to the statements made in the General Assembly at the current special session on disarmament could not have missed a very salient point underlined by many speakers. Disarmament by itself is not a means of resolving regional problems. On the contrary, suCh an approach can bring disastrous consequences. The underlying causes of political differences and confrontation have to be addressed in order to find peaceful solutions to such problems. Prime Minister Ozal stressed in his statement:
(Mr. Turkmen, Turkey) "Regional problems have to be peacefully resolved and international understanding has to be improved in order to rely on disarmament measures for enhanced security and stability." (A/S-15/PV.6, p. 7)
A similar point was made by Sir Geoffrey Howe, who eloquently underlined the connection between security and disarmament. He said:
... "disarmament cannot proceed in a vacuum. It is simply no good talking about it as an abstract end in itself. Disarmament is inextricably tied up with security. Nobody is going to discuss disarmament seriously if he already feels insecure. That is why it is crucial to tackle the root cause of military confrontation: the tensions that foster insecurity. Disarmament by itself cannot bear the weight of resolving these tensions." (A/S-15/PV.10, pp. 28-29)
Besides this fundamental principle, there is a historical experience which cannot be lightly disregarded. The bicommunal Republic established in I960 in Cyprus was already demilitarized, but the Greek Cypriots and Greece unilaterally militarized Cyprus. President Denktas has drawn attention to that historical fact, in his recent letter to the Secretary-General. It should come as no surprise to the Greek Cypriots that when the side which is responsible for militarizing Cyprus starts preaching demilitarization its words may not sound so convincing to the other side. In short, demilitarization under the present circumstances would mean total insecurity for the Turkish Cypriots and supremacy for the Greek Cypriots because of their numerical superiority. It would signify the elimination of the deterrent which prevents the Greek Cypriots from re-establishing forcefully their previous oppressive monopoly of political power. Mr. Vassiliou should understand that, for the Turkish Cypriots, in the light of the ordeal they have suffered from 1964 to 1974, the vital issue is security.
They are not likely to be swayed by the offer of Mr. Vassilion to use the funds to be saved through the demilitarization for the development of areas which have fallen behind economically. True, the Greek Cypriots' standard of living is considerably higher than that of the Turkish Cypriots, but it would be naive to assume that the Turkish Cypriots will exchange their freedom, security and dignity for a doubtful promise of a greater prosperity. How can they forget the well-known saying about the need to beware of the man bearing gifts?
Finally, I wish to comment briefly on the appeal of the Secretary-General for a reduction in the Turkish forces in Northern Cyprus.
It should first be pointed out that the Turkish forces are not the only non-Cypriot forces on the island. If the Turkish forces are larger, the reason is that the need for them is greater in view of the inability of the Turkish Cypriots to defend themselves against the Greek Cypriot military threat.
In the south, the size of the Greek mainland forces is smaller, though substantial, because the Greek Cypriots have built up their armed forces, both in quantity and quality for many years and are continuing to supply them with offensive capabilities. Therefore the fact that a unilateral appeal has been made does not, in our view, reflect a balanced approach.
On the other hand, the Turkish Government has always indicated that the level of its forces stationed in Northern Cyprus is proportionate to the assessment that the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and Turkey are making: regarding the military potential and threat against the Turkish Cypriots from the south. It is for this reason that the level of Turkish forces has fluctuated over the past 14 years.
It is also on record that the Turkish Government firmly supports negotiations between the two sides on the basis of the Secretary-General's draft framework
agreement of 29 March 1986. This document envisages the establishment of a time-table for the withdrawal of non-Cypriot forces within the framework of a comprehensive settlement. Since 1974 the negotiations between the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots have always been carried out on the assumption that the non-cypriot forces would be withdrawn if the two sides could agree on a settlement. At no time was a prior withdrawal of forces contemplated or negotiated. It should be clear that, as much as Turkey supports a negotiated settlement in Cyprus, it cannot in any circumstances agree to jeopardize the security of the Turkish Cypriots by a premature reduction or withdrawal of its forces.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I thank the representative of Turkey for the kind words he addressed to me.
The representative of Cyprus has asked to be allowed to speak, and I call on him.
Mr. MO US HJ UTAS (Cyprus): Ambassador Turkmen sticks to the March 1986 document as though it were the beginning and the end of the negotiating efforts of the Secretary-General on Cyprus. He forgets that the Secretary-General’s mission of good offices is an ongoing process based on mutual acceptance of his ideas and that the Secretary-General is mandated to continue to produce suggestions and ideas for the solution of the problem of Cyprus. He was in fact given such a mandate even today.
As the Secretary-General put it in his report in document S/18491:
"as long as the Security Council maintained my mandate, I could not allow my mission of good offices to be frozen either because one side found a particular suggestion unacceptable, or because the other side, having accepted a suggestion, insisted that my effort could not proceed until the other Side had done the same." (S/18491, para. 54) Not only do we agree with the Secretary-General but we remind the Permanent Representative of Turkey of their rejection of the April 1985 document - they seem to forget it - of their rejection of the Secretary-General's suggestion for parallel talks as late as 1987; and, of course, their utter - I would say contemptuous - disregard of all United Nations resolutions on the question of Cyprus.
We believe that the Secretary-General's efforts must go on and we fully support him.
Our proposal for demilitarization - which, by the way, is contained in the 1979 high-level agreement - does take into account the security of the Turkish Cypriot community and, here I must add, the security of all Cypriots.
BG/11
The pretext of a security gap, used by the Turkish side, is a ploy which cannot be interpreted other than to find a pretext in support of its policy to perpetuate the presence in Cyprus of the Turkish occupation troops.
If the Turkish side is interested in a solution, it must decide? there is before it a proposal by the Secretary-General for the resumption of talks) there is before it our proposal for demilitarization) and there are the mandatory resolutions of the Security Council calling for the withdrawal of the Turkish troops.
Ambassador Turkmen denied the existence of settlers. I think he chose a very bad time to do so. The presence of settlers is confirmed in the present report of the Secretary-General, who states specifically?
"The presence of settlers from Turkey in the northern part of the island continues to be a matter of great concern to the Government of Cyprus." (S/19927, para. 25) Still, i would remind my Turkish colleague of our proposal for the establishment of a committee of legal experts to investigate this grave matter. If Turkey has nothing to hide, why not accept our proposal? I shall spare him the ironic statement that Mr. Ozgur addressed to a certain Gurler, who was trying to tell him that these are returning Turks. For the benefit of the new members of the Security Council, I shall quote?
"Are you trying to deceive us, too, by saying things you say to the foreigners? Be a little serious, Mr. Gurler." Ambassador Turkmen spoke of my side's taking an economic view of the matter. Our side's economic progress was described in a magazine as "half a miracle", considering that Cyprus, owing to the invasion and occupation, has been cut in two. We did it by hard work and out of a desire to survive. We did not and do not
(Mr. Moushoutas, Cyprus) impose an economic embargo on our Turkish Cÿpriot brethren. What we do is, legally through international courts, try to protect their properties that at present are under occupation, usurped by the Turkish occupation troops and settlers.
The Turkish side spoke of "peoples" in Cyprus. There is one people in Cyprus, and the Constitution so states. Indeed, there are two communities: some of us are Greeks and some are Turks; some of us go to the church and some to the mosque. But there is only one people. There are no borders in Cyprus. There is no such thing as stamping of passports within any country; and no such thing will be accepted in Cyprus.
There was a question of arming ourselves. Imagine, little Cyprus, occupied by a giant, and they are afraid if we buy a couple of helicopters. That is really something for Ambassador Turkmen to reconsider.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The representative of Greece has asked to be allowed to speak, and I call on him.
Mr. ZEPOS (Greece): I shall not comment on all the points made by my learned colleague, Mr. Turkmen, but must make certain things clear.
Demilitarization is an extension of the principle of the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of a sovereign State. When we refer to this notion, we must be absolutely clear in our minds about what is international legality and what is the rule of law. No solution can be found by ignoring that basic, fundamental principle. The maintenance of peace and the safeguarding of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of any country cannot admit of any exception by acceptance of any form or presence in or military occupation of a sovereign State by a foreign country. That is one point.
The other point is that there should be a distinction between this rule and the security rule. It is the obligation and right of any country to organize its own security within its own frontiers. The presence of foreign troops in another country is unacceptable, both legally and historically.
We have lived the experience of foreign military occupation. We cannot obliterate certain memories. That is why we insist on the rule of the inadmissibility of the presence of foreign military forces in a sovereign State.
An extension of this would be to reach a satisfactory level of security for both Cypriot communities. That is why we support the proposal for the total demilitarization of Cyprus - which, it has been said, holds a very unfortunate record of having the highest proportion of military forces per square meter on its territory. If that is true - and I am afraid it is - it is a very sad fact.
(Mr. Zepos, Greece) The other point I wanted to make is that we should be absolutely frank when we use the notion of accepting a solution for a federal State while at the same time we speak of two legal States at this stage. We must be very clear. I refer to comments made by Mr. Koray. Let us be absolutely clear not to confuse the issues. We have the sovereign, internationally recognized State of Cyprus, which is rightfully seeking to liberate part of its territory from the presence of foreign troops and this is why we fully support the proposal by President Vassiliou that he should meet with Prime Minister Ozal to tackle that problem of major importance to him.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.
Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): I wish to reply very briefly to the representative of Greece. He mentioned the question of the rule of law. with regard to the presence of Turkish forces in Cyprus. I hate to do this at a time when my Prime Minister is in Athens and we are trying to develop a better atmosphere between the two countries, but I have to remind him that if there was one country that broke international law in Cyprus it was Greece itself. Between 1964 and 1977 it sent over 20,000 troops to Cyprus illegally, and it attempted to annex the island in 1974.
Now of course the Greek representative will say, "Yes, but this was done under the dictatorship in Greece." But it is also a principle of international law that countries are responsible for their actions, whatever their Governments.
The other question on which I would like to throw some light is that of two States. Nobody is against one State in Cyprus. There will be one State in Cyprus if there is an agreement between the two sides, but as long as there is no agreement there are two States in Cyprus. This is a fact. This is a de facto situation and nothing can change this reality.
(Me. Turkmen, Turkey) I want to say something else with regard to the insistence on the withdrawal of the Turkish forces. I think we should reflect on this, that if the Greek Cypriots had accepted the 29 March 1986 agreement, which was almost two and a half years ago, the Turkish forces would have been withdrawn by new. They have only themselves to blame for their continued presence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.
Mr, MOOSH3UTAS (Cyprus): I have a question to put to the representative of Turkey. The Turkish forces, he said, would have been withdrawn. Does he mean all the Turkish forces?
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Greece.
Mr. ZEPOS (Greece): Just one phrase. I think that Mr. Tur kmen was certainly misquoting me or is mistaken if he thinks that I would ever support any argument by what conspirators and traitors have done to my country. I never base my argument on that. I base my argument on the fact that, since the independence °f Cyprus was established in T960, the presence of military forces in Cyprus was done with the acceptance of, and agreement between, two sovereign states - that is the great difference - while at this moment the presence of Turkish forces in Cyprus is without that agreement. They are there under a military occupation operation, which is unacceptable and has been condemned by this Organization in very clear terms.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.
Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): One very brief clarification. The 29 March 1986 Draft Framework Agreement perceives the negotiation of a time-table for the withdrawal of non-Cypriot forces, all of them, not just the Turkish ones. What I
meant to say is that if the 29 March 1986 Draft Framework Agreement had been accepted and negotiations had proceeded, it is very possible that by now there would have been an agreement, a settlement that would have permitted the withdrawal of Turkish forces and also of other forces.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. MODS H3 UTAS (Cyprus): I just wanted to remind members of the Council that in Mr. Denktash’s statement as to the withdrawal of the troops he referred to them as the Turkish troops except for those that are to remain.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): There are no further speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2823,
11 August 1988
ENGLISH
S
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 8 August 1988, at 3.30 p.m.
President: LI Luye
Memberst Alger ia
Argentina Brazil
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Italy Japan Nepal Senegal
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America Yugoslavia Zambia
(China)
Mr. DJOUDI MT. DELPECH Mr. NOGUEIRA-BATISTA Mt. BLANC
Count York von WARTENBURG Mr. STARACE-JANFOLLA Mt. KAGAMI MT. JOSSE Mr. SARRE Mr. LOZINSKIY
Sir Crispin TICKELL
MT. WALTERS Mr. PEJIC MT. CHABALA
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
Reissued for technical reasons.
The meeting was called to order at 3^55 pan.
EXPRESSION OF THANKS TO THE RETIRING PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese) : As this is the first meeting of the Security Council in the month of August, I should like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Paulo Nogueira-Batista, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council for the month of July 1988. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Nogueira-Batista for the great diplomatic skill and very able manner demonstrated in his conduct of the business of the Council last month. TRIBUTE TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): On this occasion, I believe that I interpret the sentiment of all the members of the Council in expressing our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts which have made this meeting possible. I wish to thank him whole-heartedly on behalf of the Council for his excellent work.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): On behalf of the Council, I invite the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahallati (Islamic Republic of Iran) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): On behalf of the Council, I invite the representative of Iraq to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittani (Iraq) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting today in accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the following documents: S/20092, letter dated 6 August 1988 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General? and S/20094, letter dated 7 August 1988 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran addressed to the Secretary-General.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Members of the Council are aware that over the past two weeks I have been engaged in intensive diplomatic activity aimed at achieving the implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987).
As a result of these efforts, and in exercise of the mandate given to me by the Security Council, I now call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Iraq to observe a cease-fire and to discontinue all military action on land, at sea and in the air as of 0300 hours GMT on 20 August 1988. I have been assured by the two parties to the conflict that they will observe this cease-fire in the context of the full implementation of resolution 598 (1987).

The Governments of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Iraq have also agreed to the deployment of United Nations observers as of the time and date of the cease-fire.
I shall extend to the Islamic Republic of Iran and to the Republic of Iraq a formal invitation to send their representatives to Geneva on 25 August for direct talks under my auspices. I am sending letters in this connection to both sides.
On the date of the cease-fire, I shall confirm that I am making the necessary preparations aimed at carrying out the mandate entrusted to me by the resolution under the various operative paragraphs, in particular paragraphs 4,6,7 and 8.
I note that military activity has decreased in the past few days. I wish on this occasion, however, to appeal to all concerned, in the strongest possible terms, to exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain forthwith from any hostile activity on land, at sea and in the air in the period before entry into effect of the cease-fire.
I wish to express my deepest appreciation for the efforts made by the parties, the members of the Security Council and others over the past weeks. I am confident that I shall be able to count on the continuing co-operation of the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Iraq when we convene in Geneva.
The restoration of peace will bring to the peoples of both countries victories far greater than those of war.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): Following consultations of the Security Council, I have been authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the members of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the statement just made by the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of its resolution 598 (1987) of 20 July 1987 on the Iran-Iraq conflict.
"The Council endorses the Secretary-General's announcement that the cease-fire demanded in the resolution shall come into effect at 0300 hours GMT on 20 August 1988, and that direct talks under his auspices between the two parties shall begin on 25 August.
"The Council further endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General to both parties to exercise the utmost restraint and expects them to refrain from all hostile activities in the period before the entry into effect of the cease-fire.
"The Council reiterates its determination that its resolution 598 (1987) be fully implemented as an integral whole and reaffirms its full support for the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General to this end." The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4;05 p.m.
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV. 2918
17 April 1990
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 17 April 1990, at 3. 30 p.m.
President.-	Mr. TfflESSE	(Ethiopia)
Members.-	Canada China Colombia Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Democratic Yemen Finland France Malaysia Romania Union of Soviet Socialist Republics United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Zaire	Mr. FORTIER Mr. LI Luye Mrs. CASTAÑO Mr. ESSY Mr. ALARCON de QUESADA Mr. AL-ASHTAL Mr. TORNUDD Mr. BLANC Mr. HASMY Mr. MUNTEANU Mr. BELONDGDV Mr. RICHARDSON Mr. PICKERING Mr. BAGBENI ADEITO NZENGEYA
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed ^n the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE ACE ND A
The agenda was adopted.
ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS
RETORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS CONCERNING TIE APPLICATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA FOR ADMISSION TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNITED NATIONS (S/21251)
The PRESIDENT; I should like to inform the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Brazil, Mali and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the application of the Republic of Namibia for admission to membership in the United Nations. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nogueira-Batista (Brazil), Mr. Diakite (Mali) and Mr. Shearar (South Africa) took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT; I should like to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated 17 April 1990 from the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, which reads as follows;
"On behalf of the United Nations Council for Namibia, I have the honour, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, to request an invitation for the Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Mustafa Aksin, to participate in the Security Council's consideration of the item presently on the agenda." On previous occasions, the Security Council has extended invitations to
(The President) representatives of other United Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Vice-President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the application of the Republic of Namibia for admission to membership in the United Nations, which appears in document S/21251. In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee recommends to the Security Council the adoption of a draft resolution on the application for membership of the Republic of Namibia. In accordance with the procedure followed on previous occasions, I propose that the Council first proceed to the vote on the draft resolution and that those who wish to make statements do so thereafter. If I hear no obejction, I shall take it that that procedure is acceptable to the members of the Council.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in paragraph 3 of the report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the application of the Republic of Namibia for admission to membership in the United Nations, document S/21251.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour? Canada, China, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Malaysia, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist-Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire
The PRES IDENT? There were fifteen votes in favour. The draft resolution has therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution 652 (1990).
In paragraph 4 of its report the Committee on the Admission of New Members has proposed that the Security Council request the inclusion of an item entitled "Admission of new Members to the United Nations" in the supplementary list of items for the agenda of the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly. I understand that the proposal was made in light of the wish expressed by the President of the Republic of Namibia in the application letter that the application be given consideration on a priority basis so as to enable the Namibian delegation to participate in the work of the special session of the General Assembly, and in conformity with rule 18 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. May I take it that the proposal of the Committee to request the inclusion of the supplementary item meets with the approval of the Security Council?
There being no objection, it is so decided.
As President of the Security Council, I am sure that my sentiments of great happiness on the adoption of this historic resolution correspond to those of the members of the Council. This resolution marks the culmination of a long and complex process in which the Council and the United Nations as a whole have been closely involved. I feel privileged to be in the Chair on this momentous occasion.
In extending warm congratulations to the Government and the people of the Republic of Namibia, it is fitting to note that Namibia's admission to United Nations membership will be a tribute to the courage, dedication and sacrifice of its people and their leaders. They have waged a long struggle for self-determination and genuine independence. They will now be facing diverse challenges of nation-building and should be able to enjoy the continued support of the entire international community in connection with their efforts to achieve successful economic and social development. In this regard the Council has already taken the lead in its resolution 643 (1989) of 31 October 1989, in which it
(The President) urgently appealed to Member States, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to extend, in co-ordination with the Secretary-General, generous financial, material and technical support to the Namibian people, both during the transitional period and after independence.
I am now pleased to call upon the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The adoption today of the resolution recommending the admission of the Republic of Namibia to membership in the United Nations is a historic event. For this Council and for the United Nations as a whole it marks the culmination of an effort sustained over long years to enable the people of Namibia to take charge of their destiny and assume the place to which they are entitled in the community of nations.
The achievement of this goal was not easy. It involved a protracted and often complex process. Almost every phase of that process was beset with difficulties. At many a stage on the way, hopes wavered and lives were lost. Now that Namibia is about to join the ranks of sovereign Member States in the Organization, we can look back with a sense of fulfilment on our perseverance in the struggle. It is indeed a source of great satisfaction for me that ultimately the solution to the question of Namibia was reached through free and fair elections, under the supervision and control of the United Nations, in implementation of the settlement plan that was adopted in this very Chamber 12 years ago.
The steadfastness, the vision and the co-operation of the members of the Security Council - with one another, with the people of Namibia, with other interested parties and with the Secretary-General - have provided a most instructive example of how just goals laid down in our Charter can be achieved and how, with unity in aim and coherence in effort, multilateralism can be both fruitful and dynamic.
RM/5
S/PV. 2918
8

It was the Security Council which set the framework for a settlement in Namibia. It was the Secretary-General to whom the Council entrusted the task of helping to implement the Council's resolutions. It was the General Assembly which appropriated the necessary funds. It was the Council for Namibia which, in the transition period, represented the people of Namibia in international forums and assisted their preparations for independence. It was the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) , headed by my Special Representative, that carried out the will of the Orgnaization, with the co-operation of the parties concerned, notably South Africa and the Southwest Africa People's Organization (SWAPO). Above all, it was the Namibian people who, despite severe tests and hardships, in the end triumphed. It was my honour and pleasure to administer the oath of office to their first President, Sam Nujoma.
Moreover, the accomplishment by the United Nations of its mission in Namibia demonstrates how long-standing conflicts, seemingly insoluble, can be made to yield to the procedures of peaceful settlement once the. international community agrees to join hands and use the world Organization for its intended purposes. The gains that are thus made strengthen the international rule of law and the principles of democracy and human rights and thus consolidate peace.
The Government of Namibia has indicated its willingness to accept the obligations contained in the Charter and to assume the responsibilities inherent in membership of the United Nations. I should like to express the confident hope that the international community, for its part, will not forget its continuing responsibilities to the people of Namibia. The warm, universal goodwill which has greeted its birth will need to be translated into all possible assistance, when requested. The new State should be assured of the full support of the United Nations in the onerous tasks of nation-building it has now assumed.
Mr. HASHY (Malaysia): I should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the high office of the presidency of the Council for the month of April and to extend my delegation's fullest co-operation to you. 1 am confident that, given your well-known diplomatic skills and personal attributes, you will be able to steer the work of the Council for this month to a successful conclusion. I should also like to express my delegation's appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Abdalla Saleh Al-Ashtal, Permanent Representative of Democratic Yemen, for the outstanding manner in which he conducted the work of the Council during the busy month of March.
I should also like to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to His Excellency the Secretary-General for the most edifying remarks you have both just made to the Council on the matter that is the subject of our consideration today.
My delegation strongly and wholeheartedly supports the Republic of Namibia's application for membership of the United Nations. Namibia's entry into the community of sovereign and independent nations represented here in this Organization is the culmination of the long years of struggle for nationhood, a struggle in which the Organization itself played a crucial role, of which it should be justifiably proud. Malaysia would like to pay the highest tribute to the Namibian people and its leadership, particularly the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), for their great courage, fortitude and sacrifices in their long and arduous struggle for nationhood. We warmly congratulate them on the successful outcome of their first general election and on the formation of the first post-independence Government, under His Excellency President Sam Nujoma, whose astute leadership and statesmanship we salute.
(Mr. Hasmy, Malaysia)
The independence of Africa’s last colony is a cause for celebration for the entire international community. My delegation would therefore pay tribute to the United Nations, its Secretary-General and the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) for the exemplary manner in which each played a part in, and contributed to, the Namibian independence process. We also pay tribute to the Council for Namibia for its tireless efforts in protecting the rights of the Namibian people and in preparing it for self-determination and independence.
As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, which has been in the forefront in championing the cause of Namibia’s independence, Malaysia is proud to have been closely associated with the international effort to bring freedom to the people of Namibia. As a member of the Council, Malaysia is gratified to have played a role in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), which paved the way for Namibia’s independence. We are particularly honoured to have presided over the Council at the adoption of resolution 629 (1989) in January last year, and to have made a contribution to UNTAG.
The young Republic of Namibia will face many challenges of nation-building.
It will have to grapple with the tasks of building a strong and united nation and a viable economy and of uplifting its people's standards of living, while not only ensuring its continued independence, but also proceeding with the early reintegration of all its sovereign territories, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands, as provided for in Security Council resolution 432 (1978) , adopted unanimously by the Council. In all of those tasks Namibia will have to rely on the continued assistance and support of the international community, which clearly continues to have a responsibility towards the young Republic, not the least of which is in supporting Namibia’s efforts to reintegrate all of its sovereign territories. Malaysia stands ready to play its part in all these efforts.
The PRES IDENT; I thank the representative of Malaysia for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. AL-ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic); Allow me at the outset. Sir, to extend to you our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current month. I wish to express our appreciation of your efforts in the past and our confidence that your diplomatic skill will enable you to guide the Council's work successfully.
On 21 March the world's attention was focused on Namibia, when it celebrated its independence in its capital, Windhoek. At midnight on that joyful day the celebrations reached their peak when Mr. Sam Nujoma took the oath of office before the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, inaugurating the beginning of a new era for himself and his country. When Namibia achieved its independence on that day and Mr. Sam Nujoma became its first President, that historic event symbolized in a few minutes the place of the United Nations and its role in supporting the Namibian people in its liberation struggle, under its experienced leadership, the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) .
Since the United Nations assumed responsibility for administering Namibia it had provided all forms of moral and political support to enable the Namibian people to determine its national fate in an independent and sovereign State. The Security Council established the framework for a peaceful political solution and elaborated the plan for Namibia's independence by its resolution 435 (1978). It also contributed significantly by using the resources of the United Nations to preserve the peace and supervise the elections in an exemplary manner. This led to the final transition to independence. In that regard I pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his arduous efforts in dealing with the most difficult peace operations during the transition period. I also pay tribute to the international civil servants who dedicated themselves to their duties.
(Mr. Al-Ashtal, Democratic Yemen) As we welcome Namibia to the United Nations, we also welcome the beginning of a new era in which national reconciliation will prevail under democracy and with regional co-operation. We also look forward to the day when Namibia gains complete independence by regaining sovereignty over Walvis Bay and the adjacent islands, just as we look forward to the day when the State of Palestine takes its place among the nations so that the United Nations becomes truly universal.
The PRESIDENT., I thank the representative of Democratic Yemen for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. BAGBENI ADEITO NZENGEYA (Zaire) (interpretation from French): On behalf of my delegation. Sir, I congratulate you most warmly on your accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of April. It is significant that it is under your presidency that the Security Council has just unanimously voted in favour of recommending the admission of the Republic of Namibia as the 160th Member of our Organization. Your country, Ethiopia, has played a particularly historic role in the process of decolonization in Africa. In providing the headquarters of the Organization of African Unity since 1963 and the headquarters of the Economic Commission for Africa, your country has made it possible for African leaders to get together often to decide upon measures that, with the help of the international community, have led to Namibia's independence. Please be assured of my delegation's full co-operation during your term of office.
In addition, Sir, I wish to express my great respect for the remarkable, competent way in which your predecessor, Ambassador Abdalla Saleh Al-Ashtal of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, conducted the Council's work for the month of March, to the complete satisfaction of all its members.
Ever since the adoption on 29 September 1978 of resolution 435 (1978), embodying the United Nations plan to bring independence to the Namibian people, the
Security Council has played a leading role in the matter. Aiming at a peaceful resolution of the question of Namibia, the Council began a large-scale endeavour in support - although 12 years later - of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), of 27 October 1966, which terminated South Africa's Mandate over the Territory of Namibia.
I must also refer to the contribution also made to the building of that nation by the International Court of Justice, which on 21 June 1971 handed down its advisory opinion that South Africa was under an obligation to withdraw its administration from Namibian territory.
Although it is a long time since 1978, the Security Council has shown perseverance in seeking to implement its decision, taking the most appropriate steps, such as the setting up of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) by its resolution 435 (1978), and it has spared no effort to promote the chances of peace and dialogue in southern Africa.
It was in that context that the tripartite negotiations were carried out.
Those negotiations, encouraged by the members of the Security Council and supported by the African States, including my own country, Zaire, culminated in the creation of a climate of confidence in southern Africa which was the basis for Namibia’s gaining independence and which justifies its request for admission to membership of the United Nations.
This is the place for my delegation to pay a well deserved tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his skill and tenacity in discharging his noble mission of leading Namibia to independence. To all his associates closely involved in the transitional operation in Namibia, my delegation expresses sentiments of profound recognition.
My country, Zaire, hails Namibia's entry as the next Member of our Organization, in which it is called upon to play within the concert of nations a dynamic role that may lead its neighbour State South Africa to emulate its example in the building of a similar multiracial nation. We address to the heroic people of Namibia our sincere best wishes for success in its struggle to preserve the territorial integrity of its country in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and in its efforts to ensure the harmonious economic and social development of its country.
In conclusion, my delegation expresses the hope that the Security Council resolution recommending Namibia's admission will receive the enthusiastic support of the General Assembly at its eighteenth special session so that Namibia will indeed become the 160th Member of our Organization.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the representative of Zaire for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. ESSY (Cote d'Ivoire) (interpretation from French); When the African Heads of State gathered in Addis Ababa on 25 May 1963 to establish the Organization of African Unity, their primary objective was to struggle to achieve the total decolonization of Africa and to put an end to all racial discrimination, notably apartheid.
It is therefore particularly significant that a felicitous happenstance saw to it that it would be you. Sir, the representative of the country that plays host to the Organization of African Unity, Chairman of the Special Committee on the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and President of the Security Council for the month of April, would be directing our work to realize not only the emergence of a new State on the international scene but also, and above all, fulfilment of the aspirations of the founding fathers of the Organization of African Unity and of the African peoples to bring about the decolonization of the African continent.
My delegation is sure that, thanks to your great political experience and your exceptional professional qualifications, the work of the Council during this month will be crowned with success.
I would express to your predecessor, the Ambassador of Democratic Yemen, Mr. Al-Ashtal, our fullest appreciation and admiration of the professional competence and the judicious manner in which he conducted the work of the Council during the month of March, a month in which we did a great deal of work.
It is a source of particular satisfaction to see that, along with the many complex questions often debated by the Council in a tense atmosphere, Council members are sometimes present at a positive event such as the admission of a State to the United Nations.
The Security Council, which has through its resolutions and decisions played a major role in the peaceful transfer of power to a united, free and independent Namibia, has just unanimously adopted a historic resolution recommending Namibia's admission to the United Nations.
The honour and joy felt by Cote d'Ivoire on this blessed day is explained by the fact that for us, the people of Cote d'Ivoire, the Republic of Namibia is not just another nation among nations; it is a sister nation within the great African family that is today seeing the consecration of the courageous struggle waged by its people to vindicate its right to dignity and national sovereignty. It was with
(Mr. Essy, Cote d,Ivoire) much anguish that Cote d'Ivoire followed the many alternations in the struggle of Namibia for independence.
It is thus quite natural for us joyously to hail the successful conclusion of the liberation struggle, which is coming to an end in peace, with unity regained, thus bearing witness to the determination and maturity of the Namibian people and its capacity to overcome, through dialogue and negotiation, all the differences, thus enabling a democratic, peace-loving State to emerge.
It is a source of acute pain to recall on this day of joy the colonial history of Namibia and the hopes, disappointments and frustrations our Organization has felt since the adoption of resolution 435 (1978) as it has psychologically prepared itself to welcome an independent Namibia in its midst. That has now been accomplished, and better late than never. This is the place and time to pay tribute to the magnificent job done by specific bodies of our Organization such as the United Nations Council for Namibia and the Committee of 24, and the tireless efforts they in particular have made throughout the long struggle to bring independence to Namibia. The troops of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAQ and the civilian units that participated in the great adventure of the democratic decolonization of the last bastion of colonialism in Africa are worthy of our fullest admiration for the remarkable way in which they discharged their tasks under trying conditions. It was a noble mission indeed.
Scarcely a few years ago, in the context of international relations then dominated by doubts and scepticism, in his statements and reports to the General Assembly our Secretary-General never failed to emphasize the unique role to be played by the United Nations and its capacity to confront and cope with the many challenges the world over.
If it enjoyed the confidence and support of the Member States, the success of the operation carried out in Namibia by the United Nations, which history will record as one of its greatest achievements, confirms the forward-looking vision he had then with regard to the data and factors that fashion the evolution of the world in which we live. This success is his success, just as it is the success of the team that assisted him day by day in times of extreme tension that marked the various stages of that "sui generis" operation.
Objectivity compels us to acknowledge, with regard to the present authorities of the former adminstering Power, that they have indeed shown the merit of co-operating in the final phase of the process of bringing independence to Namibia in orderly and dignified circumstances and through democratic institutions.
The difficult economic context in which Namibia is acceding to independence renders all the more complex the future battles to be waged by the Namibian people and its Government as they seek through dialogue to secure territorial integrity and to succeed in economic and social development. Cote d'Ivoire joins in the appeal launched by the President of the Security Council, in keeping with resolution 643 (1989) of 31 October 1989, for generous material and technical support for the Namibian people, which we are convinced is prepared to mobilize, alongside other peoples, to face and cope with new non-military threats to peace: unemployment, drugs, the absence of development, third-world indebtedness and destruction of the environment.
The admission of the Republic of the Namibia will confirm - there can no be doubt about this - one of the fundamental principles of the United Nations, universality.
With impatience and much hope, we await the admission of the 160th Member of
our Organization.
The PRESIDENT^ I thank the representative of Cote d’Ivoire for the kind words he addressed to me and my country.
Mr. PICKERING (United States of America); I would first like to congratulate you. Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council and to assure you that we look forward to working closely with you this month. I would in addition like to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Abdalla Saleh Al-Ashtal of Democratic Yemen, for his enormous contributions to our work last month, when he was President of the Council.
The United States is especially pleased and proud to support Namibia's application for membership in the United Nations. The matter we are discussing today is not just a routine formality but the outcome of 14 years of continuing and determined effort in which we played a role as a deeply engaged participant. Beginning with the formation of the Contact Group in 1976, we joined with others in working to create the agreements that ultimately led to the resolution of the conflict in Namibia. Two Americans, a diplomat and a military officer, gave their
lives in that effort.
(Mr. Pickering, United States)
As we observe how the Namibian people are preparing for their future, we are sure that our efforts were worth while. We are gratified to see that the Namibian people have created an excellent constitution, one which ensures them democracy and all of its benefits. It also appears that they will pursue sound, pragmatic economic principles. They have set themselves on a course of social tolerance, openness and forgiveness to heal the wounds of conflict. They will be warmly welcomed by all of us into this Organization, which has had so much to do with their freedom and independence. And we would like in that regard to congratulate the Secretary-General on the manner in which he, his staff, and all other United Nations personnel have acted in this regard.
Having helped bring Namibia to the threshold of the United Nations, we also pledge our continued support to Namibia as it establishes itself in the community of nations.
Namibia’s birth has been protracted and difficult, but it now appears that the star under which it comes into the world shines brightly. We have every hope for Namibia’s successful future.
The PRESIDENT? I thank the representative of the United States for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French)? First of all, Sir, I should like to extend my delegation's and my own congratulations to you on Ethiopia's accession to the presidency for this month. We are very happy that Namibia's admission to the United Nations is taking place during the presidency of an African colleague.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Abdalla Saleh Al-Ashtal for having guided our work during the past month.
Our Council has just unanimously recommended to the General Assembly that it accept Namibia’s application for membership of the United Nations which was addressed to the Secretary-General by President Nujoma.
In the view of the French delegation this meeting is of special importance for several reasons. First of all, the admission of a new Member to the United Nations has become a rather rare occurrence; but above all it is because it is Namibia, for whose independence the United Nations has worked so long, that we are about to welcome here among us. And this so long awaited independence has come about after an operation unprecedented in our Organization’s history. The guiding principles of the operation had been defined in Security Council resolution 435 (1978). That resolution’s implementation, so efficiently ensured by our Secretary-General and his team, was followed very closely by the Security Council from April 1989.
On this solemn occasion our thoughts are turned to the people of Namibia, who have struggled so long for independence. Recently that people have demonstrated their responsibility and maturity, in particular by their massive participation in the November 1989 free and fair elections to choose a constituent assembly. And it was by consensus that that assembly adopted a democratic constitution which is fully in keeping with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
In this connection, my delegation wishes to pay a tribute to the resolve and wisdom demonstrated by President Nujoma.
Accordingly, France warmly supports the application for membership submitted by Namibia. We are especially happy to welcome in our Organization a new State from Africa, a continent with which my country has long had close ties of friendship and co-operation.
France hopes that Namibia will benefit from the active support of the international community, particularly through the United Nations, as it pursues its objectives in the field of economic and social development. For its part, France will continue to do what it can to help in the attainment of those objectives.
I cannot conclude without paying a tribute to the work done by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative; their contribution was decisive in the successful conclusion of the process of independence and the success of one of the most difficult operations ever undertaken by our Organization.
Lastly, my delegation extends its warmest congratulations and sincerest best wishes for success to the Government and the people of Namibia.
The PRESIDENT.- I thank the representative of France for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. BELONOGOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian) .- First of all, I should like warmly to congratulate an African country a friend of the Soviet Union and you personally, Sir, on acceding to the presidency of the Security Council at this time, which is indeed an historic one for the world community and for Africa. I wish you every success as you discharge your mandate. I should also like to extend thanks to the Permanent Representative of Democratic Yemen, Ambassador Al-Ashtal, for the exemplary manner in which he discharged his mandate as President of the Council in March.
Today's meeting of the Security Council on this item on the admission of the Republic of Namibia to membership of the United Nations is indeed a remarkable one. For this is, indeed, the final link in the chain of the efforts of the world
(Mr. Belonogov, USSR) community to implement Security Council and General Assembly decisions, and it is an important step in the international political standing of this young State.
On 21 March this year the last page in the colonial history of Africa was turned when Namibian independence was proclaimed and the last bastion of classic colonialism crumbled. General democratic elections were then held in Namibia, as a result of which the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) was given a mandate to govern the country.
This Namibian experience has shown clearly that the most complex problems can be resolved by political means, if the efforts of the parties concerned and of the world community are bound together by a common goal. From that standpoint, the freedom of Namibia is not only the fruit of the heroic efforts made by the people of Namibia; it is also the result of international joint action based on new political thinking.
Namibia's example is convincing proof and evidence of the enhanced effectiveness of the United Nations and its Security Council and of the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
(Mr. Belonogov, USSR)
There is one more important conclusion that we think can be drawn from this: the improvement in international relations makes it possible to work productively on finding settlements to regional conflict situations and breathes new life into the search for compromise solutions based on a balance of interests.
We have all witnessed the inception of far-reaching changes in South Africa. The settlement of the Namibian question offers good prospects for the settlement through national conciliation of the internal conflict in Angola; it also has an influence on Mozambique. What is more - and this may be the most remarkable of all the things that await us in the future - is that we have glimpsed the beginning of the process of the elimination of the system of racial segregation in South Africa. What will be required is a demonstration by all parties of consistency, patience and mutual understanding. The Soviet Union is willing to do all it can to promote this process.
I turn now directly to the item that has brought us all together here today at the table of the Security Council. I take this opportunity to extend my congratulations once again to the people of Namibia on the fulfilment of their age-old dream. The Soviet Union has already declared that it will co-operate with the Government of the free and independent Namibia.
In supporting Namibia’s request for membership of the United Nations, we are expressing our belief that this young Republic, which will become the one hundred and sixtieth Member of the Organization, will make a positive contribution to the multifaceted activities of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for the kind words he addressed to me and my country.
Mr. FULTON (United Kingdom): It is particularly fitting that this meeting of the Security Council should be taking place under your presidency, Sir. Ethiopia was one of the four African founder Members of the United Nations and has
played host for many years to the headquarters of the Organization of African Unity. The resolution we have just adopted is in many ways a milestone in the history of Africa: it is thus doubly appropriate that you should be in the Chair today. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor for the way in which he guided the Council's work in March.
I was very qlad to have had the honour to vote, as I have just done, on behalf of the British delegation in favour of the admission of Namibia as a Member of the United Nations. As the Secretary-General has said, the United Nations has had, since its inception, a special responsibility for Namibia. The independence of Namibia is an event of great significance both for southern Africa and for the Organization. It marks the end of the colonial era in Africa and provides a portent for peace and reconciliation in southern Africa. It is also a major triumph for the United Nations. It is right on this occasion to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General and to his Special Representative, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari: in fulfilling their mandate from the Council they have successfully conducted one of the largest United Nations operations ever mounted. Nor should we forget the contributions made to Namibia’s transition to independence by others, from all sides of the political divide.
For many years Britain has been deeply involved in efforts to bring Namibia to independence. It is a source of particular satisfaction that this came about through the holding of free and fair elections in fulfilment of the United Nations settlement plan. That plan was presented to the Security Council in 1978 by the Western contact group, of which Britain was a member. It has stood the test of time well. So have the associated understandings negotiated by the Secretary-General and the contact group between 1978 and 1982. I should also like to pay a tribute to the efforts of all those involved in the negotiations that
(Mr. Fulton, United Kingdom) culminated in the signing of the agreement between Angola, Cuba and South Africa in December 1988, which cleared the way for the implementation of the settlement plan.
The elections in November last year, which took place under United Nations supervision, were a model of the democratic process in action. They were a great credit to the Namibian people and the spirit of reconciliation, which led to agreement on a Constitution more quickly than allowed for in the settlement plan. The Secretary-General has since reported to the Council that the Constitution reflects the Principles for the Constitution for an Independent Namibia adopted in 1982 by all the parties concerned.
The international community must now see to it that the new Republic of Namibia gets the best possible start. In addition to its substantial contribution to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) - which included finance of some $27 million, a signals unit, 50 election monitors and a team of fingerprint experts - Britain has made a major contribution to the repatriation effort of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and to the help for Namibia provided by the World Food Programme. On 21 March the British Foreign Secretary announced a bilateral aid package of 316 million for commitment over three years. We have already responded to requests for help for the new Namibian Government, and are helping in education, the police, fisheries, and public-service reform. We are also providing military training for the new Namibian army. Our involvement will continue. Our bilateral aid will focus on technical co-operation and rehabilitation; we shall also be providing substantial assistance through multilateral channels, including the European Community and the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation.
29-30
(Mr. Fulton, United Kingdom)
The Government of Namibia has left the Council in no doubt of its determination to play an active and constructive role on the international scene. We are very glad that Namibia has joined the Commonwealth as its fiftieth member. We strongly support its application for membership of the United Nations and look forward to working closely in the future with the Namibian delegation.
The PRESIDENT? I thank the representative of the United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed to me and my country.
Mr. TORNUDD (Finland)i May I first express my delegation's warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April. We pledge our full co-operation to you as you fulfil your responsible duties, and we are confident that your leadership will successfully advance the Council's work during the current month.
I wish also to thank Ambassador Abdalla Saleh Al-Ashtal of Democratic Yemen for the effective way he handled the presidency during the month of March.
It is a rare pleasure nowadays to admit a new Member State to the United Nations. It is an even rarer pleasure when the new State being recommended for membership is a nation for whose freedom and independence the Organization has canpaigned for so long and so hard.
Bet me take this opportunity to extend Finland's warm congratulations to the people and Government of Namibia on their accession to independence.
I am sure that Namibia will make a great contribution to the work of the Organization. Many of its constituent parts are already very familiar to Namibians, who know the work of the United Nations at first hand. Successful implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), and the harmony and goodwill displayed by Namibians in drafting a constitution for the new nation embodying constitutional principles that have stood the test of time, augur well for the future of Namibia.
Finland is proud to have lent a hand to Namibians in the course of their long quest for freedom and independence. As a member of the Security Council, as a contributor to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group, and as a member of the United Nations Council for Namibia, we now have the immense satisfaction of witnessing the new nation of Namibia assume its rightful place at this table of nations, the United Nations.
My last words will only be: Welcome, Namibia.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the representative of Finland for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. LI UJYE (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am certain that you will discharge your important duties with distinction. At the same time, I should like to thank Ambassador Al-Ashtal of Democratic Yemen for his successful completion of the Council's heavy work last month.
Today is a day of great joy for us. We all vividly remember that, during the extended period before Namibia became independent, the Security Council met on numerous occasions to deliberate the situation in that country, which was then occupied by colonialist rulers. Today, the Republic of Namibia has become a fact, and we are again gathered here to discuss its application for membership in
the United Nations. That has a special significance indeed. The Chinese delegation wishes to express its sincere congratulations to the Namibian people, which has just won its long-awaited independence, and wishes to see Namibia admitted to membership in the United Nations. With one more Member, the United Nations will gain strength with fresh forces in its efforts to maintain world peace, in keeping with the purposes and principles of the Charter. We are convinced that the Republic of Namibia will contribute both to United Nations affairs and to the cause of human progress.
As the last remaining colony in Africa, Namibia’s declaration of independence marks the beginning of an era in which the continent is once and for all liberated from colonial rule. This is a major event of epochal importance and far-reaching impact, from which the international community can draw a great deal of inspiration. In order to win state independence and national liberation, the Namibian people carried out a tenacious struggle over a long period and sustained enormous sacrifices. The people of the entire world hold the Namibian people and their leaders in high regard for their dauntless fighting spirit and bravery. Namibian independence is the result of the protracted struggle of the Namibian people. It is also inseparable from the vigorous support of the African countries - the front-line countries in particular - the United Nations Council for Namibia and the international community as a whole. We would like to express our appreciation to the United Nations Secretary-General and the United Nations Transition Assistance Group for their active endeavour in implementing the Namibian independence plan.
The Chinese Government and people have always deeply sympathized with and firmly supported the Namibian people in its just struggle against colonial domination and for national independence, and never wavered in their conviction that the Namibian people's just cause would triumph in the end. The fact that
Namibia established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China immediately after its independence indicates that the profound friendship between the Chinese and Namibian peoples, forged over long years of common struggle, will be further consolidated and developed on a new foundation. Namibian independence has added a new chapter in the annals of African history, and the Namibian people has also entered a new historical period. We are confident that under the leadership of President Nujoma the Government and the people of Namibia will achieve still further successes in their cause of maintaining national independence and building their new-born nation.
The PRESIDENT.- I thank the representative of China for his kind words addressed to me.
Mrs. CASTANO (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): Sir, my delegation is pleased that you have assumed the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April. We are especially pleased that an African country should have thus been honoured precisely at the moment we are accepting Namibia's application to become the 160th State Member of the United Nations. Furthemore, we welcome the fact that Ethiopia should now hold the presidency of the Council, for it is a country with which we are bound by close ties of friendship and co-operation, in addition to its being a fellow member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We are also pleased that Ambassador Tadesse should be the person holding that office. His long career in the public service of his country, and his proven skills as a negotiator and diplomat, guarantee success for the Council's work.
We wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Ambassador Al-Ashtal, Permanent Representative of Democratic Yemen, for his exemplary guidance of this body during the difficult month of March.
In the majority of cases, the Security Council meets to debate issues of international concern when the peace and security of the world are threatened. Rarely does it have the opportunity to meet for purposes as pleasant as that of celebrating the admission of a State as a new, fully-fledged Member of our Organization.
We are dealing here with a very special case. The United Nations is opening its doors to a State to which it has extended solidarity, effort and work for over 23 years, a State at whose people’s side we have stood in its struggles and dreams, and with which we are now climbing the first step leading to the forum of the United Nations.
For over 20 years the Council for Namibia protected the rights and interests of the Namibian people, administered its affairs, and strove to ensure representation for its people by training its future leaders. Above all, the Council for Namibia has helped it in its quest for ways to bring about the withdrawal of South Africa and to achieve independence, freedom and self-de termina tion.
Colombia had the good fortune to be a member of the Council for Namibia, and in that way observed at first hand that historic process of struggle for the freedom of the Namibian people. We are overcome with joy, as all are, but we feel a certain pride in knowing that we have made our own, albeit modest, contribution to our Organization's gigantic endeavour, together with the people of Namibia and the resolute support of brotherly African countries, which led to a happy conclusion on 21 March, when independence was declared.
Today is a day of joy and gratitude for the United Nations. The effort undertaken more than two decades ago by the United Nations is reaching a successful conclusion. This is the time to thank the Secretary-General, who, with dedication, skill and astuteness, guided.Namibia's transition. It is the time to recognize the
major role played by the Security Council in adopting the resolutions that in turn provided for an end to South Africa’s mandate over Namibia, lent legitimacy to the struggle of the Namibian people against South Africa's presence on its territory, and declared illegal the steps taken by the Government of South Africa on behalf of Namibia. Particular mention must be made of Security Council resolution 432 (1978), which declared that the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia had to be assured through the reintegration of Walvis Bay within its territory. We also extend our appreciation to the General Assembly for its steadfast vigilance and support for Namibia's struggle for its independence and freedom.
We must pay a special tribute to the heroic people of Namibia who, under the wise leadership of President Sam Nujoma, have been successful in winning and keeping the support and solidarity of the international community because their ideas were on the side of justice. That people, led with dignity, militancy, determination and wisdom by the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), have also enjoyed the resolute backing of fraternal countries throughout Africa.
Lastly, today is a day of happiness for the Security Council. We are meeting to recommend the admission of the Republic of Namibia as the 160th State Member of the United Nations. We are gathered here to salute its arrival in our midst, certain that the same support it won in its struggle for freedom will now be given it to keep intact a strong, independent and sovereign State that will be the master of its own destiny in order to foster the kind of economic and social development that will provide for its people the well-being and happiness they have hitherto been denied.
Welcome, Namibia.
The PRESIDENT.. I thank the representative of Colombia for her kind words addressed to me and to my country.
Mr. MUNTEANU (Romania); I am very pleased to congratulate you most cordially, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the current month. My delegation trusts that under your able guidance the Council will exercise its high responsibilities in a most satisfactory manner. I also wish to express once more my delegation's high appreciation for the excellent performance of Ambassador Al-Ashtal as President of the Council last month.
The achievement of national independence has always been the most sacred aspiration of any people. At one time or another every nation has had to go through suffering and sacrifice before enjoying the fulfilment of that noble aspiration. The Namibia people are no exception. Their path towards independence
was not an easy one. Therefore, when independence came three weeks aqo the people of Namibia had every reason to feel proud and happy and to celebrate that great moment in their history. Nor were they alone in celebrating that historic event. High officials from all over the world gathered in Windhoek on 21 March to share the feelings of fulfilment of the Namibian people.
Today, we have just witnessed in the Council another important event in the life of the newly independent nation of Namibia. In the resolution just adopted the Security Council, acting on the request of the President of the Republic of Namibia, recommends the admission of that country to membership of the United Nations.
For all of us, the Namibian request for United Nations membership immediately after its proclamation of independence is fully understandable. In no other previous instance has the United Nations been so deeply involved in the birth of a nation. In fact, for almost a quarter of a century the world Organization fully identified itself with the struggle of the Namibian people for independence. In that connection I wish to pay the warmest tribute to the Secretary-General for his outstanding contribution to the successful outcome of a most complex and difficult process, one that eventually led to Namibian independence.
Romania, for which the idea of national independence has always been a way of existence, has firmly sided from the very outset, together with many other countries, with all United Nations efforts to assist the Namibian people to achieve their goals. Thus, my country has been.directly associated from the beginning with the activities of the United Nations Council for Namibia, which played a prominent role in bringing about the situation that made the Windhoek celebrations of 21 March and today’s meeting of the Council possible.
My country also had the privilege of being one of the sponsors of Security Council resolution 385 (1976), which called for free elections under the
(Mr. Munteanu, Romania) supervision and control of the United Nations as a means of enabling the people of Namibia freely to determine their own future. The message from the President of the Provisional Council of National Unity, Ion Iliescu, to the President of the Republic of Namibia, Sam Nujoma, on the day of the country’s independence expressed the satisfaction of the Romanian people at the happy outcome of the long struggle of the Namibian people against colonial rule and apartheid and for national dignity and democracy.
The emergence of an independent Namibia is a historic and crucial event for the Namibian people, as well as for Africa and the whole world, and a major contribution to the ideals of peace, understanding and co-operation among all nations. As a country which has firmly embarked upon the path of a genuinely democratic development based on individual freedom, political pluralism and the widest possible co-operation with all nations, Romania is convinced that its relations with Namibia, which have been raised to the ambassadorial diplomatic level and are based on a long tradition of sympathy and mutual solidarity, will further develop to the benefit of both nations.
Mr. President, my delegation fully shares the sentiments of happiness and the congratulations and support you conveyed on behalf of the Council to the Government and the people of Namibia on this auspicious occasion.
The PRESIDENT.- I thank the representative of Romania for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. FORTIER (Canada): Allow me first to congratulate Ethiopia on having assumed the presidency of the Council for the month of April. My delegation is very pleased indeed to see you, Sir, at the head of our table at this important and crucial time. It is also my pleasant duty to pay a tribute to our colleague, Ambassador Abdalla Saleh Al-Ashtal of Democratic Yemen, for the exemplary manner with which he presided over our deliberations during the very busy month of March.
Canada takes special pleasure in supporting this historic resolution today.
It was during our previous term on the Council that we had the honour of participating in the negotiations which led to the adoption of the United Nations settlement plan for Namibia. Throughout the intervening years we remained fully committed to the implementation of the plan. We therefore take great satisfaction in preparing to welcome Namibia into the United Nations. The road to nationhood has been long and difficult, and the Namibian people must be warmly applauded for their courage and their commitment. The dignity and the determination with which they have embraced democracy is an inspiration to all who aspire to such freedom as well as to those who take such liberties for granted. In exemplary fashion their elected representatives worked assiduously and with common purpose to adopt a model constitution that entrenches and guarantees a full range of human rights. It is indeed an auspicious debut for the world's youngest nation, and we welcome the example they have set.
We all have good reason to be proud, for Namibian independence is a victory of the entire international community. The implementation of the Nambian settlement plan, involving two-thirds of the United Nations membership, has been a truly international effort. The Secretary-General, his Special Representative Martti Ahtisaari, and all those who served with such distinction in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group must be congratulated for the outstanding success with which they have fulfilled their mandate and the trust placed in them by the Namibian people and the Member States of the United Nations.
(Mr. Fortier, Canada)
Some 700 Canadians participated in UNTAG as military personnel, civilian police and electoral experts and supervisors. Many more supported the struggle of the Namibian people through their work with churches and non-governmental organizations.
Political independence is, however, but the first step. As Namibia embarks upon the road of nationhood it will look to the continued support and goodwill of the international community to develop its economic and social infrastructure and to ensure that its citizens enjoy the rights and freedoms for which they have struggled so valiantly.
I am therefore pleased to inform the Council that in the current year Canada will provide more than $4 million in development assistance to Namibia through the United Nations, the Commonwealth and Canadian non-governmental organizations. The initial projects include a major effort on immunization with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), police training and drought relief. Additional projects will be developed in response to the United Nations Development Programme donors' conference in June.
In closing, I want to express Canada's pleasure and honour in having had the opportunity to work so closely with both present and past members of the Council, the international community and the people of Namibia in realizing this happy event. The resolution we have adopted today is the culmination of decades of dedicated work by the Namibian people and the international community. It also stands as a powerful reaffirmation of the fundamental principles and purposes of the United Nations in promoting the peaceful resolution of threats to international peace and security through international dialogue and common action.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the representative of Canada for his kind words
addressed to me and my country.
Mr. ALARCON DE QUESADA (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish) : I wish to say first, Sir, that my delegation is very pleased to see you presiding over our work. We are convinced that, with the benefit of your experience and skill, the Security Council will fully live up to its responsibilities this month. We are particularly pleased to see the representative of Ethiopia, a country so closely involved in African independence and unity, presiding over a meeting with such significance in the overall struggle against colonialism.
I also wish to take this opportunity to carry out a pleasant duty - that of paying a special tribute to Ambassador Al-Ashtal for the very effective way in which he guided the Council's work during March.
The Council has just recommended the admission of Namibia as a new Member of our Organization, a decision that comes at the beginning of the Decade that the Organization has proclaimed as the one in which we shall see the total elimination of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations. We are confident that, as in the case of Namibia, after such a long and selfless struggle, those peoples that still cannot exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence will one day, sooner rather than later, be able to do so.
As previous speakers have said, this is the time to express recognition of, and to congratulate, first, our Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, and his associates, such as Mr. Goulding, and the others at Headquarters who day after day sought the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), and particularly Mr. Ahtisaari, Mr. Legwaila and General Prem Chand, whom we are very pleased to see in this Chamber. They.managed to do a complex and very difficult job on the ground in ensuring that the plan adopted by the Council in resolution 435 (1978) was fully and successfully implemented. Other United Nations bodies, particularly the
(Mr. Alarcon de Quesada, Cuba) United Nations Council for Namibia and the Special Committee responsible for implementing General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) , the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, over which you, Sir, so effectively preside, also deserve our recognition. For long years they took care of the legitimate interests of the Namibian people and sought to create the conditions in which that people might finally fulfil its main national aspiration -independence.
However, we' also feel that we should recognize the main factor that has brought us to this happy moment; the selfless liberation struggle waged for so many years by the Namibian people, headed by the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). In that struggle SWAPO enjoyed the active solidarity and backing of Africa, particularly the front-line States, all the members of the Non-Aligned Movement and all those others around the world who have struggled to put an end to colonialism. Throughout that struggle Cuba, its people and Government have had the most solid fraternal ties with SWAPO, which we gave our fullest material, diplomatic and moral suppport.
We believe that that international solidarity, particularly that of the People’s Republic of Angola, given to the SWAPO combatants for more than a decade, will always head the list whenever recognition is given to events in the long process leading to Namibia’s independence. Angolans, Namibians and Cubans struggling together forged indestructible ties of friendship and solidarity, confirmed in the trenches at Cuito Cuanavale and the battles in south-west Angola.
But if we knew how to fight with determination on the battlefield, we also knew how to conduct ourselves in the more constructive arena of consistent, patient diplomatic effort. So it was that we regarded the signing of the December 1988 agreements, first in Brazzaville and later in New York, and the establishment of the joint Commission, made up of the People’s Republic of Angola, the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of Cuba, as an undeniable contribution to that years—long diplomatic effort. Despite the major differences that separated the countries making up the Commission, we felt that constructive joint action was taken, action that contributed significantly to the implementation of, in particular, the plan adopted by the Council at the beginning of April last year. We are especially pleased that the whole process of combat and negotiation has at last borne fruit with the very auspicious occasion that brings us together today.
. On 21 March we hailed the coming to independence of a new State, and we established full diplomatic ties between our two Governments. We hope and expect, to the extent of our potential, to be able to contribute to the process the Namibian people is now beginning, the process of rebuilding, of economic construction, of the building of a new life, drawing on a colonial experience that lasted too long and was too bitter.
In this connection the Security Council continues to have a responsibility we cannot dodge. The international community in general, and the Council in particular, must see to it not only that appropriate co-operation is given the Namibian people but also that everything possible is done to ensure that Namibia’s sovereignty, national independence and territorial integrity are guaranteed, including the reincorporation into its territory of Walvis Bay, as stipulated in a resolution adopted unanimously by this Council, resolution 432 (1978). Like all other members of the Security Council, we extend a cordial welcome to the new Member State, Namibia, and we thank you, Mr. President, for the masterful way in which you are guiding our deliberations.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Cuba for the kind words he addressed to me and my country.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil, who wishes to make a statement on behalf of the States of the Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. BATISTA (Brazil): Mr. President, allow me to start by extending to you our appreciation for giving us the opportunity to participate in this debate on behalf of the States of the Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic. May I also congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
(Mr. Batista, Brazil) Security Council for the month of April and on the skill with which you have quided the Council's work.
Our thanks also go to Ambassador Al-Ashtal of Democratic Yemen for his efficient handling of the Council's affairs in the month of March.
I have the great honour and privilege to speak at this meeting of the Security Council especially convened to consider the application of Namibia to become a Member of the United Nations, on which the Council has taken the historic decision unanimously to recommend its acceptance to the General Assembly.
I have been asked, in my capacity as Co-ordinator of the 22 States of West Africa and South America members of the Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic, to express our great satisfaction and pride at seeing Namibia occupying its rightful place in the community of nations. Namibia's independence is a goal that has in fact been with us for several decades as a fundamental case for the application of the principle of self-determination worthy of our utmost attention and care. The long and overdue process of its accession to statehood has to a great extent been the result of common resolve and of actions taken by the United Nations either through the General Assembly or this body in support of the Namibian people’s unswerving and heroic determination to become free. The independence of Namibia certainly took much longer than we desired or expected. It has been completed, however, in a peaceful, democratic and orderly way, in a manner which augurs well for its future as a peace-loving Member of this Organization.
We, the 22 States of the Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic, feel particularly close to Namibia, a country which we have always considered a natural and integral part of the zone we decided to constitute with the blessing of the General Assembly in 1986. We are extremely pleased to witness the coming into reality of the expressions of hope we then manifested that representatives of a
(Mr. Batista, Brazil) free and independent Namibia would be able to join us in the community of South Atlantic nations.
The States of the Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic will be meeting again in Nigeria next June to evaluate the implemention of the objectives we set for ourselves at our first meeting, in Rio de Janeiro in July 1988. We very much hope that Namibia will be in a position to be present at that meeting in Nigeria as one of the first demonstrations of its ability to exercise to the full the recently acquired prerogatives of statehood.
I should like to place on record on this occasion the congratulations of the States of the Zone to the Secretary-General for the skilful and able manner in which he discharged his responsibilities in the course of the independence process in Namibia. The Security Council, as ultimately responsible for this process, is also deserving of praise for its consistent action on behalf of the Namibian people's quest for independence.
Lastly, we should be remiss if we failed also to thank those Members of the United Nations which made a special contribution to the attainment of this lofty goal through their participation in the work of the United Nations Council for Namibia as well as in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) .
The PRESIDENT^ I thank the representative of Brazil for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. SHEARAR (South Africa); Mr. President, it is indeed appropriate that a representative of Africa should preside over the Security Council at the time of Namibia’s application for membership of the United Nations. May I congratulate you on the way in which you have carried out your duties as President and wish you success during the remaining term of your presidency.
(Mr. Shearar, South Africa) It gives me great pleasure to join those delegations that have spoken and will speak today to welcome Namibia’s application to become the 160th Member of the United Nations. It is with a great sense of achievement that the South African Government has participated in the long and arduous process that has enabled the new State to be born amid circumstances of considerable promise.
There are many who deserve thanks and appreciation for their sacrifices and the work they have done to promote the independence process of Namibia and to make it a reality, who have chiselled away at this unyielding rock in order ultimately to make peace a reality. In the process many of them gave their lives. They are not and shall not be forgotten.
When he spoke in the South African Parliament on 14 and 15 March 1990, during the second reading debate on the Bill to recognize the independence of Namibia, which was signed into law by the South African State President, Mr. F. W. de Klerk, on 20 March, the South African Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. R. F. Botha, reminded his audience:
"Those who are familiar with the complexities of the Namibian dispute would agree with me that all the debates, confrontations and conflicts surrounding this dispute did not in the end bring about a solution to the problem. The solution came about when we heeded the instruction in the Charter of the United Nations which requires that disputes be settled peacefully."
(Mr. Shearar, South Africa) He added;
"It is the earnest hope of the South African Government that this fundamental concept - the commitment to peaceful negotiation - will form the basis for resolving other conflicts in southern Africa and beyond.
"I would like to express the hope that what has happened in Namibia will serve as an encouragement in the field of negotiations to all the leaders in southern Africa to resolve the problems of the region in a peaceful manner." The international dispute about the administration of the Territory is behind us. Namibia is now a free, independent sovereign State which has earned the recognition and good wishes of the nations of the world and those of southern Africa, the sub-continent of which both it and South Africa are an integral part, in particular.
Progressive phases of internal self-determination have given the people of Namibia vital experience in self-government at various levels. Over the years, with the extensive concrete assistance and encouragement of South Africa, they have worked together to produce an enviable infrastructure which will equip the new country for the challenges that lie ahead in terms of economic development, towards a quality of life to which the people naturally aspire.
We join the international community in the hope that the future of this vast and beautiful land will be one of peace, security and properity for all its people. My Government once again wishes to make a serious appeal to that community to recognize the need for tangible assistance to be provided to Namibia as it joins the community of nations. Now is the time for a commitment from the United Nations and the international community.
(Mr. Shearar, South Africa) South Africa has during the protracted negotiations over the past years derived particular satisfaction from being able - within the framework of the new circumstances created by the tripartite discussions with Angola and Cuba and the constructive role of not only the United States of America and the Soviet Union but also several African Heads of State - to help initiate the final implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). Close co-operation with them and, thereafter, with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and with the Force Commander of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) , General Prem Chand, has demonstrated that where the political will exists negotiated solutions can be found to seemingly intractable problems.
In particular, I would recall the remarks of the South African Foreign Minister on 15 March 1990.,
"At last, after years of tussling with each other, I also want to convey my sincere gratitude to Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Representative, who, being between the devil and the deep blue sea, also brought his ship safely to shore. I also thank Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. We were sometimes at serious loggerheads with one another, but now that our troubles are over we may thank each other." Many of us have been touched in some way by the long process which has led Namibia to this day. Few have been so deeply involved for so long as the man who is now South African Foreign Minister, or given so much of themselves as he in his pursuit over 30 years of a fair solution to the aspirations of all the Namibian people. I would therefore close my statement with a reflection of his thoughts as he looked back over the past, last month:
(Mr. Shearar, South Africa) "They say that the Skeleton Coast was not so much given that name owing to its God-forsaken and inhospitable appearance. Inch by inch, the giant sand dunes are continually being moved by the wind. Concealed skeletons are uncovered and covered up again by the wind - hence the name Skeleton Coast. In this way, all the footprints of everyone who has ever walked there are swept away. To all my colleagues.who have walked with me through the Namib: Your footprints of friendship will never be swept away, even after our skeletons have come to rest on the Skeleton Coast."
The people of South Africa wish the Government and people of Namibia prosperity, happiness and stability. We look forward to a constructive and mutually rewarding relationship with Namibia and with all the sovereign States in the southern African region.
The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Mustafa Aksin, Vice-President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, to whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. AKSIN (Turkey), Vice-President of the United Nations Council for Namibia; Let me at the outset, Sir, express to you our deep sense of satisfaction at your presidency of the Security Council at this important time. Your nation's commitment to the principles of freedom, justice and equality needs no confirmation. Your country has been involved intimately with the resurgence of Africa, and you personally, Mr. President, are the able and articulate Chairman of the Special Committee on the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Namibia's freedom has considerably lightened the rigours of your responsibilities, even as it has reflected the efficacy of your efforts.
We also express our appreciation to Ambassador Al-Ashtal of Democratic Yemen for the outstanding way in which he conducted the presidency of the Council last month.
For the United Nations Council for Namibia this is a moment of both pride and humility. The trust placed in us by the international community 23 years ago stands fulfilled. We did not achieve this alone: our efforts were inspired and invigorated by the solidarity the world community displayed on this critical issue. Above all, the vision, grit and determination of the Namibian people themselves gave us direction.
The United Nations Council for Namibia provided a unique instance of international trusteeship. Its creation formalized a number of tenets and principles the Organization was built upon. Namibia offered a dramatic and tangible possibility to make those principles work in a precise, defined instance. Universal acknowledgement of staked interest in Namibia’s future underscored collective responsibility. Programmes of international assistance and co-operation compelled the realization of the indivisibility of man. The care and diligence with which the often rocky and always arduous road to independence was negotiated made manifest the essentiality of statesmanship, grace and reconciliation in the conduct of international relations.
On this last aspect, the role of the Security Council has been of essential value. Only last week, at one of its special plenary meetings in Windhoek, the United Nations Council for Namibia declared that the Security Council had
"... ensured the critical implementation of its resolution 435 (1978) by the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) for Namibia and its completion under the guidance of the Secretary-General."
It went on to assert that;
"... the fulfilment of this mandate is a tribute to the strength, resilience and capacity of the world body."
The Declaration of the Special Meeting underscored the sharing by the United Nations Council for Namibia of
"... the commitment of the world community that independent Namibia be assured of complete territorial integrity, security of frontiers, sovereignty over its resources as well as unhindered and equal opportunity for its citizens to realize their full human potential."
It reflected the pride of the Council at the assistance it had been able to extend to the Namibian people throughout its existence and,
"... While expressing deep appreciation for the generosity extended by freedom-loving peoples", went on to call upon all
"... to address with equal fervour and concern the immense challenges facing
the new nation."
56
(Mr. Aksin, Vice-President, United Nations Council for Namibia)
The United Nations Council for Namibia has returned from Windhoek with a sense of joy and fulfilment. The sense of diligence and purpose with which the Namibian nation, under the leadership of its popular and democratically elected Government, has embarked on the journey of self-rule has moved us all. Trust, vision and hope are the hallmarks of this proud people. We are grateful for the opportunity we have had to share their voyage. We look forward to our new journey together, as fellow Member States of this comity of nations. In the concluding words of the Windhoek Declaration of the Council for Namibia:
"Today we celebrate the dawn of a new era and welcome the rise of a new star on the African continent. The Namibian people have finally regained liberty and are now working towards the establishment of an equal and just society.
"Namibia, we salute you."
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Vice-President of the United Nations Council for Namibia for the kind words he addressed to me and my country.
The next speaker is the representative of Mali, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of African States for the month of April. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. DIAKITE (Mali) (interpretation from French) : As Chairman of the Group of African States for the month of April, I extend our warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council, and thank you sincerely for the opportunity you have given me to participate in this important consideration of the question of Namibia’s admission to membership of the United Nations.
(Mr. Diakite, Mali)
Africa is proud to see a distinguished son of Ethiopia presiding over the Security Council at a crucial moment in the history of our continent. Your country has spared no effort with a view to speeding up the process of the complete decolonization of Africa. During the long colonial night, Ethiopia’s material, financial and diplomatic assistance to the colonial countries and peoples of Africa was never lacking. For example, it will be recalled that in 1960 Ethiopia, together with Liberia, initiated proceedings at the International Court of Justice against South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia. And, finally, I extend to you, Mr. President, our whole-hearted thanks for your personal commitment to the struggle waged by oppressed peoples to free themselves from the colonial yoke. The members of the Special Committee on decolonization - that important body which you have presided over so successfully for many years - have been able to appreciate your courage and your resolve.
I also wish, through you, Sir, to congratulate the Ambassador of Democratic Yemen on the remarkable way in which he presided over the Council last month.
On 21 March the Namibian people celebrated with joy and elation their country's accession to independence. All of Africa saluted that event, and many African Heads of State went to Windhoek to pay a tribute to the courage of a people that had made such enormous sacrifices to put an end to South Africa's illegal colonial occupation. Namibia's independencé is the result of the armed struggle waged by the Southwest Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) to restore dignity, freedom and equality to its country. The blood of the martyrs has not flowed in vain, for today the people of Namibia are the sole master of their fate.
The road to Namibian independence was a long, difficult and arduous road. During the many years of struggle the Organization of African Unity, the front-line States and the United Nations supported the cause of the Namibian people with
(Mr, Diakite, Mali) determination. Here I should like to pay a heartfelt tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, whose perseverance and courage made possible the implementation of Security Council 435 (1978). Africa salutes also all the States Members of the United Nations that, for these long years, made their contribution to Namibia’s liberation.
Namibia's accession to independence has not put a miraculous end to the suffering of the Namibian people. The young nation will for a long tine bear the wounds inflicted by apartheid and colonialism. To remedy the situation it will be necessary to create jobs, to improve social and economic conditions, to build schools, health centres, housing. Also, in the interest of the Namibian people, agriculture, mining and fishing will have to regain their importance. We believe that the international community, given its historical responsibility for the country, should provide Namibia with sufficient assistance to enable it to overcome the difficulties inherited from the long period of colonial exploitation and hence to set forth on1 the path to economic liberation.
The Security Council, in keeping with chapter I of its provisional rules of procedure, has just recommended that the young State of Namibia be admitted to membership of the United Nations. So far as the States Members of the Organization are concerned, there could be no objection to this admission, because the applicant is, if I may say so, "the child of the United Nations". Indeed, Namibia was under United Nations administration for over 40 years. That responsibility came to an end only on 21 March 1990, when the United Nations Secretary-General administered the oath to Mr. Sam Nujoma, the first President of the Republic of Namibia. In conferring upon Namibia legal personality at the international level, the United Nations believed that the State of Namibia was in a position to shoulder its international responsibilities as a full-fledged Member of our Organization.
That is the point of view of Africa; it is also the point of view of Namibia.
(Mr. Diakite, Mali)
On behalf of the African Group, I thank the Security Council for unanimously recommending approval of Namibia’s application for admission to membership of the United Nations.
Given Namibia's glorious past and its people's legendary wisdom, we are convinced that the new State will make a real contribution to the United Nations.
In conclusion, I urge the international community strongly to support the territorial integrity and indivisibility of Namibia; Walvis Bay and the offshore islands are indeed an integral part of the territory of Namibia.
Africa will, as in the past, spare no effort to ensure that Namibia will be able to cope with this new situation.
The PRESIDENT^ I thank the representative of Mali for the kind words he addressed to me and my country.
As there are no other names on the list of speakers, I should now like, in my capacity as representative of Ethiopia, to make a statement on this solemn occasion when the Council has recommended that the Republic of Namibia be admitted to membership of the United Nations.
On rare occasions such as the one afforded us today the Security Council discharges the pleasant duty of acceding to requests for membership by newly emerging States. None the less, I submit that the request which the Council has just considered is unique in every sense of the word.
It is unique not only because it marks the culmination of the long and arduous struggle of a people for freedom, justice and independence, but also because it is the end of a saga involving a trust betrayed and a process in which numerous resolutions were violated and few upheld. It is a unique occasion because it concerns an ex-colonial Territory over which the United Nations had assumed direct juridical responsibility. It is unique because it pertains to a newly born nation in whose emergence the United Nations has played the significant role of midwife.
For my own country, Ethiopia - which, along with the sisterly African Republic of Liberia, was in the forefront of taking the historic step of bringing the Namibia question to the International Court of Justice - the occasion is one that evokes emotions of all varieties. That this same country should, by a pleasant coincidence of history, be presiding over the deliberations of the Council focussing on the admission of Namibia, is a matter of great satisfaction to me personally and to the country I have the honour to represent.
As many of the previous speakers have mentioned, this happy occasion did not come about without human and material sacrifices associated with the kind of protracted armed struggle which the heroic people of Namibia had to wage under the leadership of its vanguard movement, the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). Without rancour or ill-feeling towards those in the Territory who inflicted so much on the people of Namibia - whose patience and tenacity is well known even to the most disinterested observer - we pay well-deserved homage to all the sons and daughters of that land who have contributed to the struggle for independence. Indeed, we pay a tribute to all of Namibia’s fallen heroes and to those who have lived to capture the commanding heights of independence and to witness this historic outcome.
Those of us who had the pleasant opportunity to observe the election process in Namibia also know that the Namibian people was willing to live and let live, to forgive and reconcile even with those who were not on its side at its moment of trial and tribulation. Indeed, it is that same degree of maturity and wisdom that this great people continues to demonstrate under the able and, I might add, tested leadership of President Sam Nujoma. The world was witness to his astute sense of political judgment when the new Government in Windhoek very carefully and judiciously chose its cabinet members, ensuring the democratic participation of all the people of Namibia in the governance of their beloved country. It is therefore our view that the political infrastructure for an independent and sovereign Namibia is well in place.
On this solemn occasion, I should like to place on record our appreciation to the United Nations Council for Namibia for its perseverance in the fulfillment of an important task. Likewise, we would like to congratulate the entire team of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) , under the brilliant stewardship of the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuellar, who had to overcome numerous difficulties in the delicate mission of ensuring the smooth conduct of free and fair elections in that country.
As the Council is well aware, Namibia is a generously endowed country headed by a democratically constituted Government. Indeed, we are happy to note that the new Government is already asserting the country’s sovereignty over its marine resources. None the less, we also know that the newly independent State must, as a matter of necessity, grapple with the exigencies of a State, and that the struggle the new Republic will have to wage on the economic and developmental front will be just as challenging. It therefore behooves the international community to render all material and political support to Namibia, with a view to enabling it to become increasingly viable and preserve its unity as well as its territorial integrity.
In welcoming the Republic of Namibia to the assembly of free nations, Ethiopia is fully aware of Namibia's potential contributions to the maintenance of peace and security within its own region and, indeed, to the furtherance of the objectives laid down in the Charter of the United Nations. My country, therefore, is delighted to have supported the application of Namibia for membership in the Organization. We are equally confident that the General Assembly will unanimously admit the Republic of Namibia to membership of this growing family of nations.
I now resume my function as President of the Security Council.
I note that the list of speakers for this item has been exhausted. I take it that the Council has concluded its consideration of the matter before it.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2943
25 September 1990
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 25 September 1990, at 4.30 p.m.
President. Mr. SHEVARDNADZE
Members t Canada China Colombia Cote d'Ivoire Cuba Ethiopia Finland France Malaysia Romania United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Yemen Zaire
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. CLARK Mr. QIAN Qichen Mr. JARAMILLO Mr. ESSY Mr. ALARCON de QUESADA Mr. DINKA Mr. PAASIO Mr. DUMAS Mr. ABU HASSAN Mr. NASTASE
Mr. HURD Mr. BAKER Mr. AL-DALI Mr. MUSHOBEKWA KALIMBA WA KATANA
This record contains the original tent of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
NR/gt
The meeting was called to order at 4.55 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAQ AND KUWAIT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian); 1 have been informed by the Secretary-General that at this meeting of the Security Council, in addition to the Soviet Union, the following members of the Council are represented by their Foreign Ministers: Canada, China, Colombia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Malaysia, Romania, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Yemen and Zaire. I should like warmly to welcome the Foreign Ministers.
Côte d'Ivoire and Cuba are represented by their Permanent Representatives to the United Nations.
I should like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Kuwait in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In keeping with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite him to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At.tha iovitation of the President., Shaikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah (Kuwait) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Security Council will now begin consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understr ^ng reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document S/21816, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Canada, Côte d'Ivoire, Finland, France, Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Zaire.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the following other documents: S/21812, letter dated 23 September 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a letter dated 23 September 1990 from the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to the Secretary-General; and documents S/21814 and S/21815, letters dated 24 September 1990 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
Before we proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before us, I call on the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a statement.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I appreciate this opportunity to say a few words at this important meeting of the Security Council being attended by a number of Foreign Ministers. The decisions taken at this meeting, like those to which they are a sequel, will have a momentous significance well beyond the crisis that has formed their context.
During the weeks since 2 August, the Security Council has found itself shouldering the heavy responsibility which the Charter has placed on it but which,
in earlier circumstances, it was unable to exercise. This is recognized all over the world. The assurance that needs to accompany it is that the Council views its responsibility as not only that of restoring peace but of upholding and maintaining peace with justice.
The power at the disposal of the Security Council is the power commanded by the solidarity of nations opposed to the transgression of the Charter of the United Nations. It is first and foremost the power of principle. What makes the Council's task particularly onerous - and, I am sure, ultimately fruitful - is that principles must be consistently applied and the Council's actions must be based on equity and perceived to be so.
The world has not had an experience of enforcement provisions under Chapter VII being used in the manner and on the scale in which they are in the present crisis. Now that they are actually applied, the United Nations is being subjected to an unprecedented test. It needs to demonstrate that the way of enforcement is qualitatively different from the way of war; that as such action Issues from a collective engagement, it requires a discipline all its own; that it strives to minimize undeserved suffering to the extent humanly possible, and to search for solutions for the special economic problems confronted by States arising from the carrying out of enforcement measures; that what it demands from the party against which it is employed is not surrender but the righting of the wrong that has been committed; and that it does not foreclose diplomatic efforts to arrive at a peaceful solution consistent with the principles of the Charter and the determinations made by the Security Council.
During my visit to Amman some three weeks ago, I had occasion, and the need, to emphasize publicly that one wrong cannot justify another. I believe that this emphasis deserves to be sustained until this crisis is peacefully resolved. It

will carry the full force of conviction if we show that our effort to secure the correction of one international wrong does not mean that we leave other wrongs unaddressed. The world situation generally, and in particular the situation in the Middle East as a whole, presents itself as a proving ground for our probity in establishing the rule of law. If peace is to be made secure, justice must have the last word.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. AL-DALI (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic): Sir, at the outset I should like to express our great pleasure at seeing you presiding over this meeting of the Security Council at the ministerial level. You represent a friendly country with which mine has wide-ranging ties that are based on the treaty of friendship and co-operation between the two countries. Also, you have demonstrated great skill and prudence in contributing to the solution of many regional and international problems. We recognize your untiring efforts to find satisfactory solutions to many an outstanding problem.
The crisis between the two sister countries, Xrag and Kuwait, developed at an important historical juncture that marked the end of a phase of tense international relations and culminated in an end to the era of cold war and ideological strife between the two major blocs. Indeed, it has marked the beginning of the end with regard to the military alliances of East and West. The basic positive aspect of that important historical development has been the shift from confrontation to co-operation. On the other hand, however, it has shifted the focus of contradiction to the economic field in the area of North and South relations. The economic gap between the poor and the wealthy nations has widened to such an extent that it now poses the threat of dire conseguences that may plunge the world into calamity.
The features of the new phase of international relations and the new International order have started to emerge in the form of a number of laws and contexts that are becoming apparent in the new international relations.
The application of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations by the organs of the world Organization falls within this context. This is especially so with regard to the Security Council as the international organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for international law as a basis for the relations between States
(Mr. Al-Dali, Yemen) and the expansion of co-operation on the basis of the fundamental tenets of respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs and the inadmissibility of the use of force to resolve disputes.
With the onset of this new phase and the high hopes of our peoples, the crisis broke out in the Gulf. At this moment in time, that crisis represents a crucial test of the nature and credibility of those international relations. Indeed it is a test, as far as the international community is concerned. It tests the ability of that community to translate those relations into concrete reality through its handling of that crisis. The way in which the crisis is addressed will determine the nature and the evolution of the new world order.
If there is to be a historical opportunity to turn over a new leaf in international relations so that peace, security, co-operation and mutual interests may prevail, it is only natural that the feasibility of achieving such a positive development should require the scrupulous renunciation of the old methods of work and the pursuit of narrow interests. As of necessity, this requires the renunciation of the old means of the use of force outside the framework of the United Nations and the subjugation of international principles and international law to the behests of narrow interests. Such principles and laws should not be made to serve narrow national interests.
The practical application of the new rules that should govern international relations requires that we should determine beforehand which of the two options of peace or war we shall opt for in addressing the current crisis in the Gulf region. Each option carries with it its own rules and consequences. Peace requires a commitment to intensive sustained efforts in the search of a fair and equitable solution of the crisis through the optimum use of the authority of the Security Council. It requires us to opt for the peaceful means at the Security Council's disposal. This we should do in a manner that avoids escalation and confrontation
(Mr. Al-Dali. Yemen) and that would effectively lead to the achievement of the aims of the resolutions of the Security Council, in particular, resolution 660 (1990), which calls for the withdrawal of the Iraqi forces from Kuwait, respect for the sovereignty of both countries and peaceful negotiations with a view to resolving the crisis.
The alternative to peace is, of course, war, which would break out if force was to be used by certain Powers, in the belief that they may achieve those goals by military means. However, this option is extremely dangerous and could indeed lead to catastrophe and far-reaching devastation in the region. It may well have much wider implications for the whole world. War involves the possibility of a lengthy confrontation, with all the resultant human and material losses.
It is important to emphasize in no uncertain terms that we cannot accept a situation in which our brethren in the region would be the cannon fodder of such a war. We do not accept the devastation of our natural resources and the destruction of our lands under the motto of defending our interests.
Wars' consequences will not be limited to the Gulf. War will lead to the expansion of the area of conflict geographically, politically and militarily due to the fact that the region is closely interrelated with the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Arab region as a whole is ripe for explosion as a result of the stalemate in the efforts to achieve an equitable peace and the obstacles created by some Powers which are now vehemently advocating principles which we have long called for in the resolution of the conflict in the Middle East region as a whole and especially the cause of the Palestinian Arab people, as well as the West Bank, Gaza and the Syrian Golan Heights.
Moreover, a war would have far-reaching long-lasting effects on the world economy especially in the case of the developing countries. It will lead to the presence of foreign military forces in the area and create all forms of conflict between the countries of the region.
If such a catastrophe should ever occur, then the new world order, which is a source of hope in the future, would be wrecked at the very outset through this grave military escalation in the region, especially if force is used outside the authority of the Security Council. This would be on the cards because those who advocate it enthusiastically do not do so from a desire to uphold the interests of Kuwait but rather to destroy Arab capabilities and tilt the scales in furtherance of Zionism’s objectives and expansionist policies. In this connection, it should not come as any surprise that Israel is at the forefront of those who call for the use of force and the destruction of Iraq’s military and industrial installations.
This bleak picture, which portrays the extremely serious consequences of war, makes it imperative for us to rule out such an option and spare no effort in working for a peaceful approach. Such an approach would require patience and flexibility so that there would be a genuine opportunity for a peaceful solution to the crisis that would put an end to the differences between the two principal parties concerned and restore peace and stability in the region.
In this context, our conviction that it is necessary to work for a peaceful resolution of this crisis between Iraq and Kuwait grows stronger from one day to the next. We wish to reiterate that the Republic of Yemen will continue its efforts to contain this crisis between the two sister countries in the firm belief that the Arab context is the only sound effective way to address the crisis and bring it to an end.
It is a source of hope to us that the Arab region now witnesses extensive and intensive efforts in that direction.
While referring to these efforts towards a peaceful resolution, we feel it is time that the Security Council should take a responsible stand in the face of the
(BtUldBalL-XSMB)
grave developments in our region« pay due attention to those peaceful efforts and give them its support. Indeed« we expect the Council to take positive measures in order to contribute positively to a peaceful resolution of this crisis that would lead to the withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait so that the resolutions adopted by the Council would not bo used as a justification and pretext for war, but rather as an inspiration for peace.
Because of that conviction, we are submitting to the Security Council a draft resolution that calls on all parties, including the countries of the region, to intensify efforts in exploring a peaceful approach that could end the crisis and on the Secretary-General to continue his good offices and mediate between the parties concerned in line with his perception of the realities, with a view to formulating a peaceful solution to the crisis. We would expect the Security Council to give that mandate to the Secretary-General. The Secretary-General has shown on previous occasions that he is prepared to work tirelessly for the solution of problems that had been thought impossible to solve. While we call for increased efforts by the Secretary-General, we also call upon our brethren in Xrag to make a positive response to the efforts which are being made to find a political solution, to the crisis.
Without any doubt, those good offices will constitute a move in the direction of a political settlement to the crisis. This is especially the case because resolutions by themselves will not lead to that. Here it must be said that the Security Council has not so far highlighted the peaceful solution, while the crisis is being stridently escalated through the application of Chapter VII of the Charter without any parallel effort to encourage peaceful solutions, especially within an Arab framework.
In less than six weeks the Council has adopted three resolutions on the blockade against Iraq and Kuwait, although that blockade was effective from the outset - that is to say, since adoption of the first resolution on this matter: resolution 661 (1990).
This tendency reached the stage, in resolution 666 (1990), of interpreting "humanitarian cases', with regard to food supplies to our brethren in Iraq and Kuwait in an inhuman manner that would lead to a famine. This would mean the
(Mr, Al-Dali. Yemen) starvation of innocent persons who have nothing to do with this crisis, especially children, women and old people. It is our responsibility to adopt a prudent approach, if the crisis is to be resolved peacefully. We should not resort to embargoes and famines but use the resolutions adopted by the Security Council to promote peaceful solutions.
On several occasions, including meetings of the Security Council, the Republic of Yemen has set forth its position on the crisis between the two sister countries. Iraq and Kuwait. We wish to emphasize the following basic elements of my country's policy on the crisis:
First, Yemen has never endorsed and will never endorse the principle of the occupation of the territory of others by force. It does not support the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq.
Secondly, my country will continue to seek an Arab solution to the crisis - a solution that takes into account all the causes of the crisis.
Thirdly, my country cannot endorse the idea that assistance should be sought through the use of foreign forces, for whatever reason.
Fourthly, we reaffirm our compliance with Security Council resolution 661 (1990).
Fifthly, rumours and false statements regarding Yemen's position on the crisis reveal unfriendly intentions towards Yemen.
Yemen's position is a reflection of the spirit of our times in regard to democracy and multilateralism. We are aware of the fact that since this crisis affects the new international order, it will have either positive or negative effects on the democratic changes in our region. The road to war will not lead to the promotion of democracy in our region. On the contrary, it is peace that would strengthen democracy in the region.
It is opportune that Yemen should participate in efforts to create a new world order at this very historic juncture when the unity of Yemen has been achieved peacefully and democratically, on a solid foundation. It allows for a free exchange of views, freedom of speech, freedom of political opposition. Our Constitution protects freedom of speech because that is an important part of our history as well as of the transformation that has now taken place in our country. We shall remain vigilant in safeguarding this great achievement so that others may not have any possibility of using the present crisis to strangle our free and independent will.
In conclusion, we emphasize that concrete measures must be taken to deal with the complex and chronic issues in our region, foremost among which is the question of Palestine. That is the way to restore the Security Council's credibility and to ensure that it is serious about shouldering its responsibilities. We stress that all our efforts and activities in the Security Council will be designed to justify the confidence shown in us when we were elected to this body. We shall continue to co-operate with other members of the Council to that end.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I express our gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen for the kind words he addressed to my Government and to the Soviet Union.
Mr. ALARCON DE QUESADA (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): First, I welcome you, Mr. President, and express my delegation's pleasure at seeing you, a distinguished Soviet personality, an outstanding leader of the Government of the Soviet Union, with which mine has brotherly relations, guiding our Council's
proceedings.
The Security Council has shown unprecedented diligence ever since Iraq invaded Kuwait, on 2 August. It has adopted - sometimes in a matter of a few hours - an unending number of resolutions. For the first time in its history, it has demonstrated the will to enforce those resolutions.
Cuba voted in favour of the resolutions that rejected the inadmissible invasion of Kuwaiti territory, the illegal claim to annexation, and the violation of diplomatic norms as well as the conversion of foreign citizens into hostages. For reasons of principle, we reject the conduct of the Government of Iraq in this respect and we appeal to it, once again, to cease such conduct and to abide by Security Council resolutions 660 (1990), 662 (1990) and 664 (1990).
We continue to believe that Iraqi troops must withdraw immediately and unconditionally from Kuwait and that respect must be shown for the sovereignty, national independence and territorial integrity of that country. We reject any form of the use of force in an attempt to resolve international disputes.
(Mr. -Alarcon de Quesada, Cuba)
Those principles, which are sacred to us and which we are all duty-bound to respect in the case o£ Kuwait no less than in the case o£ any other State, are basic to all peoples o£ the third world, and we consider it essential that they be respected as soon as possible in order to save the world - and especially the peoples o£ Asia, Africa and Latin America - from possible catastrophe.
For those same reasons of principle, my delegation felt obliged on other occasions not to join with the rest o£ the Security Council. We believe the Council has a number of Charter obligations which it is bound to respect. Above all, we £eel the Council must be consistent. We do not think it has been consistent in the past or that it is being consistent now given its conduct on other cases. I shall not go into those cases, but shall mention only a few names familiar to all members: Palestine, Lebanon, apartheid and Cyprus - and there are many others.
But in addition we have lacked consistency in the decisions the Council has hastily taken since August. The Council, which has boen deft and effective in adopting one well-known resolution after another, has been circumspect towards the growing calls £rom many States under Article 50 of the Charter: we have spent more than a month trying to find minimum agreement on this matter.
The Security Council has been inconsistent on the Imposition of sanctions, which, 1 reiterate, are, in the view of my delegation, inhuman actions because they deny thousands of Innocent people, including children, the elderly and women, a fundamental right no one has the authority to take away: the right to basic foods and appropriate health care.
We have also been inconsistent in hastily adopting decisions without awaiting relevant information from the Secretary-General. Actions have been undertaken or threatened in response to alleged violations of the economic embargo imposed on
(M£«-JUax£eii_dfi_lhmada^^ Iraq, when to date we have not received a single concrete accusation that the embargo is being ignored.
Now the Council is again being asked to state a position that would amount to strengthening the economic measures against Iraq without pausing to consider the adverse consequences this might entail for third parties - which if they later called on us to shoulder our responsibilities under Article 50 of the Charter might only encounter the same old Security Council, slow and circumspect about responding to requests from Member States.
The draft resolution before us not only contains clear threats that other measures - military measures, I presume - will be used against Iraq, but also lashes out against any State that might disregard resolutions already adopted, although to date no information has been received to indicate that any party is doing so; we have never even considered an allegation to that effect.
Moreover - and this is the crux of the draft resolution - those measures would extend to international air communications between Iraq and other States in a manner which, in our view, has very little to do with the charter signed in December 1944, in mid-war, to serve as the basis for the activities of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). It should come as no surprise that it was very hard to incorporate into the original draft resolution a specific reference to the December 1944 charter and its clear provisions.
My delegation views this text as continuing a line of thinking which, in our view, does not bring us closer to a settlement of the conflict, but rather closer to a military outbreak.
I call attention to paragraph 13 of the text before us. It is unfortunate that the sponsors could not accept our request for a separate vote on that paragraph, which contains wording the Permanent Representative of Kuwait had been requesting of the Council since the beginning of the month. He rightly conveyed
(Mr. Alarcon de Quesada, Cuba) the anguish and concern of his Government over the plight of the population of Kuwait under foreign occupation. Today - and in the context of a draft resolution that actually deals with another subject - the Council is finally showing some sensitivity, including sensitivity to the people of Kuwait, which, one would have thought, ought to have been at the centre of our concerns. My delegation regrets that it will be impossible to put paragraph 13 to a separate vote; had this been done, my delegation would have voted in favour of it. We shall not vote in favour of the draft resolution as a whole.
We are aware of the desire to move swiftly to the vote, so I shall conclude by recalling that there is, always has been and always will be a need for the Council to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security, the supreme aspiration of the Charter. I have before me an ancient text which reminds us from the far-distant past that while there is a time for tension, for threats and for the use of force there is also a time for us to be a little more concerned with peace. The quotation is from Ecclesiastes: young Americans turned it into a song popular in the United States and around the world some 30 years ago:
“To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:
"A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace". (The Holy Biblq, Ecclesiastes 3il and 3:8)
Let us hope that some day, sooner rather than later, the Council can finally devote some time to efforts that will not lead to war, but that will give peace a chance.
The Preacher also said,
"Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard". (The Holy Bible, Ecclesiastes 9:16)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I thank the representative of Cuba for the kind words he addressed to the President of the Council.
There are no more speakers wishing to make statements before the voting. The Council will therefore now proceed to vote on draft resolution S/21816.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Canada, China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Malaysia, R nania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yemen, Zaire àgaiatti Cuba
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The result of the voting is as follows: 14 votes in favour, 1 against and no abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 670 (1990).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. BAKER (United States of America): Let me begin by saying how very pleased my country is that you, Mr. President, are chairing this historic meeting. I think that our meeting here today is indeed extraordinary. This marks only the third time in the 45-year history of the Organization that a meeting of the Security Council is being attended by all of the Foreign Ministers of the five permanent maitibers. But then, rarely has the United Nations been confronted by so blatant an act of aggression as the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Rarely has the international community been so united and so determined that aggression should not succeed, Acts have consequences. The stakes, I think, are clear. For international society to permit Iraq to overwhelm a small neighbour and, in effect, simply to erase it from the map would send a very disastrous message. The hopes of our world
(Mr..Bakar, Vnitsd States) for a new, more peaceful, post-cold-war era would be dimmed, if not dashed. The United Nations Charter would be seriously devalued at the very moment when its promise is closer to fulfilment than at any time in its history.
Speaking for the United States of America, 1 want to tell the Council that our hopes for a better world are real. The United Nations Charter embodies the values of the American people and people everywhere who know that might alone cannot be allowed to make right.
Elementary justice and a prudent regard for our own interests have brought about an unprecedented solidarity of countries on this issue. We are engaged in a great struggle and test of wills. We simply cannot allow our hopes and aspirations to be trampled by a dictator's ambitions or by his threats.
Our purpose must be clear and it must at the same time be clearly understood by everyone, including the Government and the people of Iraq. Security Council resolutions 660 (1990) and 662 (1990) establish the way to settle the crisis: complete, immediate and unconditional Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, the restoration of Kuwait's legitimate Government and, of course, the release of all hostages. Until that time the international community, through resolution 661 (1990) and its successor resolutions, has set a high and a rising penalty upon Iraq for each passing day that it fails to abandon its aggression.
These penalties are beginning to take effect, and bellicose language from Baghdad cannot compensate for the perils of isolation. Threats only prolong the needless suffering of the Iraqi people. Iraq has been quarantined because its brutal actions have separated it from the community of nations. There simply cannot be business as usual. In fact, there can be no economic exchanges with Iraq at all.
Today the United States, together with other members of the Council, supports a new resolution and additional measures.
(Mr. Baker. United States) First« we explicitly state that resolution 661 (1990) will include commercial air traffic. This demonstrates once again that the international community is prepared to plug any loophole in the isolation of Iraq.
Secondly, we agree to consider measures against any Government that might attempt to evade the international quarantine. No temptation of minor gain should lead any Government to complicity with Iraq's assault on international legality and decency. I would even say that the more effective the enforcement of sanctions, the more likely there will be a peaceful resolution of this conflict.
Thirdly, we remind the Government of Iraq that it is not free simply to disregard its international obligations, especially the humanitarian provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Each and every day that Iraqi officials flout norms of elementary decency makes it that much more difficult for Iraq to resume its place in the international community and to repair the damage that it has done. On this point, I would like to take note of the call of the Arab League for reparations.
Many thousands of Innocent people have been dislocated as well. That is why the United States supports a co-ordinated and unitary approach to refugee assistance and relief efforts. The appointment of Saddrudin Aga Khan is a major step in this direction.
Fourthly, the Council puts the Government of Iraq on notice that its continued failure to comply could lead to further action, including action under Chapter VII of the Charter. The international community has made clear its desire to exhaust every peaceful possibility for resolving this matter in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter. But we are all very well aware that the Charter envisages the possibility of further individual and collective measures to defend against aggression and flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.
(Mr, Balter, United. States)
Mr. President, you spoke for all of us earlier today when you said: "This is a major affront to all mankind. In the context of recent events, we should remind those who regard aggression as an acceptable form of behaviour that the United Nations has the power to suppress acts of aggression." You continued: "there is ample evidence that this right can be exercised. It will be, if the illegal occupation of Kuwait continues".
It is important, I think, to emphasize that the sanctions we have adopted are aimed at reversing the aggressive policies of the Iraqi Government. 1'hey are not aimed at the Iraqi people, people who are being forced to live with the consequences of an extraordinarily misguided policy.
The Council has acknowledged that its sanctions, as with any disruption, can be costly to many of our Member States. We have a duty to make sure that no nation is crippled simply because it stood for the principles of international order. The United States has worked with other nations to co-ordinate an international effort to provide assistance to those desperately in need.
The passing of the cold war has meant many things, but above all, it has meant a rebirth of hope. The horizons of democracy, of human rights, of national dignity and of economic progress have all been extended, and the result has been a rebirth of the United Nations as well. Suddenly, the vision of the Charter and the promise of international co-operation do seem within reach. In Central America, in Namibia, and perhaps, hopefully soon, in Cambodia and Afghanistan, this Organization makes signal contributions as a peacemaker. We are beginning to control at last the proliferation of conflicts, major and minor, that have exacted so high a price from humanity.
(Mr. Baker, Waited States)
Now, together, we all confront a supreme challenge to the United Nations and to all that it represents, for if this Organization is to fulfil its mission, if peace is to prevail, then Iraq's leader simply must not be allowed to gain from his assault on decency and his assault on basic human values. We must do what justice, what honour and what international peace demand: we must reverse Saddam Hussein's brutal aggression.
Mr. DUMAS (France)t At the outset, allow me to express to you, Sir, our satisfaction at seeing you presiding here and guiding our work, which has already been described as historic. Those congratulations are extended to you personally, as an outstanding figure in all respects, and also to your country, with which my own is linked by very strong and long-standing friendly relations.
The new state of international relations is allowing the United Nations to demonstrate solidarity in dealing with the situations it faces in order to foster this new international order, which we all fervently wish to see. This order aims, as was stressed yesterday by the President of the French Republic addressing the General Assembly, at ensuring, throughout the world, the primacy of law and justice over force and arbitrary acts. The embargo is the instrument of this policy in the case of concern to us now, that of the Gulf.
The resolution we have just adopted, resolution 670 (1990), strengthens, for air transport, means of control similar to those which resolution 665 (1990) laid down for sea transport: by linking authorization for aircraft heading for irag or Kuwait to overfly national airspace to an obligation to touch down for inspection, and by also authorizing a number of restraining measures within limits compatible with international law and without endangering passengers or the security of
aircraft.
(Mr. Dumas, France)
This means that the resolution fully meets the concern expressed by the 12 countries of the European Community and by the members of the Western European Union, which met on 18 September in Paris. In addition, it is one of the measures deemed necessary by the President of the French Republic immediately after the violations committed against our diplomatic mission in Kuwait.
This resolution is important both by virtue of its operative part and also by by virtue of what it signifiest it demonstrates our confidence in the policy of embargo desired by, decided on and implemented on 6 August by the international community. That is has been adopted will reassure those who wonder whether this policy will be effective; it will bring home to those who might be tempted to side-step their responsibilities what those responsibilities are; and it will also show proof of our determination and of our solidarity to those whose economies are suffering the repercussions.
An embargo is a weapon of peace: it was in this spirit that the Council decided on embargo, that the means for monitoring it were strictly set out and that they will be added to yet again tomorrow if it should be necessary.
I should like to take this opportunity to acclaim the outstanding work carried out by the Security Council since the beginning of this crisis. The Council, an expression of the community of nations as a whole and also of all that community's diversity, works to ensure that the international legality of which the United Nations is the depositary is observed.
The international community's unanimity has shown, indeed, that the present crisis does not stem from any supposed North-South confrontation. Rather, it is the basis for the conviction that a new international order, a more peaceful order in which there is greater solidarity, is already within reach today. It also emphasizes that neither is this a case of antagonism between the Western countries
(Mr. Puma.. Frww)
and the Arab world. The Arab world judges that the present crisis, which has its roots in a conflict between two of its members, is making of the Arab world its first victim. France has just one desire: for the Arab world itself to find a political way out of the conflict.
The resolutions of the Council set out the principles on which any solution must necessarily be founded. The Arab world must also ensure that the conditions which gave rise to the crisis do not occur again. That is what France’s message means, as expressed by the President of my country yesterday: we must think in terms of peace if relations are to be established between the States of the Middle Bast, Iraq and Kuwait in particular, which will guarantee the peace and security of the region.
Mr. CLARK (Canada): I should like to begin by expressing my great pleasure that this historic meeting is being presided over by the Foreign Minister of Canada’s good friend and next-door neighbour the Soviet Union.
Our meeting this afternoon at the level of Foreign Ministers marks an extraordinary moment in the history of the United Nations and of the Security Council. It is a clear testimony to the gravity with which we all view the perilous situation in the Persian Gulf. Since Iraq carried out its unilateral and unprovoked invasion of the sovereign State of Kuwait, the Security Council has worked ceaselessly to try to achieve a peaceful settlement of this grievous threat to international peace and security.
Canada condemns unequivocally the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq. The invasion was clearly an act of overt aggression by one State against its neighbour, a flagrant violation of international law and a challenge to the principles of the international order on which world peace depends. Our challenge here today is to continue our collective efforts in persuading Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait and having the legitimate Government restored.
(spoke, in French)
We can take collective pride in the unanimity with which this body has spoken time and time again during the past two months. Our voice has been echoed by the overwhelming majority of the Member states of the United Nations. This crisis is unquestionably grave, but the united response of countries of East and West, North and South, standing together, holds great hope for future collective action through the United Nations.
The resolutions the Council has adopted state in clear terms the path Iraq must follow if it wishes to resume its place as a full member of the international
37 (Mr. Clark. Canada) community. It must first and foremost withdraw totally and unconditionally from Kuwait. Iraq must allow all those who wish to do so to leave Iraq and Kuwait. Canadians are horrified to see that their compatriots are being held against their will. Once it has carried out these measures completely, Iraq will be welcome to pursue its disputes with its neighbours through the channels established for the peaceful resolution of disputes, including the United Nations, channels to which it should have resorted in the first place, (continued in English)
The single voice with which the international community has spoken and the implementation of the resolutions of this Council by the overwhelming majority of the Member States of the United Nations have not been without cost to many of those States, and I wish to pay a special tribute to the individuals and the countries that have paid a significant price for their commitment to upholding the Charter of the United Nations, the rule of international law and human dignity.
Through this crisis Canada has been active on three frontst diplomatically both here at the United Nations and bilaterally, through economic and humanitarian assistance to those most seriously affected, and militarily by the dispatch of ships and planes to the Culf.
Canada views this body as the principal instrument of collective international action to ensure Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait. We have taken important steps together, and are taking an additional step today. Let us leave no doubt that this body stands ready to take further steps if Iraq does not move quickly to do what it is being called upon, time and time again, to do.
The decision of the Government of Canada to send ships as well as a squadron of aircraft to the Gulf to participate in the international effort to deter further Iraqi aggression and to ensure the implementation of United Nations sanctions is a
(Mr. Clark. Canada) visible expression of our national commitment to uphold the Charter of the United Nations.
We all feel the plight of the tens of thousands of displaced person who fled Iraq or Kuwait, leaving behind their personal belongings and their hopes for a better life for themselves and their children, for an uncertain existence in hastily established refugee camps. The Canadian Government responded quickly to their tragic situation.
Today the Council has adopted its ninth resolution, co-sponsored by Canada, in response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Each resolution has been painstakingly considered, and each country here has made its decision in full cognizance of the gravity of the situation and of its possible consequences. This is true above all of the resolution we have adopted today, which responds to the continuing blatant disregard of the Government of Iraq for the resolutions of the Security Council and the will of the International community.
The resolution we have adopted today tightens the sanctions imposed against Iraq and sets out the means by which their effectiveness is to be assured. But it does more than that. It underlines to the Government of Iraq that its continued failure to comply with the resolutions of this Council could lead to further action by the Council under the Charter of the United Nations, with potentially severe consequences.
Our diplomatic efforts to achieve an urgent and peaceful solution to this crisis will continue in the coming days. In carrying out these efforts Canada will work closely with our colleagues on the Council and with the countries of the region. The solidarity of the international community and of the Security Council In responding to this crisis is to be treasured, and we will work ceaselessly to ensure it is maintained.
Mr. HURD (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)! May I say first of all that it is a real pleasure to gather here under your presidency of this extraordinary but necessary meeting of our Council.
Five years ago the Foreign Ministers of the members of the Security Council met round this table to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, and I suppose that meeting marked the beginning of efforts to make the United Nations work more effectively, to end the paralysis which had plagued the cold-war years and prevented the permanent members and the whole Council working together to fulfil their responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
On the debris of the Iron Curtain we are now building a new, a better international order. We have to entrench this new habit of co-operation if we are to be spared the hatred, the bloodshed which have scarred the history of this century so far.
Iraq's seizure of Kuwait faces this post-cold-war world with its first crucial test. So far the signs of the response are good. The United Nations, for the first time in its history, is behaving as the founding fathers intended. The United States, the Soviet Union, China, Western and Eastern Europe, Japan and a decisive majority of Arab and Muslim countries stand together in a unique coalition to defeat aggression. On this continued resolve by all of us rest the hopes for a better future.
(Mr, Hurd. United Kingdom)
The invasion by Iraq of a State Member of the United Nations was an outrage in itself, a breach of international law given greater horror by the pillage of Kuwait and the ruthless treatment of foreign hostages and Kuwaitis alike. But it would be worse still if Iraq's treatment of Kuwait became a pattern for international relations in the years ahead. It must not be so, and that is what is at stake in this series of discussions.
It could be said that aggression, the obliteration of a small State, looting, and maltreatment of hostages is the oldest pattern in the world, but we must not let it return like a disease of which we thought we were slowly ridding ourselves. The Council has to apply firm and fitting treatment.
The representative of Cuba in his statement before the vote looked forward to the day when the Security Council would concentrate its efforts on the search for peace, for peaceful answers to the problems of the world. But I would say to the representative that that day is today. It is precisely by passing this resolution, by tightening sanctions and making them more effective that we are working for the peaceful reversal of aggression and for a peaceful end to this crisis.
There are many small countries with reason to fear the unfriendly attentions of a more powerful neighbour. There are many international frontiers whose existence is resented by one or other party. Given human nature, there might be, there are likely to be, from time to time, tyrants and demagogues entranced by the thought of appearing in front of the cameras to declare that this or that territory has been reunited with the fatherland. If Saddam Hussein is allowed to get away with the spoils of conquest, then other would-be aggressors will take heart, and that is what we cannot allow to happen.
None of us round this Council table or in the publics whom we represent relish the possibility of war, and that is why President Saddam Hussein is quite wrong to describe us as warmongers. He is the one who has used force, but because the
(Mr. Hurd. United Kingdom) invasion was so quickly accomplished it is sometimes overlooked that Kuwaiti soldiers died defending their country after an act of open war. That is a fact of which the Foreign Minister of Kuwait, whom I am very glad to see in his place here, is entitled to remind us. The threat to the security and stability of the Gulf comes from Iraq, and that is why such a large coalition of peace-keeping forces has been assembled there. It is not the United States ranged against Iraq, but the States united. Every member of this coalition against aggression wants to see the independence of Kuwait restored by peaceful means, and that is why we have to make every effort to make the United Nations embargo against Iraq effective. That is why we are meeting today, that is why we have just voted - to add another brick to the international wall being constructed around this aggressor.
So success in this effort is indispensable to us all - if possible, achieved by peaceful means. This broad alliance, this concert of nations, has to reverse the aggression, restore legitimacy to Kuwait, and secure the release of the foreign nationals being held hostage. In doing this we do not just do justice to Kuwait; we can strengthen hopes of a more secure world order, an order based on the implementation of the resolutions of this Council rather than their rejection, whether in the Middle East or elsewhere. The other way lies failure. The other way lies the vanishing of hopes for a better future, leaving us once again - as so often before - in a world where the guiding principle of international relations is anarchy, punctuated by outbursts of destructive violence.
That is the essence of this discussion under your guidance, Mr. President. That is why the aggressor has to lose. That is why my country and the United Nations cannot rest until this goal has been achieved.
Mr. PAASIO (Finland): Let me join the other speakers before me in expressing the pleasure of my delegation at seeing you. Sir, assuming the presidency of this meeting of the Security Council.
(Mr. Paaaig. Fialand)
The Security Council meets today under unusual circumstances. The background for today's session is tragic. In the midst of a crisis, the Security Council has just adopted another resolution to follow up those adopted since early August under Chapter VII of the Charter. This new resolution follows logically the action already taken by tbe Council in order to deal with the invasion and occupation of the State of Kuwait by Iraq and to bring the crisis to a peaceful end.
Mindful of the fact that the Security Council is intended to act as the supreme organ for collective security, we hope that the holding of this meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers adds emphasis to the action the Council has taken in order to solve the crisis.
In our view, the adoption of today's resolution will give a clear signal of the determination of the Security Council to continue to uphold and strengthen the principle of collective security.
I wish to take this opportunity in order to set out briefly the principles on which Finland has based its policies with regard to the occupation of Kuwait by Iraq.
As a small, neutral country, Finland has a vital interest in promoting the development of a peaceful and rational world order based on the universal collective security system provided by the Charter. Collective security implies in actual fact that the security of Kuwait is also the security of all other States, in particular of the smaller Member States.
Finland is against the use of force by one State against the territorial Integrity or political Independence of any other State. We are against occupation resulting from such use of force. We believe that all disputes between States must be settled by peaceful means.
We believe that the authority of the United Nations must not be undermined by tolerating, in flagrant violation of the Charter, the purported annexation of one Member State by another.
(Mn Paas io < Finland)
The fact that it has not always been possible in the past to apply the rules of Chapter VII of the Charter and summon the collective strength of the international community against aggression is no argument against the application of effective sanctions today.
We want to live in a world where the Charter is respected and where everybody knows that, if needed, the Security Council has the will and the capability to use effectively the instruments at its disposal. This is now being demonstrated by the Council in concrete action.
There is one message which in the midst of the crisis cannot be emphasized too often. It is that the world community wants a peaceful outcome to the crisis caused by the invasion and occupation of Kuwait. It must be based on the resolutions of the Security Council We know that sincere efforts have been made in order to persuade Iraq to abandon its present misguided and dangerous policies and to withdraw from Kuwait. We kn&w that the Secretary-General is readily available for further discussions with the Iraqi leadership, if such discussions could be useful. The road to a peaceful outcome is clearly marked. What is needed is for Iraq to choose that road and fully implement the resolutions adopted oy the Security Council.
(Mn_Eaafiisu-Iinlaa4)
Looking beyond the present situation, we see that there is a need for long-range international efforts to promote peace and stability in the whole region of the Middle East once the occupation of Kuwait has been brought to an end. The countries of the region will have the main responsibility for such efforts. They could be assisted by the United Nations and its other Member States in accordance with the principles of the Charter. Finland is ready to do its share.
The United Nations, representing the collective will and the collective strength of the international community, is now facing a challenge. This challenge must be met. The benefits will be greater security, greater justice and better opportunities for equitable development for all.
Mr, MUSHOBEKWA KALIMBA WA KATANA (Zaire) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to congratulate you and thank you for convening this meeting of the Security Council at the political level of Foreign Ministers of the States members of the Security Council in order to consider once again the situation obtaining in the Persian Gulf.
On 2 August 1990 the world awakened to the shock of the events that had just taken place in the Gulf. Iraq, a Member State of the United Nations, a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and a member of the Arab League, had just committed an act of aggression and invaded Kuwait, a sovereign State and a full member of the aforementioned organizations. This act, contrary to all the principles of international law, to the Charter of the United Nations and to the principle of the non-use of force in relations between States, met with outrage and condemnation throughout the world.
The reaction of the Security Council, a principal organ of the United Nations entrusted by the Charter with ensuring international peace and security, was the prompt adoption of resolution 660 (1990), in which the international community
(Mr. Mushobekwa Kalimba wa Katana.
Zaira) called for the unconditional and immediate withdrawal of Iraq from Kuwait and the restoration of the sovereignty, national independence, integrity and legitimacy of the Government of Kuwait.
My country, Zaire, reaffirms the provisions of resolution 660 (1990) and it believes that if the resolution is accepted and implemented by Iraq it provides the best possible solution and the only way to avoid a widespread conflict in the region.
Zaire, which has voted consistently for, and sometimes co-sponsored, all the resolutions of the Security Council on the Gulf crisis, had hoped that these clear and precise messages sent to Baghdad would receive a favourable response. To all these steps taken in the quest for an honourable and peaceful settlement of the crisis, Iraq has responded with contempt and provocations.
The international community, In adopting resolution 670 (1990), at this meeting, following its resolution 661 (1990), wishes to send one further message to the authorities in Baghdad to cease defying its determination to ensure in the present circumstances the collective security of all its Member States.
By the resolution we have just adopted, Zaire does not wish to bring Iraq to its knees but rather wishes to make sure that no State, no matter how powerful, intends in the future to use brutal military force to crush the weak.
The Security Council, in having recourse to Chapter VIZ of the Charter, something very rare in the history of our Organization, is confronting Iraq with its responsibilities in the eyes of the world and calling on it to withdraw its tfuvpS uuvvuultlvSally £iw. Kuwait so that the multinational troops stationed in the region at the request of sovereign Governments would withdraw in turn. Zaire pledges itself to that.
If the roots of the crisis are eliminated, its effects will disappear also.
Mr. QIAN Qichen (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Sir, at the outset, please allow me to pay a tribute to you, the President of the current meeting of the Security Council. I am convinced that under your guidance this meeting at the ministerial level will proceed smoothly. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations. He has made commendable efforts to enhance the role of this world Organization in safeguarding peace, promoting development and strengthening co-operation.
It is the Chinese Government's consistent position that relations between States should be established on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries should be fully respected. In international relations China always opposes armed invasion and annexation of one sovereign State by another and advocates that disputes between States should be resolved through peaceful dialogue and friendly consultation without resorting to force. Based on those principled positions, China has voted in favour of Security Council resolution 660 (1990) and all subsequent relevant resolutions, including resolution 670 (1990), which has just been adopted, with a view to safeguarding the basic norms governing international relations and restoring peace and security in the Gulf region.
Regrettably, Iraq has shown no political will thus far to comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call on the Iraqi Government to heed the strong aspirations of the international community, adopt a co-operative attitude towards the Security Council, Immediately stop its occupation of Kuwait and withdraw its troops from that country.
(Mr.-Qian fliehen« China)
la order to maintain world peace and restore peace and security in the Gulf region, the Chinese Government advocates that the current Gulf crisis be resolved politically and by peaceful means. We support the role played by the Security Council, and we also support the extensive efforts made by the Arab States on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, the Chinese Government supports the United Nations Secretary-General in his continued efforts at mediation and good offices. At present tension in the Gulf region continues to rise, and this is pregnant with the danger of greater armed conflict. We understand and respect the necessary defensive steps taken by some Gulf countries out of consideration for their own security. At the same time, we believe that every effort should be made to ease the present grave tension. We in principle are not in favour of military involvement in the Gulf by big Powers, for such Involvement will only make the situation even more complicated. We call on the countries concerned to exercise maximum restraint so as to prevent further deterioration of the situation. Use of force in any name is unacceptable to us.
We have voted in favour of the Security Council resolutions in the belief that they are aimed at promoting a political settlement of the Gulf crisis by peaceful means.
I wish to stress here that in implementing the provisions of resolution 670 (1990), concerning civil aircraft, the countries concerned should strictly abide by the relevant stipulations of international law and take rigorous steps to prevent any action that may endanger the safety of civil aircraft and the people on board.
(MijJliajLQidimLja^
We wish to express our concern over the plight of the foreign nationals inside Iraq and Kuwait, and appeal for guarantees of their personal safety, freedom and basic subsistence needs. We deeply sympathize with the countries that have suffered economic difficulties resulting from implementing resolutions on sanctions. We hope that the Security Council and the international community will take practical and effective measures to alleviate their difficulties.
The international community desires an early settlement of the Gulf crisis, while a comprehensive political settlement of the Middle East question is also what all the international community wishes to see. We are convinced that the solution to the Gulf crisis and the Middle East question will lead to enduring peace and security in the region.
The Gulf crisis has made people ponder the question: What kind of order should be established in the world so that peace can be preserved? In our view, it has been proved by post-war history that the kind of order that is based on military might and the use or threat of force will not stand in the end, whereas the five principles of mutual respect for each other's sovereignty and territorial Integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence are full of vitality. The current Gulf crisis is the result of the breach of these norms, while efforts towards its solution should be guided by the observance and defence of these norms. Force should be avoided and no efforts should be spared to achieve a peaceful settlement.
Mr. JARAMILLO (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): Before I begin, I should like to convey to you, Sir, the pleasure we feel at seeing you presiding over the Council. Colombia has close bonds of friendship and co-operation with your country. The fact that a Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union is presiding over the Security Council for the first time in history, and that most Foreign
(Mr. Jaramillo. Colombia) Ministers of the other members are present here is in and of itself indicative of the historic importance of the item on which we have been convened.
On 2 August this year, the world was surprised to see its hopes deferred for a lasting and stable peace and a period of accelerated development. The invasion of Kuwait by Iraq dashed those hopes and brought about a reaction from the entire international community. Throughout its history, Colombia has emphatically upheld a position of condemnation of all acts that directly or indirectly violate universal harmony, the general principles of international law, or the basic norms of peaceful co-existence between peoples.
As a matter of principle, we have opposed the use or the threat of the use of force as a solution to international conflicts. We have also rejected all illegal forms of incorporating territory. That is why we voted in favour of the Security Council resolutions seeking a peaceful settlement of the dispute arising from the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq and the subsequent annexation of the territory to Kuwait, thus violating the most important norms of international law and disregarding all the rights of the Kuwaiti people.
We must recall that the main factor triggering the confrontation has been oil. If Iraq, Kuwait and the rest of the Gulf did not produce oil, the crisis would probably not exist. That raw material is of vital importance for the planet and in particular for industrialized countries. The world did not learn the lessons of 1973, and that lapse has given rise to the new confrontation.
Whatever the solution to the present situation, the agenda of tha United Nations must include as a matter of the highest priority the study and adoption of permanent measures whereby a world forum attended by consumers and producers could establish the parameters for dealing with that commodity, which is so vital to International life, peace and security.
(Mt. Jaramillo« Colombia)
Colombia doer, not believe in "good" invasions. It considers that, given the Security Council's attitude towards Iraq, a clear message is being sent to all who may be thinking o£ settling conflicts by violating the basic principles of peaceful co-existence among peoples. This may be an appropriate time to ponder the role of the Security Council - the one it has played and the one it will continue to play -in the context of settling conflicts that threaten world peace and security.
My delegation welcomes the role of the Security Council in the Persian Gulf crisis. Its action has brought about world solidarity and represents at this time the only hope for a peaceful solution. Had the Council acted similarly in the past, how many conflicts and how much bloodshed could have been avoided? For 45 years, the specific interests of the major Powers took precedence over the collective interests of world peace. The veto was used indiscriminately during that period to protect those privileges.
The consolidation of international peace and security must undoubtedly be the final goal towards which all of the functioning of the Security Council must be channelled in the future. That is an increasingly complex goal because world order is threatened by such structural factors as under-development, extreme poverty and the irrational use of natural resources. If the developing world fails to solve its problems and does not achieve the minimum conditions fcr subsistence that will allow it to live in dignity, all efforts to secure peace will be to no avail.
To achieve harmonious and peaceful coexistence requires sound foundations that are attained only when levels of development allow for meeting basic needs. If we lack clear policies intended to eliminate poverty and to promote an appropriate economic and social environment, international peace and security will be in constant danger.
' Mr .Jaramillo, Colombia)
Ths balance of power in the world has changed. It is obvious that new rules and elements offering clarity are needed. The move from confrontation to understanding between the major Powers inevitably entails a new order. That may not be easily found, but in any event it calls for approval by the great Powers. The greater importance and responsibility of the Council in the new framework makes it necessary for there to be greater co-ordination and a careful understanding of the various forces included in it in order to obtain decisive consensus.
Peace will only be possible when there is an appropriate balance of forces, when it cun sustain itself without coercion or abuse. As the Secretary-General aptly says in his report this year on the work of the Organization:
"It has bean strikingly demonstrated that a status quo based primarily on the military factor is bound to prove fragile". (A/4S/1. o. 2)
We are faced with the enormous responsibility of contributing to a definition of new rules of the game to govern relations among all nations on the basis of equity and respect for the cardinal principles of the United Nations Charter, in particular the self-determination of peoples and respect for human rights.
Matters as abhorrent as obsession with military security and the ensuing arms race distort priorities and place economic and social progress in a secondary role, thus reinforcing feelings of general insecurity and perpetuating differences between those who have traditionally enjoyed well-being and progress and those who wallow in poverty and destitution.
(MLL-jIiwamlllex-J^
The efforts undertaken by Colombia to obtain the support of the Organization for initiatives to control the illegal weapons trade are well known. Although we are receiving more favourable responses, we have not yet achieved the consensus on our initiative that would give it validity and strength. We cannot understand why there is such insistence on wasting enormous amounts of resources and weapons which merely represent terror and devastation. The horrors of war, with its wake of suffering and destruction, cannot find justification in our times. The world still remembers the horrible military experiences of the last 50 years; the wounds have not yet healed and the results were not worth so much pain and devastation.
We wish, above all, to appeal for peace and reflection. We wish to insist on the urgent need to exhaust all the recourses to dialogue and to explore all the possible avenues of diplomacy and understanding, convinced as we are that any military confrontation would be a tragedy which we would regret for the rest of our lives.
On behalf of the people and Government of Colombia, I make an urgent appeal to all leaders and rulers who hold in their hands the crucial decisions at this moment. We cannot resign ourselves to thinking that the only solution to the problems of the Persian Gulf can be found in a war in which innocent lives would be sacrificed and wounds would be opened which would take years to heal.
We think the time has come to ensure that all the roads to dialogue and diplomatic mediation are kept open. The intransigence of any of the parties is a real obstacle to the quest for a solution, and such intransigence will be held responsible for the tragedy.
Security Council resolution 660 (1990) recommended the intervention of Arab countries to assist in the solution of the crisis. I believe we should encourage by all possible means an Arab solution to the conflict between Iraq and Kuwait. As Latin Americans we know from our experience that regional participation in the
(Mr. Jaramillo. Colombia) solution of problems frequently offers more possibilities for success than the intervention of extra-regional Powers. The Central American process of recent years is clear proof of this assertion.
Today, as we did on 2 August in connection with another resolution, we voted in favour of resolution 670 (1990), which further develops resolution 661 (1990) on an embargo against Iraq. We would have wished that, together with this resolution that we have just adopted, there would be another one calling on all parties, and in particular on the countries of the region, to undertake maximum efforts for peace, tolerance and harmony and to refrain from any acts which might contribute to making it more difficult to find formulas for a peaceful settlement. We hope that a draft resolution along those lines can be submitted to the Council with our co-sponsorship in the next few days.
We are aware of the price of, and the suffering brought about by, an embargo but we prefer that to the price of war.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I thank the Foreign Minister of Colombia for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. ESSY (Côte d'Ivoire) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, it is a great pleasure for me to see you here presiding over the work of the Council. Your country and you, Sir, have made an enormous contribution to the present development of International relations, thus allowing our Council today to play the role given it by the founding fathers of the Charter.
My delegation welcomes this meeting of the Council at the ministerial level, although, for reasons over which we have no control, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country was not able to be present this evening, much to his regret. Indeed, the seriousness of the question on our agenda requires co-ordinated action on the highest level.
bhs/pm
(Mr. Easy, Çgte d'lYQÀEa)
I should like first, on this solemn occasion, to reaffirm in the Council that Côte d'Ivoire is a peaceful country which cannot tolerate any violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member State of our Organization. States such as ours can guarantee their existence among nations only through scrupulous respect for international law. Therefore, they cannot accept recourse to force to settle any dispute, regardless how serious.
Kuwait, as a State believing in international law, as a full-fledged Member of our Organization, as a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and as a sovereign State whose only fault was that it was a small country and a neighbour of a warlike military Power, has the right to expect the international community’s support and protection. Côte d'Ivoire, which has long advocated the use of dialogue for the peaceful settlement of all disputes and conflicts, believes that in present-day International relations and in the United Nations system there is a whole legal arsenal and an array of practices for the peaceful settlement of conflicts of all kinds.
It is most deplorable that the question of the annexation of Kuwait by Iraq, despite all the resolutions which have so far been adopted by the Security Council and which are all part of the quest for a peaceful solution to this conflict, continues to threaten mankind with the spectre of war.
Iraq must understand that there is still time for it to reverse its shaky positions, to heed the call of reason, to recognize the fact that the Security Council cannot fail to shoulder its responsibilities, given the flagrant violation of the Charter and the breach of peace and international security of which Iraq is guilty.
The primacy of law over the use of force is binding on all; for if our Council is not able to take decisions to halt once and for all behaviour which violates the
(Mr. Esav, Côte d'Ivoire) international legal order and the most sacred rights of peoples to peace, independence and development, if force wins out with impunity over law, then our Organisation will wittingly contribute to the perpetuation of a process of the inevitable self-destruction of our society.
Côte d'Ivoire has sponsored and voted in favour of the provision for the strengthening of sanctions contained in the present resolution because it believes that, in the present context, that is the only option allowing us to avoid war. Iraq must listen to reason and avoid forcing the international community to resort to actions with incalculable consequences, above all for the developing countries, which, more than ever before, need peace in international relations to fulfil the legitimate right of their peoples to development.
Mr. ABU HASSAN (Malaysia): Mr. President it gives me great pleasure to see you presiding over this meeting. Given the issue before us, the tested capabilities and experience that you bring to the presidency will serve us well. Your country, the Soviet Union, has also impressed many of us for its constructive internationalism and world view contributing towards the defusion of conflicts, rapprochement among Powers and an enhanced role for the United Nations.
(Mr. Abu Hassan, Malaysia)
The Security Council is meeting today at the level of foreign ministers. The implications of this are not lost on outside observers. Malaysia supports the idea, long held by the Soviet Union, that the Security Council must, at appropriate times, meet at this level to weigh and pronounce on important and critical Issues. Such an issue brings us together today, but our meeting must not be taken to mean that we are ganging up and that we are closing the door on Iraq.
This is the eighth resolution adopted on the crisis since 2 August. Malaysia has steadfastly supported all the resolutions, as it has done again today, in furtherance of the objective of the international community: to bring about the withdrawal of Iraqi forces and the reinstatement of Kuwait. Each of the resolutions was painstakingly examined by Malaysia and others. In some cases we were less than happy over some aspects but, given the twin objectives I spelled out earlier, we went along in order to project, as we must, an International consensus.
Malaysia has been equally painstaking in examining this resolution. To apply sanctions on air traffic and transportation is risky and complicated. It was for that reason that Malaysia insisted that in operative paragraph 7 the resolution refer to the Chicago Convention. We realize that the thrust and objective of this resolution is, as in previous cases, to make sanctions effective and ensure compliance; that is the sole reason why Malaysia felt duty-bound to support the resolution. However, we cannot but feel perturbed over the apparent headlong rush, moving from one resolution to another in a period of seven weeks.
The question may be asked whether enough time is given for each resolution to take effect. Are we moving at this speed to make sanctions effective, or are we readying ourselves early for a situation where we will conclude that sanctions are not effective and that other measures must therefore be taken? Malaysia will not accept the latter course being applied. We do not accept that war is inevitable or
(Mr■ Abu Hassan, Malaysia) that we are escalating towards a confrontation. Malaysia believes our sense of uneasiness is shared by many outside the Council and that the Council should take stock of where it is going.
Many countries too are enduring much suffering because of the sanctions that we have had to apply. Malaysia is not satisfied that, as an international community and within the operations of the Sanctions Committee established under resolution 661 (1990), we have addressed ourselves enough to assisting countries that petition for help under Article 50. Much more has to be done. We cannot turn a blind eye to the fate of hundreds of thousands of foreigners, particularly from Asia, who are caught stranded in Kuwait and Iraq. Humanitarian cognizance must be accorded in such situations, and the Sanctions Committee should move swiftly, without political impediments being thrown in its way.
Malaysia, as a principle, is averse to the involvement of the armed forces of major Powers in any region. That we had to be party to authorizing the use of forces of certain countries in respect of resolution 665 (1990) does not sit easy with us. Further, the line of authority is not satisfactorily spelled out in resolution 665 (1990) and effect has yet to be given to the resolution’s provision on reporting to the Council. We know that the forces of these countries are there also upon the request of Kuwait under Article 51. We understand well the misery of Kuwait and the anxiety of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States. However, as a non-aligned member and coming from a region which has been a casualty of the battles and wars fought by armies of major Powers, we fear the consequences of a long-term presence of military forces of major Powers. That is why Iraq should respond positively to the Council's resolutions, particularly resolution 660 (1990), and remove the reason for the foreign presence and avoid the outbreak of
war.
In a broader context, the collective manner in which the Council has reacted to the Gulf crisis has marked a revival of the concept of collective security and has raised hopes with regard to the role that the United Nations can play in the maintenance of international peace and security in the post-cold-war era, which is just beginning to unfold. Malaysia, and I am sure many of our non-aligned friends, would like to see that spirit of co-operation and determination sustained so that the members of the Council can act together in resolving many existing regional conflicts. In this connection, Malaysia feels encouraged by the co-operation between the five permanent members of the Council in working out a framework for a comprehensive political settlement for Cambodia which has readily been endorsed by the other members of the Council, leading to the adoption of resolution 668 (1990), on Cambodia, only a few days ago.
Malaysia, like many other countries, including yours, Mr. President, believes that the present crisis In the Gulf underlines the urgent need for more intensified efforts to be made to resolve other crises In the region, in particular on the question of Palestine. The Gulf crisis Is not directly linked to the Palestine problem and other issues, but there can be no hope of a stable and secure Middle East If an equal commitment to their solution is not made by the Council.
The record of the Council as regard. Palestine and the Israeli occupation of Palestine is dismal. Various vetoes have been applied that have virtually paralysed the efforts of the Council and curtailed the initiatives of the Secretary-General on these issues. Even on the obvious Issue of the treatment of Palestinians In the occupied territories there has been no redress. It is as if Israel has protectors in the Council and different standards are applied with regard to Israel. This does not speak well of the Council and those that wrongly
protect Israel.
Israel's actions, well documented, are recognized by the
(Mr. Abu Hassan, Malaysia)
international community aa nothing short of aggression. Israel must be made to withdraw from the occupied territories, just as we are now applying all sorts of measures to make Iraq withdraw from Kuwait. There can be no double standards in the Security Council. And we do not have to wait for a solution to the Gulf crisis before the full attention of the Council is devoted to the actions of Israel and the situation in the occupied territories. If Israel continues to be obdurate and unresponsive, the Council must not hesitate to apply all the pressure and sanctions needed to ensure compliance.
Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia): Let me take this opportunity to express my satisfaction. Sir, at seeing you presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. Given your diplomatic skills and your vast experience in international affairs, it is most opportune that you should be at the helm of this important meeting.
Seven weeks have elapsed since the Security Council adopted resolution 660 (1990) in the early hours of 2 August 1990 in response to the crude and brutal invasion of Kuwait by Iraq. That resolution, it will be recalled, demanded that Iraq immediately and unconditionally withdraw its invading forces from Kuwait and called for the restoration of the legitimate Government of Kuwait. Since then the Council has adopted eight additional resolutions with a view to addressing many aspects of this problem. And yet neither resolution 660 (1990) nor the subsequent resolutions adopted by the Council has been complied with.
Regrettably, Iraq has consistently and unceremoniously defied the international consensus on the removal of its forces from Kuwait. Even as we speak there is no indication that Iraq is inclined to change its position and fulfil the requirements of resolution 660 (1990). In fact, to exacerbate matters, disquieting statements emanating from Baghdad continue with considerable frequency and intensity. Indeed, the situation is fraught with grave consequences for international peace and security.
On the other hand, the determination of the international community as demonstrated by the firm position of the Security Council leaves no room for equivocation. The Council's latest action with respect to Iraq's aggression against Kuwait is significant an>l Uiiueilluoo the Council's pxvutal CvutrluutluS to international peace and security.
(MnJJiakaUiliiQEia)
It is evident that the United Nations is composed largely oi small, often weak and vulnerable, nations which look to the Charter as the best means of preserving their sovereignty and integrity. Consequently, the world cannot condone a situation where the strong can subdue the weak and the small. In that regard, the decisive manner in which the Security Council responded to the Iraqi invasion has won the United Nations enhanced respect as the embodiment of a just international order.
Ethiopia's position with regard to Iraq's invasion, and its close co-operation with the rest of the Council members to bring about the withdrawal of Iraqi troops and the restoration of the legitimate Government of Kuwait, are prompted by our country's commitment to the system of collective security. We strongly believe that the resolve and solidarity manifested by the international community in defence of the rule of law are the surest means of deterring aggression.
Speaking with one voice and acting In concert, the Security Council has so far made ground-breaking accomplishments, in that regard, its resolution 665 (1990) was a broad and imaginative application of the Charter designed to meet the challenges posed by Iraq's expansionist policies. It is my delegation's conviction that resolution 670 (1990), which we have just adopted, complements the action the Council took earlier and will render sanctions against Iraq more complete and effective.
Although Iraq's attitude thus far leads much to be desired, it is our hope that the crisis in the Gulf will eventually be settled peacefully. In this connection I wish to reiterate Ethiopia's commitment to the peaceful resolution of the crisis. A peaceful resolution has to include, first and foremost, the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi troops and the reinstatement of the sovereign Government of Kuwait. Any arrangement or formula that falls short of the
(Mr Dinka. Ethiopia!
urgent realization of the stated objectives of resolution 660 (1990) would not be just and durable. To that end, my Government is prepared to work closely with other Council members to bring about the attainment of the goals we have set for ourselves in the successive resolutions the Council has adopted in the past few weeks.
Mr. NASTASE (Romania): At the outset. Sir, I should like to express my pleasure at seeing you in the Chair as President of the Security Council. I have the privilege of greeting you as the representative of a friendly country, as a great diplomat and as a promoter of the ideals of the United Nations in international life.
We came here to adopt the ninth Security Council resolution under the agenda item "The situation between Iraq and Kuwait". A while ago we adopted resolution 670 (1990), which was meant to strengthen the sanctions and other measures against Iraq in conformity with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. As a sponsor of that resolution, Romania attaches particular importance to all its provisions and believes that its implementation could play a decisive role in the peaceful settlement of the Gulf crisis.
This is not a new stand for my country, but a clear reaffirmation of a constant position which has been expressed here from the very first hours of the crisis. Allow me to recall it briefly: In early August, six hours after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, the Romanian Government made known its stand, stating that no reason whatsoever could justify the use of force against a sovereign and independent State and asking for a cessation of hostilities and the immediate withdrawal of military forces behind the national borders of the two States. Romania was actively involved in, and contributed directly to, the drafting of
(MnJIflatassit-taanIa) resolutions condemning the invasion of Kuwait and demanding the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Iraqi forces and the application against Iraq of the sanctions provided for by the Charter.
In the following days, the Romanian Government enacted the domestic regulations necessary to implement Security Council resolution 661 (1990) and to make sure the sanctions were observed by all Romanian citizens, firms and institutions. By doing that, my country expressed its strong commitment to morality and legality in all spheres of domestic and international life. Indeed, it is the very sense and the very purpose of our Organization that are at stake at this critical moment. It is unquestionable that the most immediate answers to the questions arising from the serious situation in the Gulf lie in the application of the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the resolutions of the Security Council.
Xn that respect, one of the most encouraging aspects is the fact that the Security Council has demonstrated its capacity to exercise its powers and functions. Eight previous resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the item under consideration are a vivid illustration of the firm resolve of this body to perform the responsibilities entrusted to it by the world community of nations. The Council has reflected not only the views of its members but also the general feeling of the world community of nations by condemning the annexation of a sovereign State and a Member of the United Nations. The Council has also given expression to an important requirement deriving from international law by reminding Iraq that Its acts which are contrary to the Charter of the United Nations are null and void.
(MrJistm£_R2iiiaaia)
At the same time, mention should be made of the determination shown by the Council through its formal and informal activities to ensure compliance with Security Council resolutions by maximum use of political and diplomatic means. In this connection my Government would like to reiterate its high appreciation for the personal eff .s and initiatives of Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations, who put bis valuable experience at the service of our common endeavours.
Besolution 670 (1990), which we have adopted today, calls upon all States to carry out their obligations to ensure strict and complete compliance with resolution 661 (1990) and confirms that it applies to all means of transport, including aircraft. The resolution contains a number of provisions of a far-reaching nature, with a clear intent to oblige Iraq to put into effect earlier resolutions of the Security Council.
I pledge my country's full support for resolution 670 (1990). My Government will take further measures for its full implementation, as it did earlier after the adoption of resolution 661 (1990). Despite the difficulties with which my country is confronted as a result of the implementation of sanctions against Iraq, Bomania will strictly observe and fully apply the provisions of resolutions 661 (1990) and 670 (1990).
In the same context, I cannot fail to mention that for Bomania the strict observance of sanctions against Iraq means considerable losses, estimated at more than $3 billion. The hardship is even greater owing to the already difficult condition of the Bomanlan economy. Those losses and difficulties come at a moment that is of decisive importance for the economic reforms in Bomania, and they generate additional suffering in the lives of our people.
(Mr. Nastase. Romania)
Howovor, we are convinced that certain international values are vital to the world community as a whole. One such value is solidaxity. It has been eloquently demonstrated by the very activity of the Security Council. It is in the spirit of that solidarity that we believe every effort should be made to find solutions to alleviate the difficulties of those countries which, by being faithful to the decisions of the Security Council, are seriously affected in the economic and social fields by consequences resulting from the implementation of resolutions imposing economic sanctions on Iraq.
In accordance with Article 50 of the United Nations Charter, a number of countries, including Romania, requested consultations, which, in our view, should be action-oriented and should facilitate the identification of solutions for assistance to be given to those countries seriously affected by the implementation of sanctions against Iraq.
We welcomed the adoption of resolution 669 (1990), In which the Security Council entrusted the Committee established under resolution 661 (1990) with the task of examining requests for assistance under the provisions of Article 50 of the Charter and making recommendations to the President of the Security Council for appropriate action. We express the hope that the Committee will perform that task in a constructive way, to the full satisfaction of all the parties concerned.
It has been stated by many States and by the Secretary-General that the invasion and purported annexation of Kuwait have evoked a historic response from the Security Council. The present meeting of the Council at the ministerial level is an event that emphasizes the high political value of that response. The violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of International law cannot be undertaken with impunity. Resolution 670 (1990) is clear testimony to that fact. In this respect, the Security Council has made a contribution to the peaceful
(Mr, Nastase. Romania) settlement of the Gulf crisis that cannot be underestimated. It has made it crystal-clear that progress cannot be achieved on the overall situation in the area until the present crisis is set on the way towards a solution in accordance with the position taken by the Security Council.
Resolution 670 (1990) is additional proof that the international community is determined to reject the flagrant violations of the basic principles of international law. We share the view that in situations of conflict the United Nations can offer just and dignified solutions. We sincerely hope that the peace-making capacity of the United Nations will be strengthened, along with its authority in ensuring the rule of law in international affairs.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I shall now make a statement on behalf of the Soviet Union.
First of all, I should l..ke to take note of the unusual nature of today's meeting of the Security Council, with the participation of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Council's member States. This may be the first time that discussion of a specific issue in the Council has taken place at such a high level, a fact that undoubtedly shows the critical nature of the present situation and the desire to resolve it as speedily as possible.
Behind the brief words appearing on the agenda of today's meeting there is more than simply "the situation between Iraq and Kuwait". The Security Council, like the whole of the International community, has the task of settling a most drastic crisis that has put the firmness of the existing civilised world order to th, tait. Iraq's aggression against Kuwait ana the anaulnn annasatlan af that State are a glaring violation of the fundamental norms governing international relations and of the most important principles of our Organization's constitution, the Charter of the United Nations.
(The President)
Notwithstanding the diversity of the views expressed, we are ail united in believing that diktat by force, the flouting of what we know as international law, can have no place in the civilised world. A reaffirmation of this is to be found in the decisions taken by the Security Council, which reflect the demand of the entire world community for the unconditional restoration of the national independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and legitimate Government of the State of Kuwait. A first step in that direction must be, as stipulated in the Council’s resolutions, the unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
Here, I would digress from my prepared text for a moment to say the following: Various views were expressed here and various approaches to the text of the resolution we have just adopted were suggested. One delegation voted against it. I would not exaggerate the importance of that fact. I think that the most important thing is the condemnation of aggression and the demand for the withdrawal of troops from Kuwait, and on that point we are unanimous - both the delegations that voted in favour of the resolution and the one that voted against it.
Hope that those goals will be achieved is nourished by the fact that the United Nations has assumed the role intended for it when it was founded, the transformation of the the Security Council into an effective mechanism for the maintenance of international peace and security. By acting consistently and without delay the Council has justified the mandate entrusted to it by the Charter. No one should have any doubt about its unshakeable policy, which expresses the will of united nations to oppose resolutely a policy of faits accomplis and the illegal actions of the Iraqi authorities and armed forces directed against foreign citizens detained in Kuwait and Iraq, against embassies in Kuwait and their staffs and against Kuwaiti citizens and their property.
(The President)
Today's resolution is yet another, inevitable step, a perfectly logical step, given Iraq's stubborn refusal to implement the decisions of the Security Council. It is a completely legitimate reaction to Iraq's continuing challenge to the international community.
I wish to emphasize that this decision of the Council is likewise aimed at ensuring absolute compliance with the sanctions against Iraq and is in strict conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international law. At the same time, the expansion of the sphere of monitoring the full application of the sanctions laid down by the Council is something we regard as a continuation of the tireless efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful solution of the conflict.
I cannot fail to mention the fact that from the very start of the crisis, the Soviet Union has placed the main stress in its policy on collective efforts based on full use of the rights and capabilities of the United Nations and on the need to resolve the crisis through non-mllitary, political and diplomatic methods. We note with satisfaction that this approach is shared here within the United Nations as well.
The preference expressed at Helsinki by the Presidents of the USSR and the United States, Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Bush, for a peaceful settlement of the crisis was a sign of the times.
By joining our voice to the Council's voice of collective reason, we shall continue a most active dialogue with Iraq and with all parties affected by the crisis• We are convinced that the focus of joint efforts must be a de-escalation of the crisis and a political solution.
This does not, however, diminish our determination to achieve a cessation of the aggression, and if the steps now being taken do not bring that result, then we
(The Prasidept) shall be ready to consider the possibility of additional steps, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to demonstrate that aggression cannot and will not yield advantages.
To what extent and how soon will it be possible to implement the peace-making potential of the United Nations which is opening before our very eyes? The answer to this question depends on the consistency of the efforts made by all States and by our Organization as a whole. The Arab States must have their important say. We believe that a useful role, as in the past, can be played by the tireless peace-making efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
We hope that the significant statement made at this meeting of the Security Council for restoration of the international legal order will be heard and correctly understood in Iraq and that the leadership of that country will choose a course of action leading to the resolution of the crisis and to the restoration of peace and legality.
Here we must also express our conviction that, having provided for a solution of the crisis in the region of the Persian Gulf, we should, without delay on a collective basis, concern ourselves with healing the other age-old wounds of that region, first and foremost through a solution of the problems of Palestine and of Lebanon. I believe that our colleagues here have raised these issues quite rightly as a matter of principle.
Our main objective is to stop the aggression. To reconcile ourselves to it would be to stop the world clock that has started to show the time for a new era; it would mean dashing the hope of all countries, small and large, that mankind could look to the future with optimism. That cannot be allowed.
I now resume my function as President of the Security Council.
The Council has thus concluded its voting procedure, and it has been proposed
that we should hear other statements.
(Ihs_2mi!iaüî.)
I now call on the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Al-Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and I welcome his participation in the work of the Security Council.
Sheikh AL-SABAH (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me satisfaction and gratification to see you, a dear friend, presiding over this historic meeting of the Security Council, representing also your great country, which is skilfully and responsibly carrying out its privileged role in maintaining international peace and security, and in rejecting and resisting aggression.
I extend my greetings also to my colleagues, the Foreign Ministers of the Member States of the Security Council, who, through their personal participation in this meeting have elected to demonstrate their firm determination to use the capabilities and powers of the Security Council given it by the Charter to implement its resolutions and spare the region and its peoples the scourge of a conflagration, the effects of which cannot be foreseen.
As I take part with you in this meeting, another meeting comes to mind, at which I had the honour of representing Kuwait as a member of the Security Council. At that meeting, on 29 September 1976, we voted in favour of resolution 435, containing the Independence plan for Namibia. And despite the regular rotation of the Council's membership, I still see no wavering in the Council's determination to implement the objectives of the Charter and to ensure a world free of the use of force in the settlement of disputes.
I come to you bearing greetings from the Government and people of Kuwait, a sssll, peaceful country; we greet «ou for your courageous, historic stand on the side of Kuwait against the aggression and occupation inflicted on us by a neighbour who is also a brother, a neighbour whose leaders have become drunk on sheer brute force and whose behaviour has become perverted into a fierce greed for expansion, a greed which knows no bounds, no laws and no morality. I come to you from a people
(Sheixh Al7gal?ah. Kuwait) which has consistently chosen its path to serve as a bridge for friendship, a beacon of wisdom and a force for good. Through the twists and turns along that road, Kuwait has used the resources granted it by God's will in such a way that they became a source of pride and well-being for its people, a source for sharing with their brethren, and a source of help for friends in need. To you, friends, and through you, to all the countries which have supported our just cause, we give our thanks.
Your resolution today, the ninth in a series of resolutions adopted by the Security Council since the beginning of the treacherous aggression by Iraq and its occupation of Kuwait, confirms that the battle is between the leaders of Iraq on the one band and the entire world on the other. The rejection by Iraq's leaders of your resolutions, their flouting of them, have transformed the aggression from an aggression inflicted on one country to an aggression against the entire civilised world, its values, traditions and norms of behaviour.
(StoUkh Al-Sabah. Kuwait)
The world can no longer accept the continuance of the Xragi aggresaion. Iraq must be forced by all means available through the Charter to heed the international will and withdraw all its forces from my beloved country's soil, unconditionally and without qualification, so that its legitimate Government may return to resume its mission, thus avoiding a raging conflagration in the region.
The economic embargo imposed upon Iraq is certainly not an end in itself. It is a peaceful means to attain an objective: implementation by Iraq of the binding resolutions of the Council. Thus, despite its negative effects for the peoples of Kuwait and Iraq, and indeed for some other peoples and States, the embargo is necessary to ensure full implementation of the Security Council's resolutions, because the world is determined to ensure that the aggressor does not reap any benefit from its aggression.
The Council's resolutions, particularly 660 (1990), 662 (1990) and 664 (1990), set limits that must not be overstepped. None must be conceded; none must be subject to negotiations. We cannot under any circumstance accept any move by any party that does not accord with the letter and spirit of those resolutions.
The Emergency Arab Summit Conference held in Cairo, through its resolution 195, adopted all the elements of the Security Council's resolutions. Furthermore, the Islamic States, at a Ministerial Meeting held in Cairo, blessed and supported those resolutions. Thus the Security Council's will has been united with the will of the Arab and Islamic world, and indeed with the will of the International community, in a historic stand to isolate the Iraqi régime from the peace-loving, civilized States end peoples. That régime has Imposed Its outlaw status on itself, and thus obliged us to stand up to it.
There can be no negotiations with Iraq until it has explicitly and unequivocally accepted the Security Council's resolutions and begun to implement them.
(Sheikh Al-Sabah, Kuwait)
Here we have the right to ask if Iraq itself did not make the same demand vis-à-vis Iran with regard to resolution 598 (1987)?
I come before the Security Council today bearing the feelings of the Kuwaiti people towards those generous lands that have warmly and fraternally, and with a sense of common destiny, given haven to some citizens of Kuwait who have been forced by the aggressor's harshness to leave their land, the land of their fathers and forefathers, because of its premeditated actions aimed at stripping Kuwait of its people, changing its demographic make-up and, indeed, erasing its national identity, not to mention the acts of pPlage and theft. Not even Mosques, hospitals and public installations have been spared such actions, which are also intended to instil despair in the hearts of those Kuwaitis who due to circumstance and custom were outside their country at that time of the year.
But before the Security Council I declare that the people of Kuwait, under the leadership of its Emir, Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabeh, will, with God on our side, with the help of our brothers and friends, and with the support of this Council for the just cause of Kuwait, will liberate our homeland, the land of pride of generosity, and will work, as always, to maintain peace and security in the region.
The Council, while in this resolution supporting the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949, on the protection of civilians in time of war, has decided that Iraq, as the occupying Power, is fully responsible for the behaviour of its forces and all its policies in Kuwait directed against the people of Kuwait under occupation. Therefore the Government of Iraq is bound to bear full responslblity for the destruction and pillage being inflicted on the economic and social infrastructure of Kuwait, both public and private. The Iraqi Government is also legally bound to pay full reparations for the destruction it has Inflicted on Kuwait.
(Sheikh Al-Sabah, Kuwait)
There have come to our attention the suspicious attempts of some States and some circles to distort the nature of the Iraqi aggression in the eyes of the international community. In that context, Kuwait wishes to affirm that the substance of the Iraqi aggression against Kuwait is the continuing occupation of Kuwait, which prevents its legitimate Government from returning to it. These are but after-effects of the aggression. When the occupation is eliminated, when the entire land of Kuwait is free of the trampling boots of the occupier, and when the legitimate Government has returned, all those after-effects will be eliminated.
I am in duty bound to say a few words to my friend the Secretary-General of the United Rations, Bis Excellency Javier Peres de Cuellar. He has been courageous and faithful. He has sided with right and justice. He derived strength from the Council when in a statement he said recently
"An Injustice has been done a small country that has been one of the States most attached to the United Rations and Its objectives."
I wish to assure him that the people of Kuwait, and indeed the entire world, will remmber the role he has undertaken, for the world cannot accept the continuing injustice In Kuwait at a time when all the forces of justice are fighting the forces of evil.
The president (interpretation from Russian)! I thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait for his kind words addressed to the Council and all the participants in today's meeting.
There are no further speakers for this meeting.
I express my heartfelt thanks to all my colleagues for their co-operation and mutual understanding, and for the businesslike attitude that has prevailed at this meeting, as a result of which we have proved able to adopt a most important resolution today.	( ■ ... - im । r r . .	■	। .	•
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2963 29 November 1990
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 29 November 1990, at 3 p.m.
President : Mr. BAKER
(United States of America)
Members ;	Canada	Mr. CLARK China	Mr. QIAN Qichen
	Colombia	Mr.	JARAMILLO Cote d'Ivoire	Mr.	ESSY Cuba	Mr.	MALMIERCA	PEOLI Ethiopia	Mr.	DINKA Finland	Mr.	PAASIO France	Mr.	DUMAS Malaysia	Mr.	ABU HASSAN Romania	Mr.	NASTASE Union of	Soviet	Socialist Republics	Mr.	SHEVARDNADZE United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern	Ireland	Mr.	HURD Yemen	Mr.	AL-ASHTAL Zaire	Mr.	MUSHOBEKWÀ	KALIMBA wa KATANA
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-61483/À 3515V (E)
AW/ad
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAQ AND KUWAIT
The PRESIDENT: I have been informed by the Secretary-General that at this meeting of the Security Council the following members of the Council are represented by their Foreign Ministers: Canada, China, Colombia, Cuba, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Malaysia, Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Zaire. Côte d'Ivoire and Yemen are represented by their Permanent Representatives to the United Nations. The participation of so many Foreign Ministers of the States members of the Council is testimony, I think, to the significance of this meeting. On behalf of the Council, I would like to express to them deep appreciation for their presence.
Colleagues, your very presence here, for only the fourth time in the Security Council's history that Foreign Ministers have assembled, symbolizes, I think, the seriousness of the present situation. I would like to begin today's discussion with a quotation that I believe aptly sets the context for our discussions today. The quotation is as follows:
"There is no precedent for a people being the victim of such injustice and of being at present threatened by abandonment to an aggressor. Also, there has never before been an example of any government proceeding with the systematic extermination of a nation by barbarous means in violation of the most solemn promises made to all the nations of the Earth that there should be no resort to a war of conquest and that there should not be used against innocent human beings terrible poison and harmful gases."
(The President)
Those words, I think, could well have come from the Emir of Kuwait, but they do not. They were spoken in 1936, not in 1990. They come from Haile Selassie, the leader of Ethiopia, a man who saw his country conquered and occupied, much like Kuwait has been brutalized since 2 August. Sadly, that appeal to the League of Nations fell ultimately upon deaf ears. The League's efforts to redress aggression failed and international disorder and war ensued.
History has now given us another chance. With the cold war behind us, we now have the chance to build the world which was envisioned by the founders of this Organization - by the founders of the United Nations. We have the chance to make this Security Council and this United Nations true instruments for peace and for justice across the globe. We must not let the United Nations go the way of the League of Nations. We must fulfil our common vision of a peaceful and just post-cold-war world.
But if we are to do so, we must meet the threat to international peace created by Saddam Hussein's aggression. And that is why the debate that we are about to begin will, I think, rank as one of the most important in the history of the United Nations. It will surely do much to determine the future of this body.
Our aim today must be to convince Saddam Hussein that the just and humane demands of this Council and of the international community cannot be ignored. If Iraq does not reverse its course peacefully, then other necessary measures, including the use of force, should be authorized. We must put the choice to Saddam Hussein in unmistakable terms.
In accordance with the decisions taken previously on this item, I invite the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations to take a place at the
(The President) Council table; I invite the Deputy Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Anbari (Iraq) took a place at the Council table; Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT; The Security Council will now resume its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document S/21969, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Canada, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. Romania and France have joined as sponsors of that draft resolution.
The first speaker is the Deputy Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait. I welcome His Excellency and invite him to make his statement.
Sheikh AL SABAH (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): In the name of Kuwait, I convey to the Assembly the sincere gratitude of its steadfast people which is now resisting the Iraqi aggression. While we follow closely and hopefully the Council's deliberations, it is indeed our fervent hope that this historic meeting will reflect the true voice of the international community, showing a landmark united stand condemning aggression and demonstrating yet again its resolve to counter it, thus affirming that the future will indeed be ruled by law and that international relations will be based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law; on understanding, dialogue and the settlement of disputes by peaceful means.
The Council's voice is a message to the people of Kuwait that the international community stands behind it in its struggle to eliminate oppression, throw off tyranny and strengthen its aspirations to overcome the plight of occupation.
In greeting the Council, I express the profound gratitude and appreciation of the Kuwaiti people, its hope that tomorrow will be a better day and that the present suffering will be a lesson to the whole world that force, intransigence, obduracy and aggression are all forms of behaviour that belong to the past and that the international community will no longer tolerate or accept such behaviour.
It gives me pleasure, Mr. President, to express to you, in the name of Kuwait, our sincere acknowledgement of the key role played by the United States during its stewardship of the Security Council in the month of November. On a personal note, let me commend you. Sir, for your laudable effort to underscore the vital role of the Council and its effectiveness as an instrument of preserving - indeed, imposing, if necessary - peace and security in the world. The people of Kuwait expresses its gratitude to you and to your country, which the statement of His Highness, Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmed Al Sabah, the Emir of the State of Kuwait while receiving President Bush in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia a week ago, reflected. I should like to quote a few words from that statement:
"I commend the decisive role played by the United States of America, its people and Government, by facing up to aggression and repelling it. This American stand did not come from a vacuum, because they are the descendants of those trail-blazing immigrants who, centuries ago, preferred to risk and endanger their lives by emigrating to a remote and unknown world rather than submit to oppression and having their freedom shackled. By so doing, they instituted a heritage of countering injustice and aggression. Their hopes to build a free world that rejects humiliation and that refuses to succumb to tyranny were realized, and it has now become a refuge for all freedom lovers. Today, their descendants reflect the historic crossing of their ancestors to
(Sheikh Al Sabah, Kuwait) dissipate the darkness cast on the land of the free people by the spectres of dictatorship and injustice, in keeping faith with their forefathers' customs and heritage."
I should also like to pay a tribute to the United Kingdom for the important role played during its presidency of the Council last month. In addition, I should like the record to reflect our deep appreciation to the friendly Government of Great Britain, with whom my country has long-standing historical ties, for its brave and just stand on the side of the rights of the Kuwaiti people.
I should also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the Foreign Ministers who have taken the trouble to come from far away to attend this meeting in person, thus underlining the importance of this historic session today. The Kuwaiti people is indebted to each and every one of them for it perceives in their presence here an expression of support and solace of its pain and redress of the injustice it suffered.
The Council convenes today to express its resolve that the principles of the United Nations Charter should be concrete facts, that words will be translated into tangible deeds and that the principle of collective security should be the framework that regulates international relations, so that people may rest assured that the stronger will not prey on the weaker and that those who harbour aggressive intentions should hesitate and consider before resorting to force because they now know that the entire world will reverse their aggression and face up to their adventures.
The Security Council meets today under Chapter VII of the Charter which regulates international relations in a way that leaves no room for aggression or acceptance of the use of force and shows no tolerance towards those who breach the principles of the Charter.
In this connection, I should like to pay tribute to those countries which have contributed to the multinational force and thus demonstrated their commitment to the supremacy of the rule of law, to the consolidation of peace and their determination to prove by deed that aggression, arrogance and oppression are forms of behaviour that belong to the Middle Ages and have no place at all in the 1990s.
The multinational force is a concrete translation of the will of the international community that aggression stands to lose and that the use of force avails nothing but destruction.
Kuwait participates in today's meeting while fully recognizing that peace means construction while war means destruction, and that prosperity as well as economic and social progress depend on stability.
Kuwait has been the victim of aggression and invasion mainly because it has sought to solve problems through dialogue and understanding. We were confident that force could not be used by another Arab country, by a neighbour with whom we have always had common bonds of brotherhood, neighbourly relations and a common heritage.
Following the brutal Iraqi aggression against Kuwait and its occupation and annexation by military force, this Council meets for the second time at the Foreign Ministers level. This in itself is a highly significant event, an event that reflects the true nature of the aggression that is now being discussed, its implications, dimensions, repercussions and effects on world peace. This aggression has not been limited to the occupation of land. Indeed, from the very first day of the invasion there has been an uninterrupted string of acts of killing, torture, displacement and brutality towards the peaceable Kuwaiti people which rejected occupation and proudly showed no willingness whatsoever to co-operate with the occupiers. On the contrary, the people of Kuwait began to mount resistance by civil disobedience, thus graphically demonstrating its rejection of occupation. This has proved the most effective weapon yet, but the response of the Iraqi aggressor showed no mercy or compassion, indeed no respect for divine or human codes of conduct. Perhaps this explains the havoc wreaked by its forces and the wide-scale destruction they have brought about throughout Kuwait.
The Iraqi troops also denied individual rights and freedoms, destroyed and plundered all types of movable assets, transferring those assets to Iraq in a systematic campaign in order to destroy the economic and social infrastructure of Kuwait.
The malicious policies pursued by the aggressor sought to ensure that these crude atrocities would instil terror and alarm that would prompt Kuwaitis by force and coercion to leave their property and assets to be pillaged by these wild beasts. Those forces started to confiscate and burn all identity documents, then transferred large numbers of Iraqis and foreigners to replace the Kuwaitis and settle in their homeland and live in their homes, in a systematic campaign to destroy and transform the demographic composition of Kuwait.
Perhaps in the past two days members of the Security Council have seen for themselves some aspects of the tragedy which my compatriots in Kuwait are living through at this moment, as outlined by the eyewitnesses who have suffered under the oppression of occupation and from its brutal practices.
All that is but a limited sample of the daily practices perpetrated against the people of Kuwait by the usurpers, who have shown total indifference to every value and code of conduct, both Islamic and international. Against all these odds, however, we draw our solace from the conviction that God and right are on our side and from the certainty that the overwhelming international support we have received and the determination to defeat aggression, irrespective of the price, will ensure the restoration of our legitimate rights.
It is true that Kuwait is a small country, both in size and population, but thanks to the massive and overwhelming international support which is being extended to us on the basis that justice is a true shield of peace, we find that Kuwait is indeed a Power that carries significant weight.
Since the Iraqi aggression, the Council, in an unprecedented manner, has adopted 11 resolutions under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter wherein it demanded full, immediate and unconditional Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait and the restoration of the legitimate Government of Kuwait. Some of those resolutions were aimed at forcing Iraq to comply with the international will by peaceful means
(Sheikh Al Sabah, Kuwait) through the imposition of a total economic embargo against Iraq, together with other measures. This embargo was but a means to an end and not an end in itself.
Your Council1s resolutions were adopted at one and the same time with similar resolutions adopted at the pan-Arab, pan-Islamic level, and within the framework of the Non-Aligned Movement on the same basis as resolutions 660 (1990) and 662 (1990).
In addition to those resolutions, there have been personal initiatives and endeavours undertaken by prominent international and regional personages, including the Secretary-General and envoys from the Soviet Union, China and other countries, which aimed at persuading the Iraqi leadership to respond to the international will. Unfortunately, all those efforts have met a stone wall of Iraqi intransigence, while aggression and occupation continue to shake the very foundations of stability in the region and the people and inhabitants of Kuwait continue to undergo untold suffering.
Efforts in the same vein have also been made by some Arab States whose positions are not totally in line with the Security Council resolutions and who have kept the channels of dialogue with Baghdad open.
Despite all those efforts and good offices, the Iraqi régime persists in its intransigence and obduracy, and rejects all overtures, disdaining all peaceful attempts, thumbing its nose at the world community and shunning the international will.
The Security Council resolutions mean nothing to Iraq, which shows no respect and no sensitivity, renders homeless hundreds of thousands of people of many nationalities, causes havoc in the world order and world economy and plunges the whole region towards a horrible conflict in order to achieve its ambitions and maintain its hegemony and confrontational posture.
The atrocities of the Iraqi regime, which has run amok, go far beyond all accepted norms of civilized behaviour as set forth in legal instruments. Having no respect for the human person, for human dignity and rights, it has sought to mete out revenge against some States by detaining their nationals who were present in Kuwait and Iraq, taking them as hostages, and denying them their fundamental freedoms.
It has subjected them to torture and intimidation by using some hostages as human shields, held against their will as guests at certain strategic installations. This is perhaps a new form of degrading treatment. Now, the Iraqi regime is using these human beings as bargaining chips, offering to release some of them as a blackmail ploy and as a tactic to divert attention from its aggression against Kuwait.
After all these efforts and all these resolutions and the time that is measured by my people in minutes, as they continue to bleed profusely, no one can really claim now that the international community has not given Iraq the full opportunity to comply with international will or, for that matter, that the world community has not offered good, feasible grounds for a peaceful settlement and the elimination of the prospects for war and saving the region from a real holocaust, the real consequences of which perhaps no one can predict except God the Almighty. Nor can anyone really claim that the international community has ignored any positive signals or really meaningful Iraqi initiatives in response to the Security Council resolutions. Channels of communication with the Iraqi régime are full of good prospects for achieving a just, peaceful settlement. Indeed, there are many formulas and avenues that can lead to peace> but the intransigence of the Iraqi régime is the real reason that is pushing the region at this point to a conflagration that we do not want to see. But it is being imposed upon us, for it now seems to be the only avenue to ensure the restoration of our rights.
The Iraqi régime has sought to deflect attention from its crime against humanity and world peace by invoking issues that have nothing to do with its aggression against Kuwait, such as citing the danger of the foreign presence in the region. Iraq is the first to know that it is the real reason for that presence. It cited the question of hostages in order to create a humanitarian issue without
paying due attention to their dignity. Indeed, it dragged them into its adventurous schemes in a desperate attempt to link its aggression against and occupation of Kuwait and the expulsion of the Kuwaiti people to the question of Palestine, which is, alas, the first victim of its aggression. Iraq continues to exploit that question as a cheap propaganda ploy. It calls for an Arab solution, from which it is the first to dissent, while later rejecting and then utilizing that to sow the seeds of dissension into Arab ranks.
Crude exploitation of these questions exposed the tactics of the Iraqi regime to gain time, cause division and play on emotions and sentiments. But, the Arab world, the Islamic world and the international community found out the truth, defined the road, set the goals and demonstrated firm unity and resolve. This is represented in the draft resolution now before the Council.
The message contained in this draft resolution is indeed a message that gives peace a new chance, that would make us skilfully snatch it from the total darkness imposed on our region by the Iraqi regime. Indeed, it is a glimmer of hope that will not dim. It is a torch of light that will guide all of us out of the dark tunnel into which the Iraqi regime has stranded the region. The Iraqi régime has disregarded the appeals by people to comply with the resolutions passed by the Council and has responded to the cries of those who suffer from the harshness of occupation of my country, Kuwait, and its vicious invading forces continue to sabotage every prospect for peace. Therefore, the international community, represented by the Security Council, should now feel free, at this stage, to use all necessary means available to it and in co-operation with my Government, as provided for in the draft resolution, in order to implement the resolutions adopted by the Council so as to put an end to this naked defiance and the inadmissible
(Sheikh Al Sabah, Kuwait) opposition to the will of the international community, which refuses the use of force or the use of violence as a way of dealing with others.
Our goal is peace. Our Islamic faith advocates peace and enjoins us to work earnestly and sincerely for peace. But, by the same token, true Islam makes it incumbent upon us all to resist aggression and not to yield in submission to the aggressor. Perhaps God the Almighty has defined for us a prescription for fair and just recourse in the face of such an aggression, for God says in the Holy Koran:
"If two parties among the believers fall into a quarrel, make ye peace between them: but if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the other, then fight ye (all) against the one that transgresses until it complies with the command of God; but if it complies, then make peace between them with justice, and be fair: for God loves those who are fair (and just)." (The Holy Koran, XLIX:9) Today's meeting of the Security Council will represent a historic landmark.
Your decision today will indeed lay down historic guidelines that will perhaps have an impact on the future of mankind. Therefore, may God the Almighty guide you along the right path and, ultimately, ensure success for your endeavours. Meanwhile, we pray to God the Almighty to inspire those who diverged from the course of righteousness to regain their senses, heed the calls for peace and respond to the voice of justice. Our final prayer is to praise Allah, Lord of the universe.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Kuwait for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations, on whom I now call.
Mr. AL-ANBARI (Iraq): Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address the Council in the presence of so many distinguished Foreign Ministers.
On 25 October, when the Council was debating the text that became resolution 665 (1990), I addressed the Council. I tried to focus its attention on the legal requirement which the Council must observe in adopting any resolution involving any use of force. Otherwise, I argued, the Council would be acting beyond its jurisdiction, and its action should be deemed null and void. I believe the same argument applies today - and for even a better reason. For under the Charter of the United Nations any use of force is deemed to be an act of aggression, save for three exceptional cases. The first case comes under Article 51 and involves self-defence. Here the use of force is limited to the period until the Security Council is seized of the matter. Beyond that, any use of force must be deemed to be an act of aggression. In the second case, the Security Council can act if sanctions adopted in accordance with Article 41 prove to be ineffective or unenforceable. In such a case the Council can act collectively under Article 42 and can use force in accordance with a mechanism provided for in Article 43.
In other words, in this case only collective action under the command and control of the Security Council, in co-ordination with the Military Staff Committee, can lead to the use of force against any country, and no individual Member State may be authorized to lynch a particular country for any reason.
The third of the three cases to which I have referred arises under Article 106 of the Charter. When the Security Council fails to reach special agreements with Member countries to have forces of those countries put under Security Council command, the four countries that signed the Moscow Declaration of October 1943, together with France, and in consultation with the Members of the United Nations, can undertake joint action against any country.
Those are the three exclusive cases in which the use of force may legally be authorized by the Security Council. Regrettably, however, the Council apparently thought that in this case the legal requirements were disposable niceties. That is why I shall today focus attention on the political aspect of the dispute, (spoke in Arabic)
Today the Security Council convenes at this lofty level to vote on a draft resolution that the United States Government has been trying insistently, tirelessly and relentlessly to have the Council adopt, so that the Council may judge Iraq as a State that does not want peace. The implication is that Iraq knows nothing but the use of force. That is a tendentious stance and a deliberate and suspect distortion of the facts.
My Government has advocated peace, and continues to do so. However, what it wants is a comprehensive peace, a comprehensive, durable and just peace that neither adds to nor subtracts from the rights of any party.
As members of the Council know, an in-depth dialogue has been possible only with two of the permanent members of the Council; the other three permanent members, especially the United States of America, have refused dialogue. The United States of America has imposed an embargo and a blockade upon dialogue and discussion with the Government of my country. Instead, it has chosen to issue orders and demands as if we were a branch of the American Administration. This approach is totally rejected by us because it is a brazen violation of the principle of equality between the countries and peoples of the world and an infringement of the human fundamentals upon which international relations must be based.
This American logic which throttles any initiative for any dialogue that aims at achieving a peaceful settlement on the Arab or international levels, takes its point of departure from American imperialist considerations, which are now more glaringly clear than ever before, especially in our Arab region. This is reaffirmed by the fact that the premises of this policy of the United States, the arguments that it invokes and the objectives that it declares contradict each other. The final outcome is the adoption of double standards in dealing with issues of the same nature, for purposes of pure American interest.
Where then is the new international order of which the United States speaks and to which others refer wittingly or unwittingly? Where then is the quality of "order" if what is required is the application of duplicitous policies, which, by their very nature, do not recognize justice and fair play? Where is the international quality of such an order if the purpose is to impose American hegemony, to make others carry out American orders which aim at safeguarding the political, economic and security interests of the United States, in total disregard of the interests of others? Where is this novel quality of order if the logic of
(Mr. Al-Anbari, Iraq) its basic features, beyond the European orbit, is arrogant and brutal power, which leaves no place for dialogue, at a time when the Americans flaunt the so-called achievements in the European area and depict them as if they applied by universal consensus to the entire world, to the whole planet?
As a cover for its aggressive and imperialist policies in the region, the American President alleges that the crisis is not the result of a stand by the United States against Iraq. He claims that it is the world that stands against Iraq in a manner unprecedented in the annals of the United Nations.
Such talk lays bare the fact that small States that do not enjoy veto power in the Security Council and find no one to protect them from the super-Power permanent members are the only countries exposed to sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. Suffice to refer, as an example, to the fact that the United States is the Power that, over many years, forestalled international unanimity and prevented the imposition of sanctions on the Zionist entity for its expansionist and aggressive policies, for the crimes that, since its inception, it has continued to perpetrate against the Palestinians and the Arab people at large.
The current crisis has shown, among other things, that the United States totally dominates the Security Council and its arbitrary and biased procedures. At the same time, it has highlighted the independence of Iraq, the fact that Iraq is a non-aligned State in the true sense, as it does not come under the banner or protection of any of the super-Power permanent members of the Security Council.
Is it by ironic coincidence or by naked premeditation that this meeting of the Council, at this eminent level - a meeting called for, striven for, by the United States of America by all means available to it, a meeting over which it presides -is being held on the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, at a time when the world at large knows that the United States of America is the
only Power in the world that has impeded the adoption of just resolutions to safeguard the rights of the Palestinian people and that it is the Power that has prevented implementation of the many decisions adopted by this international organization, especially by the Security Council, in spite of the limited nature of the demands of those resolutions?
Let us recall the objectives declared by the American Administration and the justification for the build-up of its aggressive forces in the Holy Lands of Islam - how they evolved from a claim that Saudi Arabia was being protected from a so-called Iraqi threat, to the declaration that the objective was to safeguard American economic security in the field of energy and job opportunities, and, finally, to the claim that Iraq has acquired nuclear weapons when it became clear to the United States Administration that the objectives which were declared previously did not elicit enough support inside the United States for turning from a defensive to an offensive posture in justifying the military build-up in the region whose aim is to wage war against Iraq. The differing pretexts and objectives of the United States have led one American observer to state: (spoke in English)
"The idea is to create so much confusion that rational public response is impossible."
(spoke in Arabic)
Our difference with the Security Council in respect of the item under consideration is that we reject this policy because it is malicious, brutal and aggressive.
The members of the Council are in duty bound to remember how the United States has dealt with the rights of the Palestinian people in the United Nations throughout the long years during which they have been pleading their cause here, and particularly in recent days when the Council has been dealing with the Israeli crimes against the children of the intifadah. That attitude on the part of the United States and its allies is representative of the dilatory manoeuvres being made to impede the adoption of resolutions that would have resolved the matter correctly and protected the Palestinian people. The true objective, of course, is to protect Israel, its crimes and its policy of aggression. In that connection, when this latter subject is before the Council we never hear any mention of the Charter, or international law, or the new world order. The logic of this is that all are equal, but some are more equal than others.
Here, we must ask the questions Why Iraq? We must say it frankly to the Council. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 660 (1990) on 2 August we have witnessed the further adoption of one hasty decision after another. Our people believe that the Council’s resolutions would not have been adopted with such alacrity had it not been for American pressure, pressure in which the American politicians daily take pride to the point that theirs has been the only voice that we hear. Our people are well aware of the fact that some members of this body and in the world Organization are concerned about the manifestations of hegemony within the Security Council purporting to make its resolutions the sole expression of the opinion of the international community as a whole. Some are asking questions about the role of other members of the world Organization who have voted to select those who represent them in this body at a time when they stand helplessly by, unable to uphold the principles of the Charter which are based on dialogue and peaceful
settlement and not on beating the drums of war for imperialistic purposes that are completely deviant from the logic of the age.
Our people also wonder how the Security Council can leap to adopt one resolution after another at a time when the Foreign Minister of Iraq is prevented under bare-faced pretexts from presenting his position to the Council before it hands down its judgement. This has entrenched the impression that the Council deals with the causes of the Arab peoples in a special way, based on double standards.
For example, we see how the Council deals with the Israeli usurpation of Palestinian and Arab rights, and it is indeed a painful paradox for the international Organization that the Security Council, which is entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and security, should be a willing tool in the hands of the American Administration at a time when that very Administration has so far been unable to convince the American Congress itself to agree to the use of force at this stage. President George Bush hopes to exploit the Security Council in order to influence the decision of the Congress and obtain its blessing for the use of force.
Once again, we ask: Where is that new international order? Is it the massing of American forces and their deployment in the Gulf	region?	Is	it the threats	of
the invasion and destruction of Iraq? Is it the issuing of	the	ultimatum of a
deadline, which is more like a police action than a	serious	and	responsible attempt
to resolve the problems of the region? Here, it is	appropriate	to quote a
statement made by a member of the American Congress and an expert in America's wars, Mr. Bob Carey, who commented on the build-up. He said:
(Mr. Al-Anbari, Iraq) (spoke in English)
"It is a mistake because it forsakes the potential of a new world order in favour of the tactics of the old order. Rather than relying on diplomacy, co-operation and multilateral regulation of arms flows, we" - that is, the Americans - "will revert primarily to reliance on United States troops and United States arms sales." (spoke in Arabic)
Iraq calls for peace. Iraq desires peace, not for us alone, but for the entire Middle East region. Iraq advocates such a peace and desires such a peace on the basis of the implementation of all Security Council resolutions, in a just manner and in keeping with a single standard based on justice and fairness. Here, I should like to quote a statement by the dean of American diplomats, Mr. George Kennan, who stated: (spoke in English)
"The important thing in thinking about international affairs is not to make moral judgements or apportion blame but to understand the nature of the forces at work as the foundation for thinking about what, if anything, can be done." (spoke in Arabic)
Iraq has adopted that approach which is embodied in its initiative set forth by Mr. Saddam Hussein, President of Iraq, on 12 August. At that time, he proposed an integrated and comprehensive way of dealing with all the problems of the Middle East through the Security Council and on the basis of international law so as to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of all the parties and so that the peoples of the region might enjoy peace, stability and prosperity, now and in the
future.
The American Administration rejected that initiative even before examining it, and it imposed its own rejection upon others. The problems of the Middle East are not isolated one from the others. The problems have common historical roots. It is clear that one problem often causes the eruption of other problems, and the situation in the region is also the result of the effects of a chronic problem that remains unsolved. Linkage between the problems in the region is therefore natural and logical. Any attempt to separate them is artificial and disregards the organic historical and political links that bind them all together.
The American refusal to accept that reality is prompted by a suspect motivation that has nothing to do with the interests of the people of the Middle East. It is a premeditated American policy to gain control over the region's fate for purely imperialistic reasons. It is indeed an exercise in political hypocrisy that the American position embodies a contrary, or opposite, linkage with the problems of the Middle East, since it calls for separation while at the same time continuing to procrastinate and to avoid any resolution of the Palestinian problem, in spite of the fact that Palestinian blood is being shed every day and that the Israeli crimes of occupation, annexation and savage repression continue unabated.
Is this because we are Arabs? Is it because the problems of the Middle East cannot be resolved by one single standard, the standard of international law and the United Nations Charter that the United States allegedly espouses? In spite of the fact that the Council has not given what we have said the attention it merits, the Council must realize that we are not the ones who are attempting to divert attention from other questions for tactical purposes.
To get to the crux of the matter - which is supported by the Arab masses and by many other countries from outside the region, I would offer one example of support for our viewpoint that we have recently received, I refer to a statement
by the National Council of Churches in the United States, an organization that represents 42 million American citizens. In mid-November, that body stressed the need to hold an international conference to deal with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and accused the American Administration of duplicity and hypocrisy for calling for the withdrawal of Iraqi forces under Security Council resolutions, in total disregard of the need to demand the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the occupied territories in the West Bank, Al-Quds, the Sinai, the Golan Heights and southern Lebanon.
In its statement, the National Council of Churches reaffirmed that (spoke in English)
"The region cries out for a United States policy that seeks to redress all causes of injustice, including those of Israel and Palestine, Lebanon and Cyprus".
(spoke in Arabic)
This is the question that must be posed now: Will the Security Council measure up to the responsibility of establishing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace through an integrated approach which deals with all the problems of the region? That is the historic responsibility of the Council.
For our part, we are continuing on our road. Peace is our goal. We are working for it; we desire it.
If the United States imposes war upon us, then that will be our destiny, and I assure you that our people will not kneel down and will measure up to its responsibilities, for it is demanding its right and defending that right against injustice and tyranny.
The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. AL-ASHTAL (Yemen): It gives me great pleasure, Mr. President, to convey to you the greetings of His Excellency Mr. Abdul-Kareem Al-Iriani, the Foreign Minister of Yemen, who unfortunately could not participate in this historic meeting of the Security Council. May I on this occasion express the satisfaction
of my delegation at seeing you, the Secretary of State of the United States, presiding over the proceedings at this important meeting.
It happens that today is the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People - a stark reminder of the plight of a people that has been systematically denied its basic right to national self-determination. There is in the Middle East region another crisis that is not being dealt with by the same standard as the Security Council has been applying to the crisis in the Gulf. What is at stake is not only the fate of the Palestinians, a displaced and tortured people, but the credibility of the Security Council.
At the conclusion of the Paris sununit last week a momentous declaration marked the end of the cold war, an era in contemporary history characterized mainly by ideological and military confrontation between the two competing Power blocs. We are now being told that a new world order is on the horizon, a world order in which law is paramount and freedom supreme. Today, however, we are not meeting here to celebrate the end of one era and the beginning of another. Nor are we here to lay down a framework for the new world order, an evolving process that will nevertheless be influenced by our decision. We are here today to face the first serious challenge of the post-cold-war era: the crisis in the Gulf.
Since the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, on 2 August, the Security Council has adopted 10 resolutions, calling for the complete withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait, the immediate release of all hostages and the restoration of the legitimate Government of Kuwait. In order to ensure the implementation of its resolutions, the Security Council has imposed on Iraq the most sweeping and enforceable sanctions regime. Today the Security Council has before it a draft resolution in effect authorizing States to use force in order to ensure compliance with those resolutions. In the annals of the United Nations this will long be remembered as
the ’’war resolution”
Ever since the eruption of the crisis in the Gulf the position of Yemen has been consistent and clear, although at times it has been intentionally distorted. From the very outset Yemen declared that it would take a neutral stand on the conflict in order to be able to contribute to the search for a peaceful Arab solution to that conflict. Yemen also supported Security Council resolutions calling for the withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait and for the immediate release of all hostages, as well as for the restoration of the legitimate Government of Kuwait. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that the Republic of Yemen cannot support a draft resolution that would authorize States to use force, for the following specific reasons.
First, the draft resolution before us does not exclude the use of force and is so broad and vague that it is not limited to the purpose of enforcing implementation of the 10 resolutions on the Gulf crisis adopted by the Security Council. Hence, it will be up to those States with military forces in the area to decide on the prerequisites for the restoration of international peace and security in the region, which might well lead to a military confrontation on a larger scale.
Secondly, the draft resolution before us is not related to a specific article of Chapter VII of the Charter; hence the Security Council will have no control over those forces, which will fly their own national flags. Furthermore, the command of those forces will have nothing to do with the United Nations, although their actions will have been authorized by the Security Council. It is a classic example of authority without accountability.
The Republic of Yemen advocates a positive, peaceful approach to resolving the crisis in the Gulf, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Accordingly, I should like to underline the following. The sanctions régime which the Security Council has imposed on Iraq actually has no parallel in the history of the United Nations. Never before has such a comprehensive and
(Mr. Al-Ashtal, Yemen) sweeping sanctions regime been imposed on any country. One can easily assert that for all practical purposes Iraq is completely isolated from the outside world. For a country that is almost land-locked and can neither export anything, including oil, nor import anything, including foodstuffs, it will not take long, in our opinion, for the sanctions to hurt badly and eventually force Iraq to comply and withdraw from Kuwait.
Furthermore, the sanctions imposed on Iraq, unlike those that the Security Council applied earlier in the case of Southern Rhodesia, are actually being legally enforced by the presence of so many foreign ships and aircraft. It is not being reported in the press, but many Iraqi and foreign ships sailing to and from Iraqi and Kuwaiti ports are being stopped and searched on the high seas or at nearby ports in order to ascertain that no violations of the sanctions are taking place. As a matter of fact, the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) to oversee the strict implementation of the sanctions regime has not to date reported any violations of the sanctions. It is a sanctions régime that is almost totally airtight.
It is a little surprising that those who used to lecture us on the need to be patient for sanctions to work when they had to do with Rhodesia or South Africa are today in such a hurry to declare that those comprehensive and enforceable sanctions imposed on Iraq are simply not working. For sanctions to work and force Iraq to implement resolutions of the Security Council we need patience. That is the alternative to a catastrophic and unpredictable military confrontation in an inflammable region of the world. But it looks like patience is a rare commodity these days.
In addition to a strict sanctions regime, a peaceful approach to the crisis should, by necessity, involve active diplomatic engagement. Commenting on the crisis in the Gulf, a very wise man said that there were too many war scenarios, but not one peace scenario. Indeed, some impatient warriors are so terrified by the prospects of peace that they would do anything to scuttle a peace proposal and pay anything to ignite the flames of war. Is it not a little strange that the Security Council has not for a long time come up with one resolution that would give the Secretary-General a free hand and clearly mandate him to engage in mediation efforts in order to resolve the crisis peacefully? It is true that Iraqi reaction to resolutions of the Council is not positive, nor is Iraq's response to certain initiatives encouraging. But serious diplomatic negotiations cannot be conducted openly.
Iraq has already expressed its willingness to talk and negotiate with the United States of America. Is it not time to engage Iraq in a serious dialogue? Moreover, we hear from time to time certain constructive suggestions and initiatives that are put forward by leading figures in our own region. Should we not encourage those silent moves, which are very much like feelers?
It is ironic that those States which have for years been lecturing us in the Arab world about the virtues of dialogue and diplomatic negotiation are now the ones who are saying no to peace initiatives and peace plans.
Less than three months before the crisis in the Gulf, North and South Yemen peacefully and democratically merged into a unitary State, the Republic of Yemen. For our country, which is situated in the southern part of the Arabian peninsula, the crisis in the northern part of the peninsula is not a distant affair. Even before the eruption of war, Yemen is paying a high price for its insistence on a policy of neutrality and its determination to pursue a peaceful approach to the crisis. To start with, our economy has been dealt a severe blow as a consequence of our compliance with the sanctions regime and of the disruption of economic relations between Yemen and both Iraq and Kuwait, particularly in activities related to oil and refining. Moreover, around 900,000 Yemeni immigrant workers suddenly became casualties of the crisis in the Gulf when their residence in our neighbour country Saudi Arabia was suspended due to new regulations. Because they had only a month to leave the country, many of them had to sell their property at distress prices in order to meet the deadline. Comparatively speaking, it is like having 30 million jobless Americans come back home within a short period, two months. You can imagine the economic strains that will be caused by this demographic dislocation. For Yemen, therefore, there is no alternative to peace, without which our region would be heading towards disaster.
It is a coincidence that the crisis in the Gulf erupted as the post-cold-war era was beginning to take shape. The way in which this crisis will be resolved will therefore definitely affect the nature and future of international economic and political relations. The war option would deprive humanity of a historic opportunity to make a smooth transition to a new world order, one that is not characterized by the military victory of one country or group of countries over
(Mr. Al-Ashtal, Yemen) others. By causing severe economic disruption and recession, a military confrontation would undermine the evolving process of democratization in many parts of the world, including in my own country, which is committed to genuine democratic reforms. That is why we sincerely hope that peace will prevail in our region and the world at large. Let us give peace a chance.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the United Nations for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. JARAMILLO (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): First, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your holding the presidency of the Council today, as a representative of the United States of America, at this critical meeting. We are sure that your recognized qualities as a successful leader and diplomat will ensure the success of this stage of our deliberations, which are crucial for peace in the world.
In the last two years, the international community has noted with pleasure fundamental changes that have taken place in the context of international relations, opening up a new world political order. The positions of hegemonic blocs that prevailed at the end of the Second World War and the beginning of bi-polar confrontation gave way to what seemed to be a return to reason, justice, universal understanding and peace. Colombia welcomed that spirit of renewal and looked forward to a new climate and to the strengthening of a peace that remained fragile but was in the process of consolidation, and it hoped that every effort would be made to find solutions through economic growth and social justice for the peoples of the developing world. We still envision that major task as being the basic dream of our peoples and the major challenge of industrialized countries.
Today, that encouraging era of peace and development is being endangered as a result of the brutal invasion that took place on 2 August this year. The Security Council has undertaken many efforts since then to restore order and normalcy, but its appeals have not been heeded by the transgressor of law. Colombia still hopes that we may prevail in the struggle to defend life, freedom, independence and human values at all times. That is why the Security Council and the United Nations exist. That is why the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraq and the establishment of an independent Government are requirements that must be met in accordance with the repeated and unanimous demands of the members of the Security Council.
We are firmly convinced that situations such as this are in part a result of the ambivalent and selective language that prevailed in the Council for over four decades. During that time, the power of the veto was used for political considerations, disregarding international law and order in situations in which world peace was breached. A position in keeping with the common interest of all and not the particular positions of any country or group of countries in the Security Council would have prevented reckless actions such as we are faced with today. Since the establishment of the Organization, Colombia has emphasized the negative effects of a discriminatory veto, as is demonstrated by the fact that it was one of the only two countries that opposed the establishment of the veto at the San Francisco meeting.
At the third session of the General Assembly, in 1949, the Head of the Colombian delegation stated, "Colombia, I repeat, has always refused to vote in favour of the rule of unanimity and has fought to limit the use of the veto." (A/PV.195) We view with satisfaction and optimism the unanimous steps being taken by the five permanent members of the Security Council with regard to the situation in the Persian Gulf. We hope that this climate of understanding will be maintained and will serve as a basis for the decisions that the Security Council may have to take in the future so as not to have its credibility and effectiveness tarnished through use of a double standard in considering its items.
Colombia has submitted various working papers to members of the Council for consideration, all aimed at promoting a peaceful settlement of the conflict. In that spirit we consider that there are two ways to achieve Iraq's withdrawal: through the use of force or by convincing President Saddam Hussein that he should withdraw voluntarily. If what we wish is to convince him of the latter course, we must ensure that he, as well as Iraq, will conclude that it is better to meet our demands than to reject them.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council, in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, not merely to threaten Iraq and hope for the best, but rather to take positive action towards achieving a peaceful settlement. If today we are opening the way for the option of using force, let us do so also for the peace option. The best hope of reaching a peaceful solution lies in creating a framework for negotiations.
In developing this idea we must state clearly what will be the future of the economic sanctions, of procedures for settling the financial claims and territorial disputes, and what procedure will be followed in guaranteeing regional peace and
(Mr. Jaramillo, Colombia) stability. Clarifying these issues could facilitate compliance with Security Council resolutions without in any way rewarding the invader for his action. All these would be in keeping with the spirit that the aggressor should not receive anything other than what would have been guaranteed him through strict application of the rules of international law.
Colombia wishes especially to request the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, to make preferential and continuous use of his good offices with a view to promoting a peaceful settlement of the conflict. His intelligence, quiet strength, resolve and proven experience lead us to hope that peace can be obtained in the Gulf region.
In recent months Colombia has been working to achieve our common goals and we will continue to do so. As the countdown begins towards 15 January, we will step up our efforts to promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The draft resolution we have before us today is, in our view, one more effort by the international community to achieve compliance with decisions adopted by the Security Council. With this draft resolution it is clearly expressing its interest in allowing Iraq one last opportunity to react and withdraw its troops peacefully from Kuwaiti territory. This pause of good will must not be misinterpreted by President Saddam Hussein, since the members of the Security Council, in authorizing Member States to use all necessary means, are expressing a clear position which, if ignored, would place full responsibility for ensuing developments on the Iraqi authorities.
In the hope that reason will prevail over any other consideration and that the hand of God will guide the decisions of those present here, we wish to announce that we will vote in favour of the draft resolution that is before us.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Minister for External Relations of Colombia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. MUSHOBEKWA KALIMBA wa KATANA (Zaire) (interpretation from French): Familiar as I am. Sir, with your qualities as an enlightened statesman and experienced diplomat, I must convey to you my congratulations on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month of November 1990. I also take this opportunity to convey my appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for the competence and determination which marked his presidency in October.
The spirit of co-operation that you have maintained recently among Ministers whose countries are members of the Security Council deserves special mention since the cohesive atmosphere it has produced has enabled members of the Council to act with greater unity.
For the second time in succession a ministerial meeting of the Security Council has been convened to discuss the situation between Iraq and Kuwait following the invasion of Kuwait by Iraqi forces and the avowed intention of the Iraqi authorities to perpetuate their occupation of Kuwait and turn that State, a Member of our Organization, into a mere province of Iraq.
In defiance of the principle laid down in Article 2 of the Charter, whereby all Members of the Organization are called upon to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered, Iraq - on the strength of its military superiority over Kuwait and its arsenal of sophisticated weapons, which it has been perfecting throughout recent years in the course of its war against Iran - has persisted in defying the decisions and resolutions of the Security Council calling on it to withdraw its forces of occupation peacefully from Kuwait.
Since 2 August 1990, the date of the occupation of Kuwait, when immediately beforehand negotiations had been under way between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
authorities in Jeddah with a view to bringing about a peaceful settlement of the financial dispute between the two countries, the Security Council has adopted 10 resolutions designed to remind Irag of its responsibilities under the Charter of our Organization as a Member State and called upon it, through the messages of peace which those resolutions constituted, to abide by the provisions of the Charter which require that Members of the Organization refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or behave in any other manner incompatible with the goals of the United Nations.
Having violated the rules of international law by infringing the territorial integrity and destroying the political independence of Kuwait, a Member of our Organization and of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Iraq must consequently restore to Kuwait its independence and territorial integrity.
Instead of following the path of reason and complying with the rules of international law, Iraq has striven to strengthen its occupation by adopting a series of measures ranging from the annexation of Kuwait to the deployment of its troops, units of which have been reinforced, and extending to tortures, atrocities, and harassment of all kinds inflicted upon Kuwaitis, not to mention the taking of foreign hostages and the violation of the diplomatic immunities of duly accredited diplomats.
Despite many goodwill missions which have gone to Baghdad to try to change the Iraqi position on the invasion and to persuade Iraq to restore independence to the people of Kuwait, the only response from the Iraqi authorities has been disdain and arrogance. The selective freeing of a few hostages highlights the cynicism that permeates the thought processes of those authorities. As a non-aligned country, Zaire deplores this obscurantist attitude on the part of Iraq, a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, which is deliberately exposing its people to the holocaust that could result from a confrontation between that country, on its own, and a heavily armed multinational force made up of many countries.
Iraq should remember the commitment it entered into on 24 April 1955 in Bandung, when it signed the Final Communiqué of the Asian-African Conference, which reaffirmed the fundamental principles of human rights, self-determination and the promotion of peace and co-operation in the world, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations, recognition of the equality of all races and of the equality of all nations, large and small, and abstention from intervention or interference in the internal affairs of other countries. Iraq was among the 24 countries of the third world at the time which ardently championed the principle of settling all international disputes by such peaceful means as negotiations, consultations, arbitration or judicial decision, or by other means that the parties might agree upon in conformity with the United Nations Charter, as laid down in paragraph 8 of section G of the Final Communiqué of the Asian-African Conference in Bandung.
The State of Kuwait, the victim of the invasion we are debating, did not take part in that important first Conference of third-world countries, which began the liberation struggle of all the peoples of the world, a struggle that has today resulted in the almost total elimination of colonialism from our planet.
Can it be that a country that was colonized, and that denounced and fought against colonialism, is today committing the same errors as those that were committed in the past, by enslaving the people of Kuwait and subjecting them to a new domination and a disturbing recolonization? Those who want the current of history with regard to decolonization to flow irreversibly will be disappointed by the invasion of Kuwait, a political event that incontestably goes against that current.
It is my privilege and duty once again to make a friendly, brotherly appeal to the Iraqi authorities to think again and recognize that the future and interests of the Iraqi people really lie in peace and the promotion of relations of co-operation, not only with an independent neighbouring Kuwait but also with all countries of the world that cherish peace and justice. For a war, whether long or short, could only bring devastation, destruction and the annihilation of all the cultural and moral values that the Iraqi people hold dear.
My delegation still hopes that this appeal will be heeded and that the occupation forces in Kuwait will be peacefully withdrawn before the deadline laid down in the draft resolution.
The international community and the members of the Security Council, motivated by the purposes of the Charter and responsible for maintaining international peace and security, while guaranteeing the political independence and territorial integrity of Member States of our Organization, cannot tolerate this affront by a single Member State of the United Nations.
Aware of its historic responsibilities to humanity, the Security Council could not envisage other measures against Iraq without giving it a reasonable pause for
reflection after four months of refusal to withdraw from Kuwait. The Council has therefore felt that it should be granted an additional delay of at least 45 days so that it may comply with the 10 resolutions adopted by the Council so far and restore to Kuwait its independence and territorial integrity.
It is in this context that we must view the current initiative by the Security Council, which would authorize all Member States co-operating closely with the Government of Kuwait to use all necessary and possible means to implement resolution 660 (1990) and to restore international peace and security in the area, unless by 15 January 1991 Iraq has withdrawn all its forces from Kuwait. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Those are my delegation's views on the item under discussion.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the Commissioner of State for Foreign Affairs of Zaire for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia); I should like to join previous speakers in expressing pleasure at seeing you, Sir, presiding over this session, which marks another important turning point in the Council's consideration of the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. I also wish to seize this opportunity to assure you of my delegation's full co-operation in the discharge of your heavy responsibilities at this important meeting of the Council.
In another era, at another place, nations of the world met to deliberate upon a blatant act of aggression perpetrated by an expansionist State against a weak and defenceless people. The time was 55 years ago and that defenceless people was none other than my own, the Ethiopian people, which had to appeal to the League of Nations to apply its own principles and take a stand against the aggression.
Historical records clearly show the serious failure of the League of Nations to act in defence of its own Covenant, thus letting brute force triumph, however briefly, over morality and legality. With the benefit of hindsight, it is often asserted, perhaps rightly, that had the League of Nations acted more forcefully and in unison at that critical time in defence of international legality the course of history would have been different, and very probably the world could have been spared the destruction and terrible tragedy of the Second World War.
So, when Iraq launched its naked, unprovoked aggression against small Kuwait, we in Ethiopia saw clearly the danger of history repeating itself, and were easily able to relate the plight of the Kuwaiti people to that faced by us in 1935. That the Ethiopian Government acted promptly in condemning that blatant aggression and in supporting collective action in this Council, therefore, was in no small measure due to the fact that it was a reflection of our own historical experience. It was also meant to signal that in the 1990s the international community must not repeat the mistakes of the 1930s.
Almost four months have elapsed since the invasion of Kuwait. During these four months numerous diplomatic efforts have been made to resolve the crisis peacefully. However, the peaceful measures taken so far, including economic sanctions, have not produced the desired results, for the occupation of Kuwait still continues. Indeed, the various resolutions adopted so far do not appear to have convinced Iraq of the seriousness and determination of the international community, which has waited patiently to see the return of the Gulf situation to the status quo ante.
Although the patience of the world community is running out and hopes for a peaceful resolution of the crisis are diminishing, the Council, in reaffirmation of its objective of settling the problem peacefully, is once again meeting today to adopt a resolution and provide Iraq with one more chance to mend its ways and respect the will of the international community.
Many have argued - and with good intentions, I must say - that the international community must wait still longer before considering additional measures. But we have learned from experience that economic sanctions can have an effect only with the passage of time, and that even that can be achieved only with complete, universal compliance. More important, the people of Kuwait rightfully demand the immediate restoration of their sovereignty. We must not, therefore, wait much longer, for justice delayed - as is so often said - could very well be justice denied. We owe it not only to the Kuwaiti people but also to ourselves to live up to our commitment to help to end the occupation of Kuwait by Iraq, and thereby fulfil our obligations vis-à-vis the preservation of international peace and security.
Ethiopia, as all members know, is located not far from the Arabian peninsula and the Persian Gulf, and, as a result, is seriously concerned both about the current crisis and about its long-term impact. We believe that it would not be too early to start thinking about a post-Iraqi withdrawal scenario leading to the establishment of durable stability, peace and security in the region, in order to obviate the possibility of hegemonistic régimes again trying to threaten their peaceful neighbours, particularly small and weak ones. We must also reaffirm and strengthen our determination to work towards lasting peace and stability in the entire region.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council to underscore our determination that aggression should be thwarted and not rewarded. It goes without saying that it is our earnest hope that the Iraqi leadership will heed the force of reason and sanity and make good use of the window of opportunity that it is being offered by the Security Council to comply with the overwhelming collective will of the international community and withdraw from Kuwait within the time-frame provided for in this draft resolution.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia for his kind words.
Mr. MALMIERCA PEOLI (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): First of all. Sir, I wish to greet you on the occasion of your assumption of the presidency of this important meeting of the Security Council. We hope that under your leadership the Council will work effectively to preserve mankind from the scourge of war.
We also wish to extend greetings to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Security Council who have come to New York as proof of the fact that we must redouble bur efforts to achieve the just solution we all desire.
We were told that this meeting at the Foreign Ministers level, and the draft resolution that would be proposed at it, would be aimed at enhancing the opportunities for a peaceful resolution of the crisis. Hence, we gladly accepted the invitation we received to participate in it.
In recent weeks the Cuban delegation to the Council, together with those of Malaysia and Yemen, have been working on the Colombian initiative with a view to achieving, rather than a draft resolution on a peaceful settlement of the conflict, the very bases that could initiate such a settlement. The Council is aware of the many consultations that these four countries have been holding within and outside the Council in the hopeful and tenacious search for the necessary solution. We shall continue along that path.
At the same time, our Government - which from the beginning of the conflict appealed not only to the President of Iraq but also to all the Arab Heads of State and to other countries, to the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and to this Organization to work for an expeditious solution to the conflict - sent a Vice-President of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cuba as a special envoy to Iraq just two weeks ago, carrying a message for President Saddam Hussein. That message had the very same intention of contributing to a political solution to the conflict.
Before that, our country had been quietly making numerous efforts designed to get Iraq to correct its positions and make them more flexible. At all times - ever since the crisis began - we have been betting on peace and not on war. We are convinced that more than once the Security Council has allowed itself to be drawn into hasty decisions which did not make the path to peace any easier.
Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait is unacceptable and must be condemned. In addition, for the non-aligned nations and countries of the third world it constitutes a regrettable and harmful act because it weakens the unity and solidarity we sorely need to face the challenge of overcoming underdevelopment and gaining a dignified place for the two thirds of the people of this planet who are so much in need of the resources squandered through the arms race and fratricidal wars.
The use of innocent persons as hostages is also reprehensible, and we have strongly condemned it in the Council. On the other hand, it is a real fact that the Security Council, by adopting a resolution for a total blockade, which did not except foodstuffs or medicines, turned millions of elderly people, women and children, who are no less innocent, into hostages of hunger and death. There are already children and sick people among the Iraqi population who have died as a
result of the lack of medicines in the hospitals. The presence of more than 200 Cuban doctors and nurses who have been giving their services free of charge in that country for more than 12 years enables us to testify to that fact. Such measures, among others, are not conducive to a solution of the situation that has been created, but rather they promote more intransigence or inflexibility.
Our clear position of principle with respect to each of the proposed resolutions leaves no room for doubt. We have supported those resolutions that we considered just and unquestionable. We have abstained or voted against those that in our view hindered the attainment of a peaceful solution or inexorably could lead to war.
We have also expressed our concern here over the enormous and increasing concentration of military forces from the United States of America and its allies in the Gulf, and over the danger of the outbreak of a war which, even if conventional, would bring enormous destruction to the countries of the region, starting with Kuwait and Iraq and their neighbours, in addition to the losses that would be suffered by the attacking forces. The destruction of the oilfields and facilities concentrated in the region and the resulting shortage of crude oil and its exponential price increases would affect the oil-consuming industrialized countries, but mainly it would affect the non-oil-producing countries of the third world. They would have to add soaring figures to the already high oil prices, on top of the already suffocating external debt and brutally unequal terms of trade.
We have on previous occasions pointed out here the contrast between the attitude of the Council towards the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and, to mention just two examples, towards the United States invasion of Panama not long ago and the situation in Palestine and the Arab territories, under occupation for 23 years now. The answer we have been given in this Chamber is that these are things that belong in the past, to the cold war era, which has ceased to exist; that we are at a new stage, in which the Charter of the United Nations will be respected by all; and that Iraq's action is an attack against the new world order being born of the best in the post-war spirit.
The reality is that it has not even been possible for this body to send a representative of the Secretary-General to the occupied territories, nor can it provide even the minimum guarantees to the Palestinian youth being murdered daily in the very land of which they have been so cruelly dispossessed.
Leaving aside moral, legal and historical considerations, Cuba has not attempted - it does not consider it realistic in the present situation - to establish any linkage between an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait and the Arab territories occupied by Israel. However, is it not scandalously incongruous to invoke norms for some that we ignore for others? Is this not the very same Council that has been holding consultations these past few days on another draft resolution, which said the minimum, was moderate and exclusively humanitarian, on the subject of Palestine, also drafted by Colombia, Malaysia, Yemen and Cuba? Yet the President of the Council ignored the request to convene this body, bypassing the established rules and procedures. Can it be that the long-suffering Palestinian people is even now, in this new, post-cold-war era, not considered worthy of the treatment meted out to other peoples? Can it be that, like the
(Mr. Malmierca Pepli. Cuba)
Lebanese, they can have used against them all the terror and brutality of the sophisticated military might of a strategic ally of the United States, without shocking those who say they are shocked by other actions that egually violate international laws and norms?
If we are indeed at the beginning of a new era, if it is our intention that international law shall prevail rather than strategic or geopolitical considerations, if we are interested in justice and not hegemony or control over the world's greatest wealth of oil, then now is the time to work together for a new world order in keeping with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations -which we have in sovereignty accepted - so that there is real equality and justice for all. It would be better still if the United Nations itself were to democratize and abandon norms and practices of privilege, adopted almost half a century ago, that are incompatible with today's world and deny the great majority of States of the international community full exercise of their prerogatives and faculties.
We understand that the various problems mankind faces today cannot be resolved all at once; however, when there is a real willingness, adequate solutions can be found. Dialogue and negotiation have proved themselves to be the best instruments available to the United Nations and its Member States for the resolution of conflicts.
Namibia is an encouraging example of the many difficulties which can be overcome at the negotiating table by parties in dispute. In contrast, the case of Korea is an example of how the use of force under the flag of the United Nations can, after three years of war, hundreds of thousands of victims and enormous material destruction, end in an armistice which keeps that country divided as it was before the conflict broke out, and with foreign military bases and tens of thousands of soldiers in the southern part of the territory.
Cuba believes that it would not be advisable to adopt a resolution which is a virtual declaration of war, a fixed-term ultimatum before hostilities are launched, and is equivalent to giving the United States and its allies carte blanche to use their enormous sophisticated military capability. If that is how the crisis is to be resolved, there can be no denying that the procedure is uncivilized to say the least and it will cause the international community enormous frustration and show that the United Nations and the principal statesmen of today's world are unable to solve problems politically and peacefully.
The text before us moreover violates the Charter of the United Nations by authorizing some States to use military force in total disregard of the procedures established by the Charter.
We would have favoured a firm resolution aimed at ensuring respect for the will of the international community, and at the same time being generous and magnanimous, a resolution that rectified the decision to prevent food and medicine reaching children, women and old people in Iraq. This would have indeed given great moral authority to the United Nations, lending force to its demand that the Iraqi troops withdraw from Kuwait, that Kuwait's sovereign rights be restored and that all hostages be released immediately.
Instead, we are being asked to support a deadline for war, in an attempt to meet the inflexibility and intransigence of the Government of Iraq with inflexibility and intransigence and most extreme measures by the Security Council. It is the duty of the United Nations to respond wisely to any manifestation of contempt or extremism, not to profess a fanatical belief in the use of force.
It has become apparent that force has not brought us closer to a solution but has, on the contrary, encouraged rigidity in Iraq's positions. The political trade and financial measures that have been taken are more than adequate. Today, Iraq cannot receive by air, land or sea goods which, in addition to food and medicine,
(Mr. Malmierca Peoli, Cuba) are essential to the life of a nation. It is obvious that no State could long withstand the political and economic isolation imposed on that country, without there being any need to starve women, children and old people or to wage bloody and destructive war.
This is an event unique in history. From the moment this draft resolution is adopted, the people of the world will, for over six weeks, be like the audience in an enormous stadium waiting for the outbreak of war. To paraphrase the title of a famous novel by Gabriel Garcia Marquez, this resolution being put before us could be called "The Chronicle of an Announced War". This is the one and only way this text submitted to us can be interpreted.
No one can escape the reality that the unleashing today, with the announced authorization of the Security Council, of unwanted conflict would be the worst expression of the equivocal role the United Nations could assume in future if it follows this path. Cuba is not willing to assume that historical responsibility.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Minister of External Relations of Cuba for his welcome of our accession to the presidency of the Council.
Mr, QIAN Qichen (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this important Security Council meeting at the Foreign Ministers level. Your diplomatic skill and experience are well known.
Almost four months have passed since the Iraqi invasion and annexation of Kuwait. The international community has made all kinds of efforts to settle the Gulf crisis, and the Security Council has adopted 10 successive resolutions in this regard. Regrettably, however, Iraq refuses to implement these resolutions and has not even indicated that it will withdraw its troops from Kuwait. The Gulf situation is becoming more and more tense and the danger of war is increasing daily. The Chinese Government feels deeply worried and anxious about this. In order to know the views of various parties concerned on the settlement of the Gulf crisis and to explore possibilities for a peaceful solution to the crisis, I paid working visits, from 6 to 12 November, to some countries in this region. I personally conveyed to the Iraqi leaders, in all earnestness, the international community's demand that they should withdraw from Kuwait immediately, and expounded to them the solemn positions of the Chinese Government. As a result of my visits, I feel deeply that members of the international community share common ground on the Gulf crisis on two points, namely, they all oppose the Iraqi invasion and annexation of Kuwait and call on Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait immediately, while at the same time they all wish to see the Gulf crisis settled through peaceful means. Today, when the Foreign Ministers of the States members of the Security Council are meeting here once again, I believe that such common ground is also shared by us.
The Chinese Government holds that relations between States should be based on the Five Principles of mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence; and that international disputes should be settled through dialogue and consultations. China is opposed to armed invasion and the annexation of one sovereign State by any other State under any pretext. Hence, China has from the very beginning called for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Iraqi troops from Kuwait and for respect for and the restoration of Kuwait's sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and legitimate government.
China does not have, nor does it wish to seek, any self-serving interests in the Gulf region, and its only concern is to maintain peace and stability in that region. Therefore, China has made every effort to advocate a peaceful solution to the Gulf crisis. This option may take longer, but the cost would be lower and the sequelae less serious, as it were, whereas a solution through the use of force would lead to serious consequences. Once this war breaks out, all the parties concerned will suffer great losses, which will have extremely adverse effects, not only on the Gulf countries, but on world peace and stability and on the world economy as well.
The United Nations, as an international Organization for the maintenance of peace and security, is responsible both to international security and to history. It should act with great caution and avoid taking hasty action on such a major question as authorizing some Member States to take military action against another Member State. The reason why China voted in favour of the 10 resolutions on the subject adopted earlier is that, although the sanction measures as stipulated in those resolutions are severe, they are not in the domain of the use of force. However, in the draft resolution about to be voted on, the wording "use all necessary means" is used, which, in essence, permits the use of military action.
This runs counter to the consistent position of the Chinese Government, namely, to try our utmost to seek a peaceful solution. Therefore, the Chinese delegation has difficulty voting in favour of this draft resolution. On the other hand, the Gulf crisis arises as a result of the Iraqi invasion and annexation of Kuwait, and Iraq has thus far not taken any practical steps on the key question of withdrawing troops from Kuwait. In this connection, we have noted that in the draft resolution the Security Council would call on Iraq to comply fully with Security Council resolution 660 (1990) and the subsequent relevant resolutions, that is, the resolutions urging Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait immediately. Since China is in favour of this position, China will not cast a negative vote on this draft resolution either.
The Chinese Government still holds that the international community should maintain and strengthen its political, diplomatic and economic pressure on Iraq. As long as there is a gleam of hope for peace, efforts should be continued towards this end. The Chinese Government wishes once again to urge Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait immediately, and wishes that Kuwait's sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and legitimate government should be restored. The Chinese Government once again calls on the international community to use all possible opportunities and ways and means and to continue to try its best to bring about a peaceful solution to the Gulf crisis.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of China for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document S/21969.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour; Canada, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Malaysia, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire
Against; Cuba, Yemen
Abstaining: China
The PRESIDENT; The result of the voting is as follows: 12 votes in
favour, 2 against, and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 678 (1990).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who have asked to make statements following the voting.
Mr. DUMAS (France) (interpretation from French): For the second time this year, our Council is meeting at the exceptional level of Foreign Ministers. Once again, as on 25 September last, the issue is the crisis resulting from Iraq's aggression against Kuwait.
This underscores the seriousness with which the international community we represent views this flagrant violation of the principles on which relations between States, their independence and security are founded. It also underscores the extent to which this continuing situation, in defiance of our successive resolutions, is provocative and unacceptable.
I was pleased to see in September the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. Shevardnadze, presiding over our work. Today, I hail the American Secretary of State, Mr. James Baker, and should like to assure him that he will find in France the same determination to see law prevail over force.
It has now been nearly four months since Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait, where in successive exhorbitant demands they have tried to impose the law of the strongest, which is rejected both by international law and by the resolve of the Kuwaiti people.
For almost four months now our Council has been endeavouring in successive resolutions to prevail upon the Iraqi authorities to restore the rule of law and to respect hallowed humanitarian principles. Ten resolutions are witness to this.
We are bound to recognize that, in the face of the international community's determination and remarkable cohesion, Iraq has shown no inclination to move towards what we rightfully expect of it.
In the wake of the recent developments in international relations, conditions have been created conducive everywhere to a new world order that respects sovereignties and identities and is also intended to promote solidarity and co-operation. Can we then tolerate such a blatant challenge for any extended
(Mr. Dumas, France) period of time, especially in a region which is so highly sensitive, where the expectations for security and stability call for special consideration?
Everything that we have done together so far was intended to make the aggressor see reason, in other words, to bring about a peaceful settlement to the crisis with due respect for law. Since our calls have fallen on deaf ears, we are compelled to resort to a higher level of pressure in the face of the continuing challenge to the international community. This is the meaning of the resolution we have just adopted.
Its text constitutes one last invitation to implement our resolutions, coupled with a warning which itself opens the way to the use of direct means of action. It is therefore consistent with the logic of the action taken from the start in order that aggression should no longer be considered the privilege of the strong, the misfortune of the weak and the means for the acquiescence of all the others.
The text is also consistent with the logic of the attitude displayed by Iraq. If Iraq chooses to remain deaf to the appeal to reason and respect for law, that is to say remain locked into the use of force, what other choice are we left with but to resort to this same means which would appear to be the only one it recognizes?
Our objective, France's objective, is not to reach that point. We do not want to compound the troubles of a region which has already suffered from various crises over the past few decades. Nor do we intend to strike at a country and a people with which we had maintained relations of respect and friendship until quite recently. We deeply hope that Iraq's leaders will understand the meaning of our warning and accept what reason dictates. In short, we prefer a solution by a peaceful means, a peaceful settlement, and not confrontation.
But they must entertain no doubt as to our resolve. Although my country is deeply committed to the search for a political settlement, in the final analysis law must prevail, that is to say, the attainment of the goal we have set for ourselves in our resolutions. This is in the interests of all our States; at stake is the future of relations among States in the building of a more secure and stable world.
It is in this spirit that my country voted in favour of this resolution. I should like to add the following comments again with regard to the meaning of our vote;
Assuming no adverse changes in the circumstances, my Government does not intend to introduce or to support any Security Council action to extend the scope or nature of the sanctions adopted in its resolutions 661 (1990), 665 (1990) and 670 (1990), or any new Security Council measures regarding Iraq during the period from today up to the date in paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 678 (1990), which we have just adopted.
Secondly, this undertaking is without prejudice to any and all rights of my Government under the Charter, including its rights in the event the Government of Iraq allows any harm to come to foreign nationals held against their will by that Government.
Finally, my Government recalls the provisions of paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 670 (1990), whereby individuals are held personally responsible for grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and states that all those involved in violations of the laws relating to armed conflict, including the prohibition against initiating the use of chemical and biological weapons contrary to the 1925 Geneva Protocol, to which Iraq is a signatory, will similarly be held personally responsible.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the French Republic for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr, CLARK (Canada); Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your presidency of this critical meeting of the Security Council.
It is just over two months since Foreign Ministers first addressed the Security Council in its consideration of Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait. That historic occasion, presided over by our colleague, the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, was a clear sign of our collective resolve in the face of a terrible transgression of international law and a challenge to the fabric of our international order.
Today, we have gathered for a second time in this crisis - this time to adopt a resolution which demonstrates that our collective resolve is firm.
We are determined to respond to the challenge of Iraq's aggression, which goes to the heart of all that we have been trying to do at and through the United Nations for the past 45 years: our attempt to build a workable world Organization able to prevent, or to reverse, the most blatant and dangerous of international offences - the acquisition by force of another country's territory and, in this specific case, an effort to extinguish a United Nations Member in its entirety. Our purpose is not order for order's sake. It is because world order allows us to act together against the diseases that ravage children, the divisions that feed conflict and the underdevelopment that cripples countries.
As the Prime Minister of Canada stated in a speech before Canada's Parliament this morning, "Canada stands with the overwhelming majority of the world community, including our partners on the Security Council, in giving Saddam Hussein an opportunity to reflect carefully on the consequences of his action and a reasonable timetable to withdraw from Kuwait. President Hussein appears to be quite prepared to see his people endure hardship indefinitely if he can hang onto Kuwait. We see no contradiction between continuing to apply pressure through economic sanctions - giving diplomacy a chance - and giving President Hussein a period of time to withdraw from Kuwait." (spoke in French)
Today's resolution is the twelfth resolution this Council has adopted since Iraq's brutal and completely unjustifiable invasion of its smaller neighbour, the sovereign State of Kuwait, a Member in full standing of the United Nations. It is a resolution with a clear and unequivocal message, in the face of Iraq's continuing refusal to comply with the earlier resolutions adopted by this Council, that there are limits to the international community's patience. This resolution is also, however, tempered by a deeply ingrained sense of justice and the most profound desire for peace.
In this resolution, we have done more than simply reiterating our commitment to the earlier decisions we have taken. What we are saying is that, should the Government of Iraq continue to choose to ignore its obligations under international law, and under Security Council resolutions, the Member States, co-operating with the Government of Kuwait, will be authorized to use all necessary means to uphold and ensure the implementation of these resolutions. These means include the use of
force.
(Mr. Clark, Canada) (spoke in English)
Does this then mean that force will be used? That is up to Iraq. It is not yet too late to solve this peacefully, and, indeed, a peaceful solution is the desire of us all.
We have offered the Government of Iraq, in this resolution, a pause of goodwill, a period of time which we all hope it will use, not only to reflect upon the decisions of this Council, and their potential consequences, but also a period of time in which it can reverse the actions which it has taken, and the grave damage it has done to the fabric of international peace and security, a period of time in which it must release the many foreign nationals detained against their will, when it must withdraw entirely and unconditionally from Kuwait and allow its sovereignty and independence to be fully restored.
We hope Iraq will take the opportunity that this resolution offers, and by full compliance resume its place as a responsible member of the international community, on the basis of full respect for international law.
Should we also be attempting to resolve other existing tensions in the Gulf and Middle East regions? My Government believes that one of the consequences of the current Gulf crisis could be a window of opportunity to solve other problems facing a most troubled region. We have of late witnessed a pattern of successes within the Security Council in addressing regional issues. If we can sustain our collective determination, then a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli dispute, which Canada views as necessary and urgent, may be within our grasp. This is a matter that can only be addressed, however, separately from the current crisis.
Iraq's offence is sui generis and its undoing, according to the highest principles of international law, and the highest interests of international security, is essential. But resolution of all territorial disputes in the region
on a just and equitable basis is urgently required, if peace and security are to aPPly ln at durable way. We will also have to turn our collective attention to the need for arms control measures, especially for weapons of mass destruction. Sustaining the new unity of the international community is the only hope and the best hope that these problems can be resolved with speed.
Many Canadians have been directly affected by this crisis, one of the most grievous the world has faced since the end of the Second World War. Canadians remain detained against their will by the Government of Iraq. Hundreds of other Canadians have joined the multinational coalition of forces in the region and are now separated by thousands of miles from their family and friends. And, despite our geographic distance, every Canadian is threatened by the new, dangerous tensions in this most volatile region of the world.
The presence of Canadian forces in the Gulf is in keeping with our traditional role as a peace-keeper under the auspices of the United Nations. To keep the peace, one must first make the peace, and it is to that cause that the Canadian men and women in the Gulf are committed. Our position has always been to uphold international law and the universally recognized norms of conduct in the relations between States.
Does Iraq have legitimate concerns which should be discussed? Perhaps there are some. It is up to the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait to negotiate those questions, either directly or in the many international forums which adjudicate exactly such disputes. The possibility of such negotiations is contained in resolution 660 (1990), the very first adopted by the Council in responding to the invasion. We urge Iraq to pursue this option. But first it must comply with the resolutions of this Council, resolutions made necessary by Iraq's deliberate
(Mr. Clark, Canada) decision to abandon the search for peaceful solutions and to invade Kuwait and seek to destroy it as a sovereign State. We sincerely hope Iraq will comply with these resolutions, as all of us wish to see peace instead of war.
That choice, between peace and war, is now in the hands of Iraq.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary of State for External Affairs of Canada for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. ABU HASSAN (Malaysia): Mr. President, I should like to join others in extending our felicitations to you for presiding over the Council at a time when the United States holds the presidency. With your experience and stature, I am sure you will guide these important deliberations of the Council to the desired end. It has come to pass, finally, that the Security Council has adopted a resolution to present Iraq, in clear terms, with the choice within a specific time frame to comply with the relevant resolutions or face the certainty of force authorized by the Council. For Malaysia, this is an extremely tragic turn of events. Malaysia has laboured over each of the 10 resolutions adopted by the Council and insisted on the need to project a balanced signal to Iraq: the necessity of complying with the resolutions and that the diplomatic option is always open. Even with the present resolution, the most serious in the history of the Council, it is Malaysia's hope that force does not have to be inevitable, that there is yet time for Iraq to comply and that the region can still be spared from war.
Malaysia has just now had to discharge an awesome responsibility as a member of the Council. Malaysia prays to the Almighty Allah that we have taken the right decision, that in the final analysis, in discharging our responsibilities, we are underlining the determination of the international community to check aggression and restore Kuwait.
It has not been an easy decision for Malaysia. We carefully considered all the various factors before arriving at our decision to support the resolution. We also listened closely to our friends from the Arab region and those who have exchanged counsel with us. We have particularly taken heed of the desperate pleas of Kuwait, a small country whose sufferings have weighed heavily on our judgement.
The natural tendency would be to abstain, horrified at the prospects of war and the thousands who would perish; however, we are convinced that such a step on our part would not amount to effectively discharging our responsibilities in the Council.
As a small nation and a member of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and of the Non-Aligned Movement, it is Malaysia’s duty to support and uphold the unity and resolve of the Council to reverse aggression and to restore peace. Malaysia’s stand against strong nations invading or annexing small nations is well known. This applies not only to Iraq but to all others, without exception. We cannot compromise on this if we are, together, to build strong foundations for a
new world order.
We have also asked ourselves whether the Council has given sufficient time for sanctions to have had the necessary impact. Again, the natural inclination, to avoid the use of force, would have been to allow more time for sanctions. But the Council is faced with the reality that it will be months and months before it can be deduced that sanctions have had effects. In the meantime, Iraq has shown no indication of complying with the resolutions. In the meantime, too, the destruction of Kuwait continues, as well as the perpetration of atrocities on Kuwait's people. Also, several thousand foreigners remain as hostages.
Malaysia would like to make it clear that our support for resolution 678 (1990) is not without reservations. The authorization of force, in the eventuality that Iraq still does not comply within the time frame specified, can only be taken under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations. We have not agreed to any attempt unilaterally to apply Article 51 of the Charter once the Security Council is seized of the matter. In this regard, we have always insisted on the centrality of the United Nations role in the maintenance of international peace and security. Any proposed use of force must be brought before the Council for its prior approval, in accordance with the specific provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. We regret that this point is not clearly reflected in this resolution, a precedent that may not bode well for the future. When the United Nations Security Council provides the authorization for countries to use force, these countries are fully accountable for their actions to the Council through a clear system of reporting and accountability, which is not adequately covered in resolution 678 (1990).
It must be underlined that this resolution does not provide a blank cheque for excessive and indiscriminate use of force. The Council has certainly not authorized actions outside the context of its resolutions 660 (1990), 662 (1990)
and 664 (1990). Malaysia warns against any action purportedly taken under this resolution that would lead to the virtual destruction of Iraq. We remain conscious of the untold misery that war will inflict on the countries and the people in the region. The Middle East, already a flash-point of conflict, due primarily to Israeli aggression and occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands, cannot afford any more turmoil. History has taught us that it is easy to start a war, but ending it is often messy and, in many recent cases, inconclusive.
As Foreign Minister of Malaysia, and on this International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, I am obliged to express my deep disappointment with the Council over its inability for more than three weeks now to address properly the question of Palestinians in the occupied territories, arising from the report of the Secretary-General. All attempts to bring about a proper consideration of this matter, including a vote, have been deliberately thwarted, raising questions on the procedure and conduct of the Council. Malaysia will not allow the Palestinian issue to be shunted aside on the basis of the political expediencies of certain countries. Those countries which make such attempts must be clearly reminded by other members of the Council, who must raise their voices, in fairness, if the Council is to maintain its credibility for being even-handed. For our part, the Malaysian people, who are unswerving in their support of the Palestinian cause, will not understand inconsistencies and contradictions of this nature.
It is absurd to talk of linkages, but every action of the Council stands evaluated, one against the other. On the basis of the performance of the Council over this period, the Council can easily be labelled as doing disservice to the Palestinian cause.
Malaysia would like to urge Iraq to weigh clearly the import of the resolution that the Council has adopted. There is a period given, as a pause of goodwill, for
Iraq to take stock of the whole situation. Iraq can still prevent the use of force and the outbreak of war. There is no dishonour in responding to the appeals of the international community. Steps taken by Iraq to comply with the relevant resolutions would enhance important prospects for a peace framework that would fully address issues between Iraq and Kuwait and bring about an early removal of foreign forces from the region, as well as allow for a positive consideration of the wider questions of peace and security in the region. Efforts along these lines being pursued by Colombia have Malaysia's support. We feel that such a framework can become a logical complement to resolution 678 (1990), facilitating, it is to be hoped, Iraqi compliance. There are many Members of the United Nations that, horrified by the prospects of war, would like the Security Council seriously to consider such an initiative.
In conclusion, Malaysia, as a member of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, would like to implore Iraq, for the sake of peace, to comply with the resolutions adopted by the Security Council. The onus for the avoidance of the use of force is clearly on Iraq.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia for his kind words.
I now call on the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. HURD (United Kingdom): I would like, first, to thank and congratulate you, Sir, for the strenuous efforts which you and others have made during the United States presidency to sustain and carry forward the objectives of the Council.
We are gathered here, it seems to me, to make a strong bid for peace. That is the purpose of this meeting. No State represented on the Council has any zest for
war. Certainly, we in Britain know well the suffering and destruction which war in the Gulf would be likely to cause. It must be right to go the last mile in search of peace, and that is what this resolution does. We have put into place today the latest and, I think, the strongest of the peaceful pressures on Iraq.
The international community, as represented by this Council, has been clear from the beginning about the nature of Iraq's action against Kuwait. Indeed, Iraq made only a fleeting and wholly futile attempt to justify the aggression. So we have not seen here that flow of argument and counter-argument or the complicated tangle of historical background which, in other cases, has made it difficult for the Security Council to make or persevere in a clear response. There have been many acts of international injustice since 1945, and it is perfectly true that too
many of those acts still persist. That is beyond doubt.
AE/ad
(Mr. Hurd, United Kingdom)
But in a world composed of nation States, and in an organization like the United Nations, which consists wholly of nation States, the obliteration of one Member State by another is an act on its own. It undermines and threatens the whole structure of international order. And that is not an abstract concept. By undermining and threatening the structure of international order, an act of aggression of this kind threatens the safety of all our citizens.
So the response of the international community has been swift and severe, but also peaceful. Nearly four months have passed since the aggression. Sanctions are in place and have been convincingly applied. If he were to base himself solely on reading the resolutions of the Security Council and the list of those who supported them the President of Iraq would have a clear and accurate account of the reactions of the international community.
But, of course, in the world today communication is confused. We live in the world of the soundbite, of brilliantly organized mass media pouring out, hour by hour, a mass of incomplete reports, impressions and speculation. By a selective reading of this output the President of Iraq might gain a quite different impression - ah impression of divisions and of irresolution. A number of individuals, including people from my country - usually with good intentions -have, by their visits to Baghdad or their efforts elsewhere, contributed to this blurring of perceptions. We see it as one of the main purposes of this resolution to blow away the uncertainties and set out for the Iraqis exactly how they stand and how we stand.
There is no ambiguity about what the Council requires in this resolution and in previous resolutions. We require that Iraq comply fully with the terms of resolution 660 (1990) and all later resolutions and withdraw all its forces unconditionally to the positions on which they stood on 1 August. This means that withdrawal must be complete. If not, then Member States, acting with the
Government of Kuwait, are authorized to use such force as may be necessary to compel compliance.
From now on, until the date of expiry of the deadline, unless there should be an adverse change in circumstances, we do not intend to introduce or to support any Security Council action to extend the scope or nature of the sanctions under Security Council resolutions 661 (1990), 665 (1990) or 670 (1990) or any new measures in the Security Council regarding Iraq. As my colleague from France, Mr. Roland Dumas, said in respect of his Government, this is without prejudice to the rights of my Government under the Charter should the Government of Iraq allow any harm to come to foreign nationals whom it is holding against their will.
I should also like to recall the terms of paragraph 13 of resolution 670 (1990), under which individuals are held personally responsible for grave breaches of the Geneva Convention. We should also hold personally responsible those involved in violations of the laws of armed conflict, including the prohibition against initiating the use of chemicals or biological weapons contrary to the Geneva Protocol of 1925, to which Iraq is a party.
In conclusion, I want to say that, following the adoption of this resolution, there is an option for peace, and the Iraqis hold it in their hands. It is for them to use that option or to discard it. The international community has not added today to its demands. It is not asking for anything except the reversal of the aggression - namely, full compliance with previous resolutions. But that reversal and that compliance the international community intends to obtain. The Iraqis now have a further period of grace in which to respond. By 15 January - the date in this resolution - the aggression will be nearly six months old. So will the suffering of Kuwait and of most of our hostages. No one can accuse the Council of impatience. The military option is reality, not bluff; if it has to be used, it will be used with the full backing of the Council. Now that the facts are plain
(Mr. Hurd, United Kingdom) and clear, the Iraqis, it seems to me, have the strongest possible incentive, of all kinds, to choose the peaceful course. Let us hope and pray they will do so.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. PAASIO (Finland): Let me, first, thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation extended to me and to my colleagues from the other States members of the Security Council to attend this meeting at the ministerial level. We are grateful for the opportunity to meet today under your distinguished leadership.
The invasion of Kuwait by Iraq has created a situation of unprecedented danger. Iraqi aggression imperils the very existence of a sovereign State Member of this Organization. It has created human suffering on a vast scale. It directly challenges the system of collective security that exists under the Charter. That is why Finland is engaged. That is why the Ministers are here, for the second time. Collective security means that the security of Kuwait is also the security of all other States, particularly of the smaller ones. The foundations of our own security are at stake.
The world community has shown determination in the face of the unprovoked aggression by Iraq against Kuwait. The occupation will not be allowed to stand. But the world has also shown plenty of patience.
What the Security Council demands of Iraq has been clearly and openly stated on many occasions. The principal demands are: full and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces from the territory of Kuwait, leading to the restoration of Kuwaiti sovereignty, and the release of all foreign nationals under Iraqi control held against their will.
Throughout the course of these events the Security Council has taken action as provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The sanctions
AE/ad	S/PV.2963
84-85 (Mr, Paasio, Finland) mandated four months ago remain the principal instrument intended to demonstrate to the Iraqi leadership the need to change course.
According to the Charter, should the Security Council consider that the economic and diplomatic measures have proved to be inadequate it may take further action as may be necessary to restore international peace and security. Acting under these provisions, the Council is simply giving effect to what is the core of the United Nations system of collective security. The authority of the Security Council must be upheld.
During the past 40 years the circumstances in which the Charter was drafted and the central purposes it was intended to serve may sometimes have been forgotten. We are now confronted with a situation in which one Member State claims the right to obliterate another Member State. Such an act is precisely the kind of aggression that the drafters of the Charter intended to prevent and, if necessary, suppress.
Everything the Council does today is intended to show that a peaceful settlement is possible. Throughout this crisis Finland has worked for a peaceful outcome. The resolution adopted today should be regarded as a warning. There are no plans to extend in the coming period, until the date mentioned in the resolution, the scope of the sanctions already in force. These weeks should be fully utilized in order to achieve a peaceful way out of the crisis. We are waiting for Iraq to respond to our message of peace and to give, in return, a message leading to reconciliation with the world community. The good offices of the Secretary-General are available in this regard.
It is very late, but it is not yet too late for Iraq to do what is necessary for the achievement of a peaceful solution to the crisis created by its own use of force against Kuwait.
Mr, ESSY (Cote d'Ivoire) (interpretation from French): First, Sir, I should like to say how very pleased my delegation is to see you presiding over this historic Security Council meeting at the ministerial level. You represent a country with which Cote d'Ivoire is linked by warm relations of friendship and close co-operation.
I take this opportunity also to express to Sir David Hannay, Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, our appreciation of the fruitful contribution he made to the work of the Security Council during the month of October.
The Council has today adopted its twelfth resolution since 2 August on the agenda item "The situation between Iraq and Kuwait". Cote d'Ivoire supported all those resolutions, thereby demonstrating its refusal to accept the primacy of force over law and justice in international relations.
In this connection the Ninth Congress of the Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire, which was held at Yamoussoukro from 1 to 5 October, addressed the issue of the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq. In the resolution unanimously adopted on that subject the Congress, "Recalling the aims and principles of the foreign policy of Côte d'Ivoire, based on the search for peace among nations, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and rejection of recourse to the threat or use of force against either the territorial integrity or the political independence of any State, condemned the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq and endorsed the resolutions adopted by the Security Council calling upon Iraq to put an end to its occupation of Kuwait."
My country remains firmly dedicated to peace and in all circumstances prefers peaceful means for the settlement of conflicts or differences, whatever their origin, gravity or complexity - the means, that is, of dialogue and negotiation.
(Mr. Easy, Cote d'Ivoire)
Our attitude to this conflict has always been based solely on the logic of peace. Iraq, a member, like Kuwait, of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, is apparently not fully weighing the disastrous consequences of its act, which of course penalizes all nations, but most especially the very great majority of that Movement's members whose economies are being disrupted by the collapse of commodity prices and the explosion in the price of petroleum products. This, alas, threatens to destroy several years of effort aimed at the structural adjustment and new investments that are indispensable to the health of their economies.
The resolution adopted today is a logical outcome of Iraq's non-compliance with the resolutions adopted earlier by the Council, especially resolution 660 (1990). It should, in our view, maintain and ensure the renewal of the credibility of our Organization and the hope it is now inspiring.
The Iraqi leaders, who excel in the art of political manipulation via the media and are toying with human lives as if engaged in a game of chess, will not attain their objective of leading the international community to accept out of weariness a situation entailing the occupation, subjugation and destruction of an independent State Member of the United Nations. The international community cannot allow a dangerous precedent to be set that would create serious threats to peace for the great majority of the small States that today make up the United Nations and for which the Charter is the best shield in the preservation of their sovereignty and integrity.
Kuwait will live, and we hope that Iraq will think again and take to heart the maxim according to which blood should never be shed in a dispute that can be settled according to the law.
It is now for Iraq to view events in the light of the old Akan proverb of my country: "It is useless to violate the rights of others in the interest of one's own rights, for that way lies only disappointment."
<Mr. Essy, Cote d'Ivoire)
At a time like the present, when the emphasis is on the quest for peace and solidarity among States, on development and the protection of the human environment, and when the United Nations is working more zealously than ever before to achieve those goals, the international community cannot allow aggression such as that committed by Iraq against a small neighbouring country to darken the horizon of its hopes and thwart its efforts to establish peace and harmony, whether regional or global. We therefore hope that the resolution which the Council has just adopted will be perceived by Iraq's leaders as a reflection of the international community’s determination to ensure respect, by all necessary means, for the great purposes and principles of the Charter. It is, of course, our firm hope that Iraq's leaders will rise above their immediate ambitions and realize that the interests of their own country, their people, require that they end their aggression. Above all, we hope - and this is the most sincere wish of the Government of Cote d'Ivoire - that the ultimate goal of the resolution we have just adopted is, according to the well-known adage, to know how to show one's strength in order not to have to use it.
Thus, the last appeal that our Council is addressing to Iraq is to respond positively and without delay to the expectations of the international community. We do not seek its humiliation. We demand only that it comply with international law.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Côte d'Ivoire for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. SHEVARDNADZE (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I think it is both logical and symbolic that this meeting of the Security Council is being presided over by Mr. James Baker, the Secretary of State of the United States, the country which from the very beginning of the Persian Gulf crisis has played an active role in countering aggression.
There is logic in the actions of our Council, which, from the outset of the crisis, has acted with cohesion and consistency and, at the same time, in a responsible, calm and prudent manner, in strict conformity with the letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter in its modern interpretation, which restores its original rights and authority. We have been faced with the first extremely grave test of the post-cold-war period, and we are coping with it, placing mankind’s common interests at the centre of our policy and being guided by the principles of the new thinking in international affairs.
There is justice and a large measure of generosity in the resolution we have just adopted. As the end of the fourth month of the crisis approaches, the international community is showing genuine magnanimity and giving the side that has breached the peace time to think again. At the same time we are giving the victim in this crisis a firm pledge that it will not have to wait much longer, that help is on the way and that its rights will be fully restored.
Today we have started the count-down of the "pause of goodwill". We are confident that before the time is up events will take a turn towards peace and that the pause will usher in a transition to a political settlement.
Had we thought otherwise, this resolution would have been unnecessary. It is one last sincere attempt to give common sense a chance to prevail; or, let us say, to give the instinct of self-preservation a chance to work; to give Iraq time to think about the consequences of any other than peaceful outcome of the crisis.
So we want to begin the pause of goodwill by calling upon Iraq and President Saddam Hussein to rise above considerations of prestige, to display wisdom and foresight and to place above all else the interests of the country and the fate of its people and of peace and stability on our planet.
No member of the Council wants or seeks a tragic outcome; but nor should there be any mistake about the collective will of the international community as expressed here, or about its resolve and its readiness to act. The Council's action is based on the clear awareness and belief that shirking its duty now by failing to reverse the aggression would mean even greater hardship and suffering for the world and for all nations. Those who have breached the peace should know that "all necessary means" will indeed inexorably be used against them. All of us would be happy if only there were no need to resort to such means.
Let me say frankly that today's decision was not an easy one for the Soviet Union. Everyone knows of our long-standing ties with Iraq and our good feelings towards the people of that country. But it is precisely our genuine concern for the future of millions of Iraqis that motivates us, together with our concern for the world in which all of us have to live.
We have just emerged from the dark shadow of confrontation, which so often served as a cover for unlawful and arbitrary actions. We must put all that behind
us and rule it out for the future.
We have just begun to overcome the mutual animosity, suspicion and estrangement that generated tension and conflict. Again, we must put it behind us and no longer be weighed down by that burdensome legacy.
We have just become aware of the universal value of freedom and democracy for man, for society and for international relations. They must be protected and upheld. Only on the basis of those values can we build and affirm a new, just world order and move towards equitable, mutually respectful and mutually beneficial relations among States and peoples.
I say quite bluntly that what has happened in the Persian Gulf region strikes a blow at the emerging world of civilized behaviour. That is why it is so important to parry that blow and make sure that it does not do irreparable damage to the institutions of peace and democracy, thereby plunging the world into chaos. The world will not enter a more lucid, calm and stable phase unless it can meet the residual challenges of the past and rise to the new challenges of the present and the future.
It is of overriding importance that today we are no longer responding to these challenges in the same way as we did yesterday. We are giving preference to the law, to action under the authority of the Charter and of the Security Council, and to collective efforts. We have acted thus, collectively and in concert, throughout the long and difficult weeks of the Persian Gulf crisis, and we are continuing to do so. We are right to act in this way. I see it as a sign that we are truly entering a time of political maturity and have recognized that freedom and democracy are inseparable from an awareness by each one of us of our responsibility for order, for the state of our common home and for saving world civilization.
I have to say that, while it in no way minimizes our sympathy for Kuwait or our pain at its suffering, there is more at stake than the fate of that one State.
Our common future is threatened. Hence the certainty that Kuwait will be reborn as an independent and sovereign State, as demanded by the resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
As some of my colleagues have rightly noted, we do not favour linkages in politics, least of all such absurd ones as those that seem to require the creation of a new problem in order to solve an old one, or the enslavement of one nation in order to promote the freedom of another. That would be truly absurd. But nor do we see any logic in artificially holding back efforts to solve a long-standing problem just because of the emergence of a new one that has to be addressed first.
The international community and the United Nations have been trying for many years to deal with the problems of a Middle East settlement and of resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question - unfortunately, without much success so far. We were involved with this problem before the events of 2 August. Our efforts took various forms. Consultations were held; various approaches were explored; there were discussions of the possibility of setting up security structures in the region, implementing security-building measures, and many other things. Wide-ranging dialogue on all these matters has long been a part of exchanges between the Soviet Union and the United States at various levels.
Why should we stop all this now? Are we in some strange way intimidated by the word "linkage"? We believe that we should continue what we have been doing and what we ought to be doing now: seeking a path towards a comprehensive settlement of the whole complex of Middle East problems that existed prior to 2 August. That is not rewarding anyone; it is just sound policy and common sense.
The Soviet Union is prepared to develop further its contacts with all the parties concerned in seeking a settlement of the Middle East conflict. In this context we have been co-operating actively with Arab countries and the Palestinians. We are ready to engage in dialogue, in any form and at any level, with Israel. We find the approaches of European countries interesting. And of course consultations among the permanent members of the Security Council on issues related to a Middle East settlement have a very special role to play.
Our clear and straightforward position on the Persian Gulf crisis enables us to work in that direction without being deterred by hints or accusations of somehow linking this crisis with the problem of an Arab-Israeli settlement. Let us not talk ourselves into believing in what does not and cannot exist.
The purpose of the resolution we have just adopted is to put an end to the aggression and make it clear to the world that aggression cannot be rewarded. We hope the Iraqi leaders will find the strength to recognize the responsibility they bear to their own people and to history and comply with the will of the international community. We are serving them with a special warning about their personal responsibility for the fate of foreign nationals in Iraq. Endangering their lives will be regarded as a crime against humanity, with all the consequences
that entails.
On behalf of the Soviet Union, I would like to state that in accordance with the support given by my Government to the concept of the "pause of goodwill" referred to in the resolution adopted today and for its duration, we will be guided by the following precepts, to which some of my colleagues have already referred.
First, assuming that there have been no adverse changes in the circumstances, my Government does not intend to introduce or to support any Security Council action to extend the scope or nature of the sanctions under Security Council resolutions 661 (1990), 665 (1990) or 670 (1990), or any new measures of the Security Council regarding Iraq during the period between now and the date indicated in operative paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 678 (1990).
Secondly, that undertaking is without prejudice to any and all rights of my Government under the Charter, including its rights should the Government of Iraq allow any harm to come to foreign nationals held against their will by the Government of Iraq.
Thirdly, my Government recalls the terms of operative paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 670 (1990) under which individuals are held personally responsible for grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and states that all those involved in violations of the laws of armed conflict, including the prohibition against initiating the use of chemical or biological weapons contrary to the Geneva Protocol of 1925, to which Iraq is a signatory, will similarly be held personally responsible.
In conclusion, I express the confidence that we will be able to overcome this crisis peacefully - I repeat, peacefully, and in a political way - and to end it on a note of hope for a better future for all of us.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. NASTASE (Romania): You are presiding. Sir, over a historic meeting of the Security Council. Your statesmanship and experience in world affairs, as a representative of a country that has an important and responsible role to play in maintaining international peace and security, are significant guarantees for the success of our proceedings.
I would also like to take the opportunity to pay a tribute to Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his constant efforts and valuable contribution to enhancing the role of the world Organization in the peaceful settlement of the Gulf crisis.
Two months ago, I had occasion to reiterate before the Council the position of Romania on the agenda item entitled "The situation between Iraq and Kuwait". We continue to believe that every effort should be made to ease the existing tension politically and to solve the issues at stake by peaceful means, in accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council.
The most appropriate framework in that regard is the United Nations. Consequently, all efforts should be directed towards making full use of the potential of the Charter and the resources offered by it. We are thinking in particular of the capabilities of the Security Council and of the good offices and other initiatives that may be undertaken by the Secretary-General. We should be inspired and encouraged by past experience in the Council, when the solidarity and common will of its members made possible the adoption of effective measures. Such a consensus has been achieved only through patience and wisdom, sometimes with considerable effort. Today, those requirements are more pressing than ever before.
Indeed, the persistence of the present situation in the Gulf is conducive to new dangers, even to a catastrophe in the area, with unpredictable consequences for world peace and security, as well as for the world economy. It is absolutely certain that the maintenance of the current situation in the area is seriously
affecting the whole international community. Many countries, including Romania, are confronted with tremendous difficulties in the economic and social fields as a consequence of the implementation of resolutions imposing economic sanctions on Iraq. In fact, the stability of the entire energy situation in the world is imperilled.
Such a course of events challenges the credibility of the United Nations and of the Security Council in particular. The Council should prove its capacity to ensure the implemention of and respect for its own decisions. At the same time, the Council should prove its real efficiency as a body dedicated to the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
As members of the Council, we find ourselves facing a delicate challenge. On the one hand, there is no doubt that the decisions of the Security Council should be fully respected and implemented; on the other, all chances to achieve a political settlement of the crisis should be explored and used.
This is not the first time that the international community has faced difficult choices. We should always learn from the lessons of the past. The present situation in the Gulf is a clear reminder to us of the test Romania had to undergo when an illustrious Romanian diplomat of the inter-war period, Foreign Minister Nicolae Titulescu, advocated a dramatic decision against a friendly country that had committed an aggression against another State. It was a case referred to by Secretary of State James Baker in his opening remarks. The legal obligation had to prevail over any other consideration. As Titulescu put it in that particular case, similar to the one under consideration:
"The line of Romania's policy was a straight one, but it was the straight line of the bullet that penetrates the heart before hitting its target."
Indeed, we have had to make a difficult decision today. We did make it, however, on the basis of our conviction that the sovereign and independent existence of our nations implies international service to peace. It is that service that motivated our action today in the Council.
Consequently, we had to arrive at the logical conclusion that the Security Council should use all the means at its diposal, including those provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.
We express the hope that the resolution just adopted and the statements made here will be responsibly interpreted by all concerned, who will finally prove to have the necessary political wisdom. It is not too late to listen to the voice of reason and to choose a dignified course of action leading to the full restoration of peace and legal order in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We are confident that peace can and should be made secure in the area and to that end we must use all our force of conviction and resort to every peaceful means available.
May this historic meeting of the Security Council serve that purpose and be a landmark in our common endeavours to promote the development of a peaceful and rational order based on the universal legal norms and values cherished by the
United Nations.
The PRESIDENT; I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania for the kind words he addressed to me.
I should now like to make a statement in my capacity as Secretary of State of the United States of America.
I think that today's vote marks a watershed in the history of the United Nations.
Earlier this week members of the Security Council heard testimony of crimes committed against the citizens of Kuwait. There can be no doubt that these are crimes incompatible with any civilized order. They are part of the same pattern that includes - and many speakers have referred to this today - the taking of innocent hostages from many nations.
The entire international community has been affronted by a series of brutal acts. Iraqi forces have invaded and seized a small Arab neighbour. A once-prosperous country has been pillaged and looted. A once-peaceful country has been turned into an armed camp. A once-secure country has been terrorized.
The nations of the world have not stood idly by. We have taken political, economic and military measures to quarantine Iraq and contain its aggression. We have worked out a co-ordinated international effort involving over 50 States to provide assistance to those nations most in need as a consequence of the economic embargo of Iraq. And military forces from over 27 nations have been deployed to defend Iraq's neighbours from further aggression and to implement the resolutions of this Council. The 12 resolutions adopted by the Council have clearly established that there is a peaceful way out of this conflict - and that is the complete, immediate and unconditional Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, the restoration of Kuwait's legitimate Government and the release of all hostages.
I do not think all this could have taken place unless most nations shared our vision of what is at stake. A dangerous man committed a blatant act of aggression in a vital region at a very critical moment in history. Saddam Hussein's actions, the vast arms he possesses and the weapons of mass destruction he seeks indicate clearly that Kuwait was not only not the first but probably not the last target on his list. If he should win this struggle, then there will be no peace in the Middle East: only the prospect of more conflict and a far wider war. If he should come to dominate the resources of the Gulf, his ambitions will threaten all of us here and the economic well-being of all nations. Finally, if Iraq should emerge from this conflict with territory or with treasure or with political advantage, then the lesson will be very, very clear: aggression pays.
As I said earlier today, we must remember the lesson of the 1930s and aggression must not be rewarded. Since 2 August many nations have worked together to prove just that. Many unprecedented actions have been taken. The result is a new fact: a newly effective United Nations Security Council, free of the constraints of the cold war. Yet the sad truth is that the new fact has not yet erased the old fact of Iraqi aggression, and that - and that alone - is the ultimate test of success.
We must ask ourselves why Saddam has not recoiled from his aggression. We must wonder why he does not understand how great the forces are against him and how profound is the revulsion against his behaviour. The answer must be that he does not believe we really mean what we say. He does not believe we will stand united until he withdraws. He thinks that his fact of aggression is going to outlast our fact: that is, an international community opposed to aggression.
We are meeting here today, therefore, first and foremost - as many speakers here have already pointed out - to dispel Saddam Hussein's illusions. He must know
from us that a refusal to comply peacefully with the Security Council resolutions risks disaster for him.
Fellow members of the Security Council, we are at a crossroads. Today we show Saddam Hussein that the sign marked "peace" is the direction he should take.
Today's resolution is very clear. The words authorize the use of force. But the purpose, I believe - and, again, many here have already said this - is to bring about a peaceful resolution of this problem. No one here has sought this conflict. Many nations here have had very good relations with the people of Iraq. But the Security Council of the United Nations cannot tolerate this aggression and still be faithful to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
With the adoption of today's resolution we concur with other Council members that this should lead to a pause in the Council's efforts - assuming, of course, no adverse change in circumstances. We do so while retaining our rights, as other nations have, to protect our foreign nationals in Iraq, and very mindful of the terms of the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Geneva Protocol of 1925, should Saddam Hussein use chemical or biological weapons.
By adopting today's resolution, which we think is a pause for peace, we say to Saddam Hussein: "We continue to seek a diplomatic solution. Peace is your only sensible option. You can choose peace by respecting the will of the international community. But if you fail to do so, you will risk all. The choice is yours."
If we fail to redress this aggression, more will be lost than just peace in the Persian Gulf. Only recently, in Europe, the nations party to the cold war assembled to bury that conflict. All the peoples of Europe and North America who had nothing to look forward to except an unending twilight struggle now have a fresh start, indeed a new opportunity. Conflict and war are no longer the watchwords of European politics.
We meet at the hinge of history. We can use the end of the cold war to get beyond the whole pattern of settling conflicts by force, or we can slip back into ever more savage regional conflicts in which might alone makes right. We can take the high road towards peace and the rule of law, or we can take Saddam Hussein's -path of brutal aggression and the law of the jungle. Simply put, it is a choice between right and wrong. I think we have the courage and the fortitude to choose what is right.
Resuming my function as President of the Council, I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Security Council has taken a decision of immense portent. I should like to stress that even on the most stringent reading, the resolution just adopted envisages at least 45 days of earnest effort to achieve a peaceful solution of the crisis. Mindful of the responsibility inherent in my office, I must express the hope that this time will be used to the most constructive purpose.
In my statement at the Council's ministerial meeting on 25 September I sought to point out the position of principle deriving from the Charter that is involved in this question. In requiring compliance with the resolutions of the Security Council, the United Nations seeks not surrender but the most honourable way of resolving a crisis in a manner that respects all legitimate interests and is conducive to the wider peace and the rule of law.
This, it is necessary to emphasize, is not a matter simply of rhetoric. It is not a question of clothing a bellicose intent in persuasive language. To my mind, the situation requires that diplomatic efforts be made with renewed determination to put the present crisis on the road to a peaceful outcome.
A collective engagement, as I have observed before, requires a discipline all its own. Moreover, the actions of the United Nations to correct this international wrong must be perceived as part of the larger endeavour to establish peace through justice, wherever the one is imperilled and the other denied.
The PRESIDENT: The Deputy Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait has asked to speak, and I now call on him.
Sheikh AL SABAH (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): In my opening statement today, I said that the people of Kuwait were looking to the Council to help them return to their homeland and restore their freedom and the ability to exercise their natural rights in their own country. We came here seeking the Council's support in defeating aggression and eliminating the injustices and ending the crimes committed on our land. I said that the Council was the voice of mankind, mankind which cries for justice, and that your voice is the echo of the conscience that yearns for fairness on the basis of the rule of law.
May I express to every member of the Council deep gratitude on behalf of the people of Kuwait, whose hopes the Council has now reinforced, while strengthening their resolve and determination to extract hope from painful suffering and a momentum for constructive work from hardship. The Council's collective position in the face of the Iraqi crime in Kuwait is a real lesson to anyone who might be misled by his own might to invade the land of others and to anyone who might be deceived into reliance on brute, naked force to achieve his greedy designs, for the resolution sends a strong, unequivocal and unmistakable message to the whole world that aggression will be reversed and that the era of the use of force has come to an end once and for all.
In the name of all Kuwaitis, who have become the victims of torture, occupation, deprivation and homelessness, I thank all members of the Council for the resolve they have shown today by adopting yet another resolution in the face of aggression. At the same time, I am spelling out their hope of returning to their homeland without any further destruction, their hope that sanity and reason will prevail once the Iraqi regime carefully and soberly ponders the full meaning and significance of the new facts that have emerged today and responds to the Council's calls and appeals.
(Sheikh Al Sabah, Kuwait)
I shall return to the people of Kuwait and faithfully convey to them what I have just seen and heard - the Council's views and sentiments and the outcome of its deliberations. Quite soon, Kuwaitis will once again see a promising future, because today the Council has handed down its judgement that an era of darkness is doomed.
Once again, I wish to express our thanks and gratitude to all the members of the Council. I say to them: "May God bring peace to all of you."
The PRESIDENT: There are no other speakers on my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.2977 (Part II) (closed-resumption 3) 23 February 1991
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH MEETING (PART II) (closed-resumption 3)
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Saturday, 23 February 1991, at 10.30 a.m.
President;	Mr. MUMBENGEGWI	(Zimbabwe)
Members;	Austria Belgium China Cote d’Ivoire Cuba Ecuador France India Romania Union of Soviet Socialist Republics United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Yemen Zaire	Mr. HOHENFELLNER Mr. NOTERDAEME Mr. LI Daoyu Mr. ANET Mr. ALARCON de QUESADA Mr. AYALA LASSO Mr. BLANC Mr. GHAREKHAN Mr. MUNTEANU Mr. VORONTSOV Sir David HANNAY Mr. PICKERING Mr. AL-ASHTAL Mr. BAGBENI ADEITO NZENGEYA
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
91-60396/A 4528V (E)
The meeting was resumed at 11.25 a.m, on Saturday, 23 February 1991. The PRESIDENT! I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents: S/22234, letter dated 15 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22236, letter dated 14 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/22237, letter dated 14 February 1991 from the representatives of Algeria, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/2223S, letter dated 15 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22239, letter dated 17 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/22240, letter dated 17 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/22241, letter dated 19 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22242 and S/22244, letters dated 19 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22245, letter dated 20 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22247, letter dated 20 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22248, letter dated 20 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/22251, letter dated 20 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
RM/107	S/PV.2977 (Part II) (closed-resumption 3)
292-295 (The Presidents
Security Council; S/22252, letter dated 20 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/22254, letter dated 22 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/22256, letter dated 21 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and S/22257, letter dated 22 February 1991 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): On instructions from the leadership of the Soviet Union, we asked for the resumption of this meeting of the Security Council to report to the Council on our work over the past few days with the special representative of Iraq, Mr. Tariq Aziz, who has visited the Soviet Union in response to the plan we proposed on 18 February. In the course of difficult and lengthy talks we succeeded in making more specific the readiness expressed by the Iraqi leadership to withdraw their troops from Kuwait on the basis of the decisions of the Security Council. Specifically, the matter stands as follows: Iraq agrees to comply with Security Council resolution 660 (1990), that is immediately and unconditionally to withdraw all its troops from Kuwait to the positions they occupied on 1 August 1990. The withdrawal of troops would begin the day after a cease-fire and a halt to all land, sea and air hostilities. The withdrawal of troops would be carried out over 21 days, and troops would be withdrawn from Kuwait City in the course of the first four days. Immediately after the completion of the withdrawal of troops from Kuwait, the reasons for the adoption of other Security Council resolutions would have lapsed, and those resolutions would thus cease to be in force. All military prisoners of war would be released and repatriated in the course of three days following a cease-fire and cessation of hostilities. Confirmation, monitoring and observance of the cease-fire and the withdrawal of troops would be carried out by observers and/or peace-keeping forces to be determined by the Security Council.
It is our belief that in those circumstances it has become possible, for the present, to achieve optimal results. This not only gives us reason to hope for a peaceful settlement of the conflict but also raises real prospects for such an
outcome.
(Mr. Vorontsov, USSR)
Of course, the proposal worked out in Moscow can be further improved, but it represents the best we have been able to achieve thus far.
The Iraqi leadership has accepted that proposal; in that connection we have received an official statement from President Saddam Hussein.
Moreover, in the statement he made in Moscow on 23 February Mr. Tariq Aziz in effect responded positively to the United States statement.
We do not think the results we have achieved so far represent our achievement alone. The possibility that an end could be called to the war today, thereby saving perhaps thousands of lives, stems primarily from the striking unanimity displayed throughout the conflict by the international community and the Security Council. For the first time in the history of international relations since the Second World War, we have been able through our joint efforts to halt aggression and provide a lesson to any future potential aggressor.
Given the current situation, we think it important to continue efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement to the crisis as early as possible. To that end, all relevant Security Council resolutions should be complied with and all existing proposals should be integrated into the settlement.
Mr. PICKERING (United States of America): I too want to provide the Council with an interim report on the approach which the members of the coalition, including, of course, the United States have been taking on the question of a resolution of the issue before the Council. In that regard I want to express our thanks and appreciation for the work the Soviet Union has been doing and for the interim report provided to us by the Soviet representative.
(Mr.-Pickering,.United States)
As members of the Council will know, the United States, on behalf of the members of the coalition, presented yesterday a document which outlines our views about how and in what ray this issue should move to a rapid settlement. I should like, if I may now, to quote extensively from that document and then, in a few minutes, to provide some commentary on the statement which our Soviet colleague has presented.
Yesterday we said that the Soviet announcement represents a serious and useful effort which is appreciated. But in our view major obstacles remain. The coalition for many months has sought a peaceful resolution of the crisis in keeping with the United Nations resolutions. As President Bush has pointed out to President Gorbachev, the steps the Iraqis are considering would constitute a conditional withdrawal and would also prevent the full implementation of relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions.
Also, there is no indication that Iraq is still prepared to withdraw immediately, in accordance with the terms of Security Council resolution 660 (1990). Full compliance with the Security Council resolutions has been a consistent and necessary demand of the international community, as we all well know here in the Council. The world must make sure that Iraq has in fact renounced its claim to Kuwait and accepted all relevant Security Council resolutions.
Indeed, it is only here in the Security Council that we could agree to lift sanctions against Iraq, and the world needs to be assured in concrete terms of Iraq's peaceful intentions before such action can be taken. In a situation where sanctions have been lifted, Saddam Hussein could simply revert to using his oil resources once again, not to provide for the well-being of his people but instead to rearm, with some intention, perhaps, of repeating his aggression in the future.
So, in a final effort to obtain Iraqi compliance with the will of the international community, the United States, after consulting with the Government of Kuwait and its other coalition partners, declares that a ground campaign will not be initiated against Iraqi forces if, prior to noon, Saturday, 23 February, New York time, Iraq publicly accepts the following terms and authoritatively communicates that acceptance to the United Nations:
First, Iraq must begin large-scale withdrawal from Kuwait by noon, New York time, Saturday, 23 February. Iraq must complete military withdrawal from Kuwait in one week. Given the fact that Iraq invaded and occupied Kuwait in a matter of just hours, anything longer than this from the initiation of withdrawal would not meet with resolution 660's requirement of immediacy. Within the first 48 hours. Iran must remove all of its forces from Kuwait City and allow for the prompt return of the legitimate Government of Kuwait. It must withdraw from all prepared defenses along the Saudi-Kuwait and Saudi-Iraq borders, from Bubiyan and Warba Islands, and from Kuwait's Rumaila oil-field within the one week specified above.
(Mr, Pickering, United States) Iraq must return all its forces to their positions of 1 August in accordance with resolution 660 (1990).
In cooperation with the International Red Cross, Iraq must release all prisoners of war and third-country civilians being held against their will, and return the remains o£ killed and deceased servicemen. This action must commence immediately with the initiation of the withdrawal and be completed within 48 hours.
Iraq must remove all explosives and booby traps, including those on Kuwaiti oil installations, and designate Iraqi military liaison officers to work with Kuwaiti and other coalition forces on the operational details related to Iraq's withdrawal, to include the provision of all data on the location and nature of any land or sea mines.
Iraq must cease combat-aircraft flights over Iraq and Kuwait, except for transport aircraft carrying troops out of Kuwait, and allow coalition aircraft exclusive control over and use of all Kuwaiti airspace. It must cease all destructive actions against Kuwaiti citizens and property, and release all Kuwaiti detainees.
The United States and its coalition partners reiterate that their forces will not attack retreating Iraqi forces and, further, will exercise restraint so long as withdrawal proceeds in accordance with the above guidelines and there are no attacks on other countries. Any breach of these terms would bring an instant and sharp response from coalition forces, in accordance with Security Council resolution 678 (1990).
In addition, I want to inform the members of the Council that our proposal is there. It remains on the table, on its own conditions, to be accepted at any time. We hope it will be accepted as soon as possible. This position of the coalition therefore stands.
(Mr, Pickering, United States) I have heard with interest the report of our colleague from the Soviet Union.
I must say that we are pleased with the progress that has been made, even though we feel that the proposal as set forth fails in two important circumstances to meet the tests that are set forth in resolution 660 (1990) itself. One of those circumstances is that of immediacy, the question of timing. The issue of timing, I believe, can best be made clear by careful examination of the proposal which I have just read out, which in our view meets the circumstances of timing as required in the initial resolution.
The second point that I believe is important is the issue which appears in the fourth portion of the Soviet proposal provided to us today in the interim report. That is the question of conditions. It is difficult for us to see how an unconditional proposal - a proposal without conditions - can be so conditioned, particularly in respect of the Idea of declaring that Security Council resolutions somehow cease to exist, are null and void or without effect. Obviously, such a step is unacceptable to us on a number of grounds.
First and foremost, there has clearly been no compliance up to this point with Security Council resolution 660 (1990). Thus, without compliance with that resolution - and, for example, the requirement of resolution 662 (1990), that Iraq rescind its purported annexation of Kuwait, which the Council declares to be null and void - it would be most inappropriate and unwise, in our view, to move to declare that such a step by the Council cease to exist and thereby to enshrine the unilateral Iraqi action purporting to carry out that annexation.
•••,• «—1 •• L^a skatfA kA,«« ^A M AaAAAO i> A CaA,(^ t ,>«« Pa««AA t 1 ,,« A1 t«fc 1 Am A MW w,j^ 090 WWSO M«VM MV lOW^VMMU WV MVVUk^WJ W WMV A A AMWAWV0VM0 VOW W^QQA
to Iraq's responsibility for its illegal acts, including breaches of the Geneva Convention of 1949; there have been continuing acts of wanton destruction within the last 24 hours, as we have seen if we all continue to watch the television
(Mr. Pickering, United States) screens, as I know members do. The enormous fires that are now consuming Kuwaiti oil fields and installations are, in our view, continuing such actions.
In addition, with respect to resolution 660 (1990), it is not clear in the mind of my Government that the proposal which we have heard read out actually involves paragraph 3 of that resolution. Members will recall that paragraph 3, which calls for a beginning of negotiations between Iraq and Kuwait to resolve their differences with the help of others, including members of the Arab League, was put into the resolution by the members of the Council with a clear sense of the importance of that step.
There are, in short, actions called for by these resolutions that remain to be taken. There are legal obligations that flow directly from and by operation of international law which remain to be satisfied. Whether, after all resolutions have been complied with by Iraq, it would make sense to engage the Council in what would become for us the thoroughly novel practice of declaring a resolution as ceasing to be in force, as null and void or without further effect, is a question that we can all examine in due course. It is not a practice, however, in the view of my Government, that should be taken on lightly. Aside from the overtones of rewriting history, there is the question of the effect of any such action taken on the network of legal consequences which flow from and which will continue to flow from the decisions of the Council on the situation created by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
The days of the invasion may be numbered. We certainly believe this to be the case. But the consequences would not and could not end so soon. There is, moreover, the important and salient need to restore international peace and security to the region in accord with the strictures of resolution 678 (1990) and
(Mr. Pickering. United States) with the implications which are clear in the appropriate paragraphs o£ resolution 674 (1990). We must not dismantle at the stroke of a pen what the Council has built since 2 August until we have reached agreement on how to restore peace and security to the area.
I am delighted to hear at this meeting indications from our Soviet colleague that the Foreign Minister of Iraq either intends to respond or has responded positively to the points I have read out today. I should be delighted to have any clarification of this that can be made.
It is my understanding as well that the President of Iraq plans to speak oh television in the next few moments. We shall obviously look forward with hope to hearing what he has to say in response to the proposals we have put forward.
We also continue to hope that Iraq will rapidly come to its senses and will accept the proposals that have been put before it for ending its aggression.
Mr. LI Daovu (China) (interpretation from Chinese): As announced by the Soviet Union, Iraq has made a positive response to the peaceful initiative of the Soviet Union by indicating its willingness to withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally. This is a major change, in a positive direction, and is a good beginning. We welcome this announcement.
This war which has lasted for more than a month has inflicted huge losses of human life and property on the innocent population of the Gulf region. If the war escalates further, the Gulf region and the people of that region as well as other countries concerned will face even greater suffering. We strongly call on the parties concerned in the conflict to demonstrate their goodwill for a peaceful solution, not to miss this opportunity to end the war and bring about peace at an early date, and to make further efforts to seek a solution that could immediately lead to a peaceful settle«^t of this crisis.
At such a crucial moment, the Security Council should fulfil its responsibilities by considering and adopting an appropriate plan for the peaceful settlement of the Gulf crisis, thus playing its role in the restoration and preservation of peace and security in that region.
Mr. GHABEKHAN (India); As the Secretary-General said a few days ago, these are testing times for our Organization. The test has perhaps never been as severe or acute as it is today. As my colleague from China, Ambassador hi Daoyu, has just stated, this is the time for the Security Council to discharge its responsibility and to work for peace.
I should like at the outset to thank the representatives of the Soviet Union and the United States for the reports they have presented to us this morning. Of course, my delegation would have been even happier if these reports had been submitted to the Security Council before today. That would have given us more time. But it seems to my delegation that we have not really run out of time. We have time - of course, not to infinity, but enough time to try and see what can be done.
I should like to express my Government’s very deep and sincere appreciation for the enormous efforts which President Gorbachev has personally exerted to find ; peaceful answer to the crisis in the Gulf region.
At the opening meeting of the Indian Parliament, yesterday, both Houses adopted a unanimous resolution calling upon the Security Council to continue to make all efforts to find a peaceful solution and expressing appreciation to President Gorbachev for his efforts. This meeting of the Houses of the Indian Parliament took place soon after the first set of proposals were announced In Moscow.
My delegation takes note of three or four points in particular in the statement made by Ambassador Vorontsov. First, after presenting the six points of the proposal, he said that they can be improved, that they are not the final word. I think that Ambassador Pickering referred to them as an interim report. The second point Ambassador Vorontsov made was that it is important for the Security
(Mr. Gharekhan. India)
Council to continue to make efforts. His third point was that it is necessary -and I think should be feasible - to prepare an integrated solution on the basis of existing proposals. His fourth point was that Iraq has accepted the Soviet proposals - and Mr. Tariq Aziz seems to have made a statement in Moscow today responding positively to the United States statement of yesterday.
I should like to thank Ambassador Pickering also for officially seizing the Security Council of the United States proposals.
There are, of course, differences between the two sets of proposals, but there are also similarities. Ambassador Pickering mentioned two points with which his country and the members of the alliance have particular difficulty: the question of immediacy, and the fourth point in the Soviet peace plan. Of course it would be naive to minimize the differences. The differences are there; they are real. But there are also similarities; there are also points of agreement. Some differences may be not so difficult to bridge and some differences may be a bit more difficult to bridge.
(Mr. Gharekhan, India)
Under these circumstances it seems to my delegation that what the Ambassador of China just said is important and very relevant. He said that the Security Council should fulfil its responsibility by adopting a plan of action of its own; I understand that to be what my colleague from China was suggesting.
The situation today is so serious, with thousands of lives at stake, that we feel the Security Council must remain in continuous session, if necessary, to try to sort out a plan of action, as proposed by the representative of China.
We not only would urge the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States to try to work out the differences between their plans of action, but would also like the Council as a whole, and in particular all the non-permanent members, to discharge their responsibility, the mandate entrusted to them - that is, to us, including my country - by the General Assembly as a whole.
If it is not possible, or if it becomes too difficult, for the principal authors of the two plans to resolve their differences, perhaps it is incumbent upon all the 10 non-permanent members at this time to sit together and see what we can do. My delegation would therefore like to suggest to its colleagues, especially the non-permanent members, that we meet, that we sit together and find some way out of what appears to be an impasse, it may not turn out to be an impasse, but if it is, it must not be allowed to remain an impasse. The situation is far too grave for us just to leave everything to others.
I think the representative of the Soviet Union also said that his Government would like the Security Council to consider the different sets of proposals and to Braduea an intearatad nlan of action.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom): I should like to begin by thanking the representative o£ the Soviet Union for the progress report he has just given us on the contacts his Government has had with the Government of Iraq. I should also like to express my Government's thanks for the very great efforts that the Government of the Soviet Union and President Gorbachev personally have made in recent days and to recognize the very considerable changes which they have managed to bring about in the position of the Government of Iraq, which started last week, as we all know, with a position which was a very long way away from the one it has now endorsed.
My Government stands firmly by the offer that was set out on behalf of a number of allies of Kuwait by President Bush yesterday. I would just draw to the attention of the representative of India that that is not simply a United States offer. In any case, we regard it as fair and reasonable, and we stand by it.
I do not want to comment in great detail on the six points referred to us by the representative of the Soviet Union which his Government has worked out with the Iraqi Foreign Minister and which the Iraqi Foreign Minister now apparently - I must , say "apparently", because we still do not have what I would call an authoritative endorsement of it by the Government of Iraq at the highest level - accepts.
But I would just make the point that although he stated that Iraq now accepts resolution 660 (1900), and in particular the requirement for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait, the content of some of the other points is in effect a contradiction of that proposition, so there is still, I fear, an inbuilt contradiction in those points.
I will leave aside comments on the time table, which in my Government's view should stand as put forward by the allies of Kuwait in their statement yesterday, and simply concentrate on the fourth point, where I think the Security Council as a whole must look with some care. This fourth point, which relates to the status of
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom) the Security Council’s own resolutions after an Iraqi withdrawal, seems to us to be fundamentally flawed. It is wrong, I think, in fact to state that the Security Council resolutions will lose their force with an Iraqi withdrawal; purely formally, one must say that only the Security Council itself can make that judgement.
But, more than that, it is, frankly, not the case that the reasons for adopting a number of those previsions will have been removed. It is simply not the case that provisions relating to the damage or the breaches of human rights that have been committed by Iraq will be removed by the removal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. But whether or not it is factually accurate as a presentation of policy, I am afraid that point is really quite unacceptable. One has only to look at some of the provisions of the Security Council resolutions which would, if this point were accepted, become invalid on an Iraqi withdrawal to understand why that is so and why my Government's view is as it is.
Resolution 661 (1990), for example, is a very firm basis for the establishment of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Kuwait. It is really an essential part of any withdrawal that Iraq recognize that. It is also the basis on which Kuwait can hope to repossess some of the goods that have been pillaged from it, including all the aircraft belonging to Kuwait Airways.
Resolution 662 (1990) is the basis for the declaration that the annexation of Kuwait is null and void. We all know there is an Iraqi internal law that states that Kuwait is the nineteenth province of Iraq, part of it, of course, being the province of Basrah. Removal of the "null and void" provisions of resolution 662 (1990) would leave the Iraqi law standing, and Iraq could go on arguing this issue for decades. That is not acceptable in circumstances in which Iraq has invaded its neighbour and committed this act of aggression.
(Sir David_Hannav, United Kingdom) Resolution 664 (1990) contains provisions about the holding of nationals against their will. As we all know, there are many thousands of Kuwaiti citizens held in Iraq against thoir will, and their future must be assured. It cannot just be left to the mercy of the Government of Iraq, which has so grievously maltreated them so far.
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
Then, resolution 674 (1990) provides for the basis for compensation for damage caused by Iraq - and every day there is more of it - and for the handling of breaches of the Geneva Convention. As I said before, these matters cannot be wiped from the slate by an Iraqi withdrawal.
Finally, in resolution 678 0990) itself there is a commitment by the Security Council to the peace and security of the region. That must surely be maintained; that is the guideline for all our future action. If you remove that, you merely risk going back in that region to the extremely unstable, extremely insecure situation that prevailed on 1 August. And that cannot be in the interest of any of the countries in that region.
Those are a number of points I wished to make, not in a spirit of criticism or hostility, to the Soviet Union, whose efforts, as I say, have been Herculean in the last 10 days. But it does, I think, demonstrate how we are still a long way from getting the Government of Iraq to accept what it will have to accept if there is to be a peaceful solution.
I had hoped, and I still hope, that the representative of the Government of Iraq at this table will be able to tell us that his Government has accepted the offer that was made by the allies yesterday. That, of course, is the simple and straightforward way to bring this dispute t i peaceful solution at the earliest possible moment.
Mr.-HOHENFELLNER (Austria); I should like first of all to thank the representatives of the USES and .he United States of America for their interim reports submitted to the Council at this meeting. The statements made by a spokesman of President Gorbachev in Moscow on 21 February and, in particular, 22 February, on the results of the talks between the Soviet leadership and the Foreign Minister of Iraq, as confirmed and elaborated today by the representative
(Mr., Hohepfellner, Austria) of the USSR, were a positive signal. They have given reasons for hope that the full implementation of previous Security Council resolutions is now possible and that further military operations may not be necessary.
Also, there are still some uncertainties and open questions as to the modalities of implementation in conformity with those resolutions. These statements and, in particular, that of 22 February, do go a long way indeed. They form the basis for further serious consideration of the remaining questions.
The members of the Security Council should play a major role in this context, bearing in mind that the very objective of our efforts is a political solution based on the full implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular the liberation of Kuwait and the restoration of its legitimate Government.
In my statement to the Security Council of 14 February, I declared:
"... even at this late hour, despite the military action already undertaken, political and diplomatic efforts still have their place and should, indeed, be intensified. The loss of human lives and the material destruction that have already occurred, and the even greater losses in the future in the event that hostilities continue, and especially if they escalate, make the search for ways and means of bringing these hostilities to an early end a moral imperative." (supra, p. 91)
Today more than ever before, we have a historic opportunity for such efforts based on the results of Moscow. I appeal to all to use it.
Mr. ALARCON DE QUESADA (Cuba) (Interpretation from Spanish): At the outset my delegation would like to pay tribute to President Gorbachev, who in the last few days, and perhaps even the last few weeks, has devoted time, energy and dedication to trying to find a peaceful solution of this conflict. We also bail
(Mr. Alarcon de Quesada. Cubp) the positive outcome o£ his efforts, which are clearly reflected in the information Ambassador Vorontsov was good enough to give us a few moments ago.
My delegation would like to associate itself with the ideas put forward earlier by other colleagues, particularly the representatives of China and India.
It seems to us that, as a result of the positive outcome of the Soviet efforts, agreements have been reached that, as Ambassador Vorontsov has informed us, have been accepted by the Government of Irag at the highest level. This implies a fundamental obligation for this Council to get down to work immediately to determine the specific steps and actions it should take to make it possible for this plan for a peaceful settlement of the conflict to be carried out as speedily as possible, and in the most appropriate way.
We believe there should be no doubt whatsoever that the Security Council alone has the responsibility to determine the terms of a peaceful settlement, under which international peace and security must be guaranteed.
At this time I do not wish to dwell on details or specific points on some issues raised by some of our colleagues. I wish only to recall that for more than six months a clear international consensus has been reflected in this Council on the need to ensure full Implementation of resolution 660 (1990), which has obviously been the basis of any subsequent action by the Security Council.
The relationship between compliance with that resolution and compliance with other resolutions agreed upon by the Council later could be the subject of an analysis among us, but I am not convinced that this is the time to engage in such a process, when other urgent teske deserve the CousclV, immediate attention. I merely wish to draw the attention of my colleagues to the first resolution adopted after resolution 660 (1990) - resolution 661 (1990), in which this Council decided to establish comprehensive economic sanctions against Iraq.
(Me...Alarcon de Queaada, Cuba)
At that time the Security Council decided the following: in paragraph 1 of its resolution 661 (1991), to determine that Iraq had so far failed to comply with paragraph 2 of resolution 660 (1991); and in paragraph 2, to decide, as a consequence, "to take the following measures", which represent the economic sanctions.
The direct cause and effect relationship between economic sanctions as decided upon by the Council and Iraq’s failure to comply with the terms of paragraph 2 of resolution 660 (1991) - that is to say, fully to withdraw from Kuwait - is quite obvious and has been stated explicitly by the Council.
In any event, my delegation believes that we could discuss all this, as we must also discuss the definition of what one colleague called a peace plan, or some action to make it possible to facilitate compliance with paragraph 2 of resolution 660 (1991) - a goal sought by the Security Council throughout.
We appreciate the statement made by Ambassador Pickering, containing the proposal made - as indicated in the final paragraph - on behalf of the United States and its partners in the coalition. We take note with appreciation the fact that it has been submitted formally to the Council.
It has been said outside this Chamber that the intent of this proposal was to set a deadline for Iraq and to humiliate that country. I do not know whether that is the precise intention of the sponsors, but the fact that it has been presented to the Council and that 20 minutes have already elapsed after the noon deadline leads me to hope that there is no intention whatsoever to regard it in the same fashion as has been announced outside thia Council.
We believe that, the Council should act in the manner suggested by our colleague from India. My delegation is fully prepared to work in the manner he has suggested, that is, in continuous session. We also believe that he has made a very
(Mr, Alarcon de Quesada. Cuba) useful suggestion with regard to the role that might be played by the uon-permanent members. He recalled a very important thing: that we the non-permanent members have been elected by the General Assembly and that we have a special responsibility to try to interpret the anxiety and concerns of all the Members of the United Nations with respect to this problem.
In this spirit, and with this readiness, my delegation trusts that under your wise leadership. Mr. President, the Security Council will make the best possible use of all the time available to it, not because it must take action in the face of some possible threats or deadlines given to the Council, but because we are indeed dealing with a very grave problem involving the lives of thousands of people and because we have the obligation to try to bring about the speediest possible solution to this problem.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French): Over the grace period established by the Security Council before 15 January, France spared no effort to promote a peaceful settlement of the crisis. Unfortunately, Iraq refused to comply with the Security Council resolutions.
Recently President Gorbachev took the initiative to make a last attempt to prevail upon Iraq to accept the will of the international community. We commend the praiseworthy efforts of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Regrettably, the results achieved remain inadequate. As the members of the Security Council know, a last appeal has been made by the members of the coalition setting forth the conditions in keeping with the resolutions of the Security Council that must be accepted by Iraq. We hope that President Saddam Hussein will respond positively to that appeal.
Mr. NOTERDAEME (Belgium) (interpretation from French): First of all I should like to thank our Soviet colleague. Ambassador Vorontsov, for the very important information he has just given to us. My Government had an opportunity
(Mr. Noterdaeme. Belgium) yesterday to express its full appreciation for President Gorbachev’s extraordinary diplomatic effort.
I also listened with keen interest to the statement of our colleague Ambassador Pickering.
I shall not at this stage comment on the two statements made here - one by the Soviet Union and the other on behalf of the members of the coalition. I merely wish to make one comment. What bothers me the most and makes me a bit perplexed is the fourth point in the Soviet proposal providing for the annulment of all the other Council resolutions once withdrawal had taken place. I really have a great deal of difficulty with this and, if possible, I should like to ask our colleague Ambassador Vorontsov to provide some explanation as to the purpose of this provision.
Mr. AYALA LASSO (Ecuador) (interpretation from Spanish)t On behalf of Ecuador, may I first express our thanks for the report our colleague Ambassador Vorontsov was good enough to give us at this formal meeting.
(Mr. Ayala Lasso. Ecuador)
I believe that his statement not only sheds light on the dynamic efforts the Soviet Union has been making to facilitate the reaching of an agreement that will bring an end to the war in the Gulf as soon as possible but also affords the Security Council an opportunity to become cognizant in a formal meeting of this commendable initiative and to consider it substantively. At least, that is my interpretation of the Soviet Union's request to hold this meeting, since a purely informative exercise - undoubtedly useful in itself - would in the present circumstances be insufficient.
I should also like to express my appreciation to my friend Ambassador Pickering for the information he has given us on the views of the United States of America and the other countries assisting Kuwait with regard to the Soviet plan and on the elements that could bring about an immediate solution to the crisis.
I have noted with great satisfaction the fact that there is a gradually increasing number of significant points of convergence between the two positions, and I am hopeful that that trend might continue. The differences between the two ways of envisaging a solution are both objective and considerable. I believe, however, that the presentation of the two reports has enabled us to see clearly that there is still room for additional progress in diminishing these differences so as to arrive at a plan eventually acceptable to Iraq.
Let me be very clear: my country has stated that the solution to this problem must begin with Iraq's compliance with the resolutions of the Security Council. Ecuador regards that as a fundamental and key point. Along with that, however, there is another point that we regard as essential, and that is that we give peace the greatest possible chance through negotiations. It is at this point in time that we must step up diplomatic efforts and the Council's actions in an attempt to achieve that peace. I agree with the statement of our friend Ambassador Gharekhan,
in which he referred not only to the Council's obligation to consider matters dealing with international peace and security but also to our common desire to participate fully in the efforts being made to put an end to the war.
Those are the two issues I wanted to mention at this stage of our work in connection with this item. Obviously. I would be ready and willing to work non-stop, should that prove necessary, and in due course to give my views on all the points of both of the plans we are considering.
Mr. AL-ASHTAL (Yemen)(interpretation from Arabic): The Security Council is meeting today at a very important juncture in the Gulf crisis. It is for that reason that we are participating in the discussion, notwithstanding our objection to the convening of a private meeting. We believe that the Council's meetings should be public. The entire world is focused on the action the Council will take. We hope that the present privacy will be ended as soon as possible.
From the military viewpoint we are on the threshold of a very important development, one that could lead to the expansion of military battles if a large-scale ground war is initiated. A ground war will have incalculable results and its expansion might result in the use of weapons of mass destruction. In any event, the losses in human life and destruction of property will be enormous. All of this must be taken into consideration by the Council at this vital moment.
From the political viewpoint, there has been a very important development: Iraq has at last agreed to implement the resolutions of the Security Council, particularly resolution 660 (1990). Iraq has announced, through its Foreign Minister, that it will withdraw from Kuwait in accordance with the provisions of resolution 660 (1990). In those circumstances matters must return to the Council, and we wonder whether any party, including the members of the coalition, has the right to escalate military action without returning to the Security Council itself.
(Mx. M-Ashtal. Yemen)
We now have a great opportunity either to achieve peace or to wage war and cause vast destruction. Ths Security Council must therefore adopt a proper and necessary resolution which in tin final analysis will restore peace end security to the region.
(Mr. Al-Ashtal. Yemen)
Today's meeting, therefore, is of special importance; at it, we must decide how to resolve this problem one way or another. In that connection, I thank the representative of the Soviet Union and the Soviet leadership, who have undertaken a very important effort to find a peaceful solution to the problem.
As members know, this process began on 15 February, when Iraq submitted a proposal for a peaceful solution to the problem. We discussed this question at another informal meeting, at which I said the Security Council had to probe Iraq on its proposals and on its acceptance of the Council's resolutions. I said at that time that the Council had to authorize one party, either the Secretary-General or the President of the Security Council, to represent it and to follow up on the Iraqi proposal.
When the Foreign Minister of Iraq was on his way to the Soviet Union we told the Council that we had to wait; we had to hear from the Soviet delegation about the talks that were to take place in Moscow and about their results. Today I want to thank the representative of the Soviet Union for the clear report he gave the Council on those talks and deliberations.
We now have before us what could be called a six-point peace plan. Iraq has publicly accepted that plan, that includes complete withdrawal in accordance with Security Council resolutions. Therefore, the Security Council must discuss this proposal and adopt the appropriate measures.
We also heard the report of the representative of the United States of America on the steps announced yesterday In Washington on behalf of the coalition forces. We thank Ambassador Pickering for his report on the steps announced yesterday.
At this critical stage the Security Council must discuss the various proposals put forward and reach a final decision. Here I wish to thank the representative of India, who has made a number of proposals relating in particular to what
(Mr. Al-Ashtal, Yemen) non-permanent members of the Security Council can do. As members know, there are precedents for such action by non-permanent members of the Security Council.
The Security Council must continue its deliberations on this question in a manner the President considers appropriate with a view to finding a solution .to this problem that is satisfactory and acceptable to the Council.
Mr. MUNTEANU (Romania): My delegation would like to join delegations that have expressed their appreciation of the efforts made by the Soviet Union to find a peaceful solution to the Persian Gulf conflict.
We have taken note of the fact that the very first element of the Soviet communication conveys to us the agreement by Iraq to implement resolution 000 (1990) without delay and without conditions. At the same time we cannot overlook the fact that major obstacles still remain. Full compliance with all the Security Council resolutions has been a consistent and necessary demand of the International community.
As I have already said before the Council, my country is strongly committed to morality and legality in all spheres of domestic and international life. It has made clear in all its statements on the item under consideration that a solution to the Persian Gulf conflict can be based only on all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Xn the light of that position of my country, my delegation considers that Iraq should authoritatively communicate to the United Nations its full and unconditional acceptance of all the Security Council's resolutions. It is necessary to have a statement from Iraq that would make it clear that that country has renounced its claim to Kuwait.
On the other hand, we agree with the Interpretation given here by other members of the Council that the sanctions against Iraq can be lifted only by the Council itself. The question of declaring null and void a number of resolutions on
(Mg^-Muatflaau. Romania) the situation between Iraq and Kuwait cannot be treated in an easy way. Such a nullification should not in any way be viewed as a precondition; that is unacceptable to my delegation. In fact, it needs very careful and responsible consideration.
What counts is to have solid guarantees that Iraq will not again violate the Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles of international law.
Like other delegations we are ready to pursue our efforts within the Security Council, Such efforts should lead to the strengthening of the solidarity of this body, to the full implementation of all resolutions on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait and to the restoration of peace and security in that area.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the Secretary-General, who wishes to make a
statement.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I have listened with greatest care to the very important statements made by the representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States, China, India, the United Kingdom, Austria, Yemen, Cuba, France, Belgium, Ecuador and Romania, and would like to express my appreciation for the contributions they have made in the debate today.
The Security Council is meeting at a crucial hour - crucial to an unparalleled degree. I have been informed of the positions taken by all parties in the past 48 hours, and I have watched the progress made in the laudable diplomatic endeavours to bring this destructive conflict to a speedy end in consonance with the resolutions of the Security Council. Openings towards a cessation of the conflict have been clearly revealed in the past two days. It would be tragic in the extreme if the opportunities that have been created were now to be lost. I appeal most earnestly that this not be the case.
The United Nations - and, If I may add, its Secretary-General - are passing through a most trying and, in some respects, painful experience. Since the beginning of the crisis, there has been devastation on a vast scale. The consequences for a vital and strategically most important region of the world are still literally incalculable. We have the obligation to uphold the principles which prompted the Security Council's resolutions, and we have to respond to the supreme moral imperative of preventing further destruction of life. These two objectives should not be Irreconcilable.
Our attitudes and decisions at this stage will carry a momentous significance for peace and for the trust of the peoples of the world, across all cultures and continents, in this Organization.
The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait, on whom
I call.
RM/107
S/PV.2977 (Par, 4 (closed-resumption 3)
337
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabie): I should like at the outset to express our gratitude to our friend Mr. Yuli Vorontsov, the Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union, for his preliminary report, which included the outcome of negotiations with the Iraqi régime. In the wake of an appreciated effort made by President Gorbachev in the past few days, I should also like to extend my thanks and gratitude to my friend Mr. Thomas Pickering, Permanent Representative of the United States, for his report. I should like to say that my Government has been cooperating with Arab, Islamic and other friendly countries to compel Iraq to withdraw immediately and unconditionally from Kuwait in accordance with Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 678 (1990) and has consulted extensively with them.
We agreed to the plan announced yesterday by President Bush and to the detailed programme that followed that communiqué. We believe that President Gorbachev has made significant progress since the first announcement. President Gorbachev's success to date does not, however, deal with all relevant Security Council resolutions. It addresses one paragraph of resolution 660 (1990) concerning the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces to the positions they occupied on 1 August 1990. Regrettably, even that paragraph was not accepted completely by Iraq, which rejected its demand for an immediate withdrawal. Iraq requests the abrogation of all Security Council resolutions on the issue on the basis of its withdrawing troops from territories under its control, as if it were withdrawing them - from Basra, for instance. I mention this because the Iraqi National Assembly unanimously adopted legislation in August - of course, without any debate and by order of the Iraqi President - naming Kuwait as the nineteenth province of Iraq.
We have been informed that Iraq communicated its acceptance of President Gorbachev’s proposal to the Soviet Government. Despite our great respect
(Hr.- Abuihasan, Kuwait)
for the Soviet Government, Iraq, as all members of the Council know, has perpetrated an aggression against Kuwait. When Iran was attempting to find a formula for the acceptance of resolution 598 (1987), Iraq insisted that the only acceptable way, which had to be imposed on Iran, was for that country to indicate its acceptance of resolution.598 (1987) through a letter from the Iranian President or Foreign Minister to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. We all know the efforts made by the Iranian representative to find an appropriate formula. However, Iraqi insistence was very clear that this was the only legal manner in which Security Council resolutions are accepted. It took almost a year, during which Iraqi aggression against Iran continued, creating countless victims.
But now we are facing an even more serious and dangerous situation than existed during our debate on Iran's acceptance of resolution 598 (1987). Our acceptance of the statement made yesterday in Moscow by the Iraqi Foreign Minister would freeze the situation for a certain period and create an even more dangerous situation in the future that would claim more lives and more damage to property, which would need to be reconstructed between now and some later aggression launched by Iraq against Kuwait.
(Mr.. Abulhasan. Kuwait)
In order for Iraq to end this situation, it must do the following:
First, it must inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in writing, that it accepts all the Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, it must embark immediately on the implementation of paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 660 (1990), on withdrawal.
Thirdly, the legitimate authorities must be enabled to return immediately to Kuwait.
Fourthly, Iraq must implement all the other Security Council resolutions by agreeing to an exchange of prisoners of war of all nationalities, including Kuwaitis taken prisoner since 2 August. This must be done immediately after the cease-fire. Arrangements must be made for looking for the missing. We have lists of names and addresses of more than 8,000 prisoners of war and more than 20,000 missing - and this applies only w Kuwaitis. Iraq must also pay full reparations under Security Council resolution 674 (1990), not only to Kuwaitis but also to all third-party nationals.
Fifthly, the legislative authorities in Iraq must abrogate all legislation concerning the annexation of Kuwait and the consideration of Kuwait as the nineteenth province.	«
I believe that without those elements we should only be freezing the whole question and paving the way for another Iraqi aggression a few years from now. My Government calls upon the Security Council to demand that Iraq immediately cease the present escalation of its inhuman practices against the defenceless Kuwaiti ,$O,1$, to COOSO COS^lttl?^! ®?l®®? ,®il??8t th® ?.tt“Bltl ®CO,0!Sy ®,d $,jvl,$,®62t 1?° setting fire to Kuwaiti oil wells and installations, and to cease the destruction of what is left of the Kuwaiti social and economic infrastructure.
Yesterday I sent a letter to the Secretary-General in which I informed him of a serious development that had taken place yesterday. Defenceless Kuwaitis between
(Mr. Abulhasan. Kuwait) the ages of 15 and 50 were arrested as they were leaving Friday prayers at a mosque. For absolutely no reason, they were put into buses and transferred to Iraq. The only error committed by these innocent persons is that they are Kuwaitis. Iraq wants to use these innocent persons as a means of pressure in any upcoming negotiations. Iraq fears that these defenceless, innocent Kuwaitis will want to defend the soil of their country and will engage in the liberation of their country.
I have listened to the proposal of my dear friend the Ambassador of India. While I appreciate his interest in bringing about peace and averting any further destruction for Kuwait and Iraq, I say that we should concentrate on persuading Iraq that the only way the region can be free of destruction, the only way that Kuwait and Iraq can be free of destruction, is for all the Security Council resolutions to be accepted and not for certain paragraphs of one resolution to be selectively chosen, for the very-well-known reasons I have set forth clearly in my statement.
The PRESIDENT. The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. MOUSSA (Egypt) (Interpretation from Arabic): On instructions from the Government of Egypt, I wish to make the following statement.
I extend my thanks and appreciation to President Gorbachev for the efforts he has exerted so far to achieve a peaceful, immediate solution to the present problem, in accordance with the Security Council resolutions. Egypt regards the ?ovlit liltlstlvs £S s stsn Is tli— rirth£ dlrsctlos — £119 l?®^dl?t® Bid unconditional withdrawal by the Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
The present contacts between Cairo and Moscow, at the highest level, as well as the contacts between Cairo and Washington, also at the highest level,
(Mr. Moussa. Egypt) demonstrate the interest that Egypt takes, because of its responsibilities in the region, in the achievement of an immediate, peaceful solution to the present problem. From the very outset - that is, from 2 August 1990 - we called for a political solution to the problem, and we have continued to do so. Our appeals and political initiatives at the International, regional and Arab levels, have reflected that interest.
In the light of recent developments, the Government of Egypt wishes to make the following comments.
First, we must work quickly to find a peaceful solution to the problem, in order to save lives and the entire region.
Secondly, what is of utmost importance is immediate withdrawal - now, not tomorrow. The Iraqi leadership must understand the dimensions of the entire situation and the serious consequences of any intransigence or delay. The time we have lost so far has been the result of this intransigence and also of Iraq's failure to understand the whole situation.
Thirdly, the withdrawal must take place immediately in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Security Council resolutions, starting with resolution 660 (1990).
Fourthly, Security Council resolution 660 (1990) cannot be accepted only partially, and it cannot be accepted alone, by itself. Negotiations between Iraq and Kuwait, two independent and sovereign countries, must start immediately after the withdrawal, and there must be an official commitment by the Iraqi Government in that respect.
(Mr. Mougsa. Egypt)
Fifthly, the solution of the problem lies not in immediate withdrawal alone, but in Iraq's rescinding of the annexation of Kuwait. Iraq must do this publicly and officially.
We must also implement all the terms of the 12 resolutions adopted by the Security Council. Therefore, we find totally unacceptable the request to rescind those resolutions or to have them regarded as null and void immediately after withdrawal. The Security Council must implement those resolutions, not rescind them. It has a responsibility to guarantee their implementation. We cannot accept their being rescinded before their full implementation.
Sixthly, acceptance by Iraq must be official and documented and be communicated directly to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
There are two things I wish to say here. First, I wish to read out the following official statement from the Egyptian Foreign Ministry on the recent developments:
"In the light of the consultations t-hat have taken place between Egypt, the brotherly Arab countries concerned and the other members of the coalition participating in the liberation of Kuwait, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Egypt declares that while we appreciate the good intentions of the Soviet Union in its initiative, that initiative is lacking in certain regards. It does not respond to the main points in the Security Council resolutions concerning the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, first and foremost of which is the call for the immediate withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait, without any procrastination or conditions and for the return of legitimacy to Kuwait. Hence we confirm once again our support for the call by the members of the coalition to Iraq to withdraw its forces immediately from Kuwait. Egypt also calls upon the Iraqi leadership to respond quickly to the communiqué by the
(Mt,ji2mau;gM) coalition, and it must end its intransigence. It must measure up to the responsibility and dimensions of the situation facing the Iraqi people, which is causing that people much suffering and much destruction." Secondly, I wish to comment on the statement by my colleague from India that the 10 non-permanont members of the Council should discuss the situation. While we do not interfere in the request of one member to others, we should like to state very clearly that what should ba done now is to call upon Iraq to withdraw its forces immediately and not to make formalistic attempts to procrastinate. Time is of the essence. Any effort now should be concentrated on calling upon Iraq to withdraw its forces and accept the Security Council rer dutions without any conditions. There should be a call upon the Iraqi leadership to put iside any other eruditions in the light of the serious situation in the region.
Efforts in this regard must be coordinated with the Arab countries concerned. The legitimate interests of the countries of the region should not be dieregarded. We must co-ordinate and consult with those countries and we must call upon Iraq to withdraw its forces in accordance with the terms announced yesterday - that is, a withdrawal that must start this very day.
Mr.VOROMTSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian,. The Soviet delegation wishes to speak again in order to express its profound gratitude to all those who have spoken here of their high appreciation of the efforts of our country and those of President Gorbachev personally to bring about the earliest possible resolution of the Kuwait crisis, the immediate wiUiuiawol u£ Zta^ vivwpo auu tuu total iootuiatlvu G, two oOvoicl^iity ¿Ha independence of the State of Kuwait.
I should like to take this opportunity also to say that we have listened attentively to the detailed points made by the representatives of the United
(Mr. Vorontsov. USSR)
States, the United Kingdom and Kuwait regarding concrete elements of the plan of action worked out iu Moscow. In the course of our further work we shall be ready to answer the question raised by the representative of Belgium.
We believe that important work has already begun at this meeting with a view to the further formulation of the plan of action. The Soviet delegation supports the proposals that we should urgently continue work on the plan of action. We think that the main thing now is to produce an integrated solution of the crisis on the basis of the provisions worked out in Moscow and the proposals of the United States and other members of the coalition. We are ready to participate actively in this work, which of course is of the utmost urgency.
Mr. BAGBENI ADEITO HZEHGAYA (Zaire) (interpretation from French): My delegation wishes first to express its gratitude to the representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Vorontsov, for the tireless efforts of President Gorbachev to bring about a peaceful settlement of the question relating to the occupation of Kuwait by Iraq.
My delegation has followed with interest the statements made by members of the coalition on the Soviet-Iraqi proposals. My delegation believes that at this stage the members of the Council should spare no effort to examine those proposals in depth with a view to identifying elements that it can use to implement fully its 12 resolutions on the question. To that end, the official statements by Ambassador Vorontsov, setting forth the peace plan, and by the Iraqi authorities, accepting the plan, should ba made official documents of the Council.
However thet may ha. my delegation regrets the absence of Kuwait from the consultations in Moscow, since resolution 660 (1990) binds Iraq and Kuwait to carrying out negotiations after the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait.
(Mr. Bagbeni.M^ita-Bisagsya,-Zaire)
As to the proposal made by the representative of India, my delegation also believes that all members of the Council should, regardless, take part in all the Council , s formal and informal work with a view to finding the most appropriate way to take the Soviet-Iraqi proposals into account.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom): I am speaking again only because I understand the speaker's list has been exhausted.
For the past one hour and twenty minutes I have been hoping to hear a few words spoken by the representative of the Government of Iraq. Since he has not spoken, I have taken the floor again merely to say that I think our debate this morning would be greatly illuminated if we were to hear the views of that Government.
Many references have been made to what the Iraqi Government does or does not accept, whether it is or is not favourable to the views expressed by the countries cooperating with Kuwait, and what it is prepared to do.
I think our further work is going to be extraordinarily difficult without an indication of the views of the Government of Iraq. This is not a negotiation between the Governments cooperating with Kuwait and the Soviet Union. It is not a negotiation at all. But we do need to know the views of the Government of Iraq.
Now, of course the representative of the Government of Iraq has every right to stay silent. I am not trying to exert any unacceptable pressure. But I do think this opportunity has to be offered before we close our debate.
The president« I call on the representative of Iraq.
Mr. KAQpaT (Iraq) (internrarar<«. frj. Arabic): Iraq's position Is very clear. It has informed the Soviet leadership in Moscow that we have accepted the Soviet peace initiative and agreed to all its points. We have oaid we can withdraw
in conformity with all the provisions of resolution 660 (1990), in accordance with what has been announced by Mr. Tariq Aziz, the Iraqi Foreign Minister, in Moscow. As our friend the Soviet Ambassador made clear a few minutes ago, we find it strange that other conditions and other questions have been put forward at this meeting.
The PRESIDENT: With the concurrence of the members of the Council, I shall suspend the meeting now. The time for its resumption will be communicated by the Secretariat.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3046
31 January 1992
ENGLISH
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND AND FORTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 31 January 1992, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. MAJOR
Members; Austria
Belgium Cape Verde China Ecuador France Hungary India Japan Morocco
Russian Federation
United States Venezuela Zimbabwe
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Mr. VRANITZKY
Mr. MARTENS
Mr. VEIGA
Mr. LI Peng
President BORJA
President MITTERRAND
Mr. JESZENSZKY
Mr. RAO
Mr. MIYAZAWA
King HASSAN II
President YELTSIN
President BUSH
President PEREZ
Mr. SHÄMUYARIRÄ
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Offigial.Records gf . the ..^çuriby .fouaMl.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
92-60198 8295-96V (E)
RM/2
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN THE MAINTENANCE OF INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
The PRESIDENT; The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
With the permission of my colleagues, I shall make a brief introductory statement to our meeting today. This is a unique meeting. We are meeting at a time of momentous change. Just a year ago, the Council met the challenge of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and the Council did that with great success. But today we face new challenges, and to set a new course in tackling them, it is right, I believe, that we should meet for the first time ever at the level of Heads of State or Government. Today, we must show that the Security Council is working with a common purpose.
I welcome very much the presence today of so many Heads of State or Government. It is proof of the importance we all attach to the United Nations and of our commitment to the ideals of the United Nations. We come today from all parts of the world, Each of our countries has its own characteristics, its own concerns. But we are united in one particular aspect. We are united by our commitment to strengthen the wider community to which we belong, to reinforce collective security and to maintain international peace and security.
In convening this extraordinary meeting this morning, I intended that our discussion could serve four important purposes. First, our presence today marks a turning-point in the world and at the United Nations. On the international scene, we have witnessed the end of the cold war. States Members of this Organization have divided and reformed themselves. This 'prese#.!,™®118® opportunities, but it carries with it also new risks. At the
(Miigali^t)
United Nations, the term of office of Mr. Perez de Cuellar has come to a close. He has served the international community for many years with outstanding distinction, and I am delighted to be able to thank him for that work. We are here not only to wish his successor, Dr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, well, but to give him our full backing in carrying out his mandate. A new situation in the world needs new ideas and a new impetus.
(The President)
Secondly, we should today reaffirm our attachment to the principle of collective security, and to the resolution of disputes in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter. We should send a clear signal that it is through the United Nations and its Security Council that we intend to deal with threats to international peace and security.
Thirdly, we should today consider anew the means by which collective security is upheld through the United Nations and consider how best to update and to develop them. It is time to review all the instruments at our disposal - preventive action: to avert crises by monitoring and addressing the causes of conflict; peacemakings to restore peace by diplomatic means; peace-keeping: to reduce tensions, to consolidate and underpin efforts to restore peace. These, I believe, are the matters that we should consider now. Even today, as we meet here, peace-keeping operations are under way in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia and Europe. The need is not likely to decrease in the future. We must consider how we can enhance the ability of the United Nations to respond effectively and ensure that it has the necessary resources, both financial and material, to enable it to do so. In all of these, of course, the role of the Secretary-General is vital.
Fourthly, we should today commit ourselves anew to upholding international peace and security through reinforced measures of arms control. Activity to restrain the accumulation and transfer of arms, to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, affects all Members of the United Nations. Arms-control policy has become genuinely global. The role of this Organization - not just the Security Council, but the whole of the Organization - is an increasingly important one.
As we meet to consider the specific responsibilities of the Security Council, the wider concerns of the international community - even if we shall
1	(The President)
not discuss all of them today - are also in our minds. It is of course true that without economic development and prosperity we cannot hope to achieve lasting peace and stability. But it is every bit as true that only when conditions of security and peace are assured can sustained economic development take place. Both are needed. Only when we have both can resources be directed to where they are so urgently needed - towards the economic and social needs of the world's population.
The opening line of our Charter - the Charter of the United Nations -does not talk about States or Governments; it talks about people. The world now has the best chance for peace, security and development since the founding of the United Nations. I hope, like the founders of the United Nations themselves, that we can today renew the resolve enshrined in the Charter - the resolve to combine our efforts to accomplish the aims of the Charter in the interests of all the people we are privileged to represent. That is our role, and I wish the Council well in its work today.
Members of the Council, we have a great deal to do today. In accordance with custom I shall, with your agreement, make my national statement when all other colleagues have spoken.
We shall now commence our debate, and I invite the Secretary-General to address us.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Mr. President, Excellencies: it is a great honour for me to welcome you to this historic meeting of the Security Council. The significance of this gathering exceeds its symbolic value. It is one of those occasions when symbol enhances substance. Your presence here is a striking demonstration of your reliance on the United Nations. This expression of support is profoundly gratifying to the Secretary-General whom you have just elected.

This meeting could not have been more timely. As the new era begins, it calls for both ideas and action to place international life on stronger foundations. What shape the emerging order will take, what defences will be built against anarchy and terrorism, and how entrenched inequities can be removed will depend greatly on the wisdom, foresight and compassion of the world's leadership. It is the leaders of nations, engaged in joint deliberations, who can address not only the apparent problems but also the frustrations and fears that underlie and intensify them. As other summit gatherings are held regularly, it would be in tune with this time of the acceleration of history that the Security Council also meet at the summit level periodically to take stock of the state of the world. If this suggestion of mine is well received, it would strengthen the tone of authority that the United Nations needs at this critical stage. It would also help to assure that transfiguration of this house which the world hopes to be completed before its fiftieth anniversary, in 1995.
There has hardly been a stage more critical in modern history. The revolution that is sweeping large parts of the world derives its momentum and authenticity not from any outdated or recycled ideology but from the primal need of peoples for freedom, for justice, for solidarity and for recognition of their identities. The contours of the global order to which it will lead are not yet clearly perceivable. But several lessons are already being driven home:
Democratization at the national level dictates a corresponding process at the global level. At both levels, it aims at the rule of law. For
national societies, democracy means strengthening the institutions of popular
participation and consent, political pluralism and the defence of human
rights, including those of minorities. For global society, it means the democratization of international relations and the participation of all States in developing new norms of international life. Small States can play large constructive roles, and the record of the United Nations proves that political will and imagination can make more fruitful contributions to peace than military power or economic power. Where such participation is not fully forthcoming, it needs to be encouraged. That, in turn, requires the willingness to accommodate different viewpoints and a readiness to offer special assistance to the democratization process.
It would, of course, be naive to suppose that democratization alone, whether at the national or at the planetary level, will solve all our problems. At both levels, democracy is a delicate plant that needs the nourishing soil of peace, security and economic development. New ways of preventing internal disputes and inter-State confrontations will therefore need to be developed.
State sovereignty takes a new meaning in this context. Added to its dimension of right is the dimension of responsibility, both internal and external. Violation of State sovereignty is, and will remain, an offence against the global order. But its misuse also may undermine human rights and jeopardize a peaceful global life. Civil wars are no longer civil, and the carnage they inflict will not let the world remain indifferent. The narrow nationalism that would oppose or disregard the norms of a stable international order and the micro-nationalism that resists healthy economic or political integration can disrupt a peaceful global existence. Nations are too
interdependent, national frontiers are too porous and transnational realities - in the spheres of technology and investment, on the one side, and poverty and misery, on the other - too dangerous to permit egocentric isolationism.

-	Collective security can be based only on collective confidence and good faith - confidence in the principles by which it is governed and good faith in the means by which it is sought to be ensured. With all the convulsions in global society, only one power is left that can impose order on incipient chaos: it is the power of principles transcending changing perceptions of expediency.
-	Now that the cold war has come to an end we must work to avoid the outbreak or resurgence of new conflicts. The explosion of nationalities, which is pushing countries with many ethnic groups towards division, is a new challenge to peace and security. Could the United Nations discharge its responsibilities if, instead of being composed of 166 States, it had double that number of Members? Nationalist fever will increase ad infinitum the number of communities claiming sovereignty, for there will always be dissatisfied minorities within those minorities that achieve independence. Peace, first threatened by ethnic conflicts and tribal wars, could then often be troubled by border disputes.
The United Nations will have to adopt a new strategy to respond to the irredentist claims of ethnic and cultural communities or their calls for autonomy. It will have to take into account the abundant supply of arms, the aggravation of economic inequalities between various communities and the flow of refugees.
We legitimately emphasize preventive diplomacy, which means identifying potential zones of conflict, offering good offices while those conflicts are still in the gestation stage and resolving crises before they degenerate into armed confrontation. That requires means for observation, a sophisticated communications network and new financial resources. It will also be necessary
to obtain the agreement of the State in crisis as well as that of communities in revolt and to invent new federal formulas for the future.
The whole strategy will be pursued under the pressures of extreme urgency, with combat and destruction and images of death, wounded people and refugees clouding the political scene. We have to some extent succeeded in establishing the foundations of this new strategy. We have succeeded in maintaining a cease-fire or restoring peace in Africa, Central America, Asia and Europe. We have gone even further; we have even touched on the sphere of the institutional management of national reconciliation.
Behind the clamour of conflict, the tumult of aspirations and resentments, there is hope - the hope that the United Nations will act. The peoples expect Member States, and in particular those in a position to help, to rise above their rivalries, to respond to the peoples' need for dignity, equity and justice and to make the spirit of conciliation and dialogue prevail, for without it there can be no peaceful settlement of disputes. At this very moment millions and millions of victims of war, tyranny, fanaticism and economic injustice are anxiously following your deliberations, in the expectation that a remedy will be found to their ills and their misery. Their hope will not be in vain if people of good will, courage, compassion and vision take the initiative to resolve the problems that have broken so many human lives.
You are those people of good will. On behalf of the men and women who work in this Organization, on behalf of the thousands of civil servants, military people, observers and experts who make history in far-flung countries and try to put an end to war and begin dialogue, I thank you for your presence
here among us and for the hope that it awakens in those who pursue their daily struggle for the triumph of peace and sovereign justice.
The PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. Secretary-General. I know the Council looks forward to hearing you on many occasions in the years ahead. Thank you very much for what you have had to say to us today.
I now invite the President of France to address the Council.
President MITTERRAND (interpretation from French): First, Mr. President, I should like to thank you for your initiative which has brought us together here as members of the Security Council. It is a very important event, as the Secretary-General has just emphasized. I should like to tell him how pleased we are to see him today heading our great international society. I wish him every success in his work, in which we shall be unsparing in our support.
In addition to those words of encouragement, I should like to express our gratitude to Mr. Perez de Cuellar, gratitude which has already been so well expressed by you, Mr. President.
I myself had hoped for a meeting such as this 10 months ago, when we were at the end of a war waged to deal with aggression and to restore law and order, under the aegis of the United Nations. That was a new, but essential step, though the war of course inevitably brought suffering in its wake.
There have been many upheavals since then, with people thrown onto the road, civil wars and the disruption of vast political entities of long standing.
Where are we heading? We are looking for signposts, but we do not always find them. It is the role of the Security Council and the General Assembly to point the way.
Disorder and upredictability have become the rule. It will be said that perhaps there are too many things happening at the same time and that the only constant today is change. But are we now to mourn the old order and prefer, with Goethe, the great German writer, injustice to disorder? Surely not! Liberty has grown in the world; we must continue to help it.
Are there any clear responses? It is true that a time of crisis, such as we are living through now, is also a time of choice. On the one hand there is war, exodus, the break-up of States and terrorism. Are they unavoidable? We can prevent them. That is my first assertion. Preventing them is precisely the primary task of the Security Council of the United Nations, in accordance with the Charter.
A meeting like today's has been needed since March of last year. Prime Minister Major was absolutely right: the time was ripe for inviting us here. By no means does everything depend on us - but a great deal does.
Let me join my colleagues in tracing the route we should follow. First of all, a world in crisis requires instruments for comprehensive, universal action; secondly, we must guarantee collective security; and finally, we must create new forms of solidarity.
Needless to say, my statement will not be exhaustive, for we have only a limited	amount of time	to say what we want to say	- and that may	be a	good
thing.	I shall merely	put forward a few ideas, a	few plans.
It	is a fact that	since 1945 all the world's	major problems	have	required
a universal approach. We must now create the instruments for that universal action: instruments on security, on how to expand the means available to the Security Council for intervention. Take, for example, resolution 687 (1991), which put an end to the Kuwait war. Its strict implementation is necessary to restore peace in the Middle East, but it is not enough. The situation clearly calls for the creation of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, which means the participation of all the States of the region - and of other regions. It also calls for universal adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. For its part, France is in the process of ratifying that Treaty. France will also become a1 party to Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America - the Treaty of Tlatelolco - whose twenty-fifth anniversary will be marked in two weeks.
But the establishment of such a zone requires also the adoption of a convention banning chemical weapons. That is possible, which is why I call upon all States to come to Paris to sign such a convention before the end of the year.
We should also try to monitor and limit arms transfers and, as so aptly proposed by President Bush and President Yeltsin, to accelerate genuine reductions in nuclear weapons. We should establish a closer link between the concepts of non-proliferation and disarmament, and so forth.
We are no longer engaged in a race towards over-armament; on the contrary. That is excellent news.
Everyone must now participate in nuclear disarmament, provided first and foremost that all States in question are able to see that their security is assured. There should not be vast differences among the nuclear potentials of various parties.
Economic interdependence is another axiom. We have a great deal of ground to cover in order to reap the practical benefits of such interdependence. We are now in a position to decrease military budgets for the benefit of development. I would recall that many of us have called for continued dialogue between the North and the South. We do not want the gap to grow even wider. We must continue the work already begun, for example, on the question of debt by considering the position of intermediate-income countries among the less wealthy. I would mention the case of Venezuela and France: without any great fanfare, we have been working since July to achieve an agreement between a consumer and a producer of oil.
We must revise many of our methods, our concepts and our approaches.
(EmifieslUil^^
I shall not dwell on the question of the environment. Soon a conference on the subject will be held in Rio de Janeiro, where we shall have to take a broad view in order to save the planet while still enabling peoples to make progress. Peoples are often compelled to alter the natural balance, because they lack the means to live in any other way.
^ Human rights have triumphed - and I hope it is no temporary triumph - in the ideological struggle of the cold war.
I am not proposing a new system. I merely remind the Council that democracy begins in the schools. We must consider and renew the role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), to make it exemplary; we must consolidate it. It is time for the States that have left UNESCO to return and contribute to its great task.
Collective security will be jeopardized very quickly if we do not create up-to-date conditions for it. Past experience has shown that nothing can be done without the determination of States, particularly the major Powers, to reject the law of the jungle and the principle that might is right. That determination is reflected in the Charter of the United Nations. For a long time, the Charter was hobbled, but today all its provisions are usable, and we must implement them immediately.
I am certain that other colleagues will also be making proposals to ensure the greater effectiveness of peace-keeping operations. I state that for its part France is ready to make available to the Secretary-General a 1,000-man contingent for peace-keeping operations, at any time, on 48-hours notice. That figure could be doubled within a week. Such deployments would involve activity by the Military Staff Committee, as provided for in the Charter.
Secondly, it is indispensible that we develop preventive diplomacy. Members of the Council should undertake systematically to provide the Secretary-General with information on international security and to give him the mandate to maintain regular contacts with his counterparts, the leaders of regional organizations. Chapter VIII of the Charter, on regional arrangements, should no longer be disregarded. We must be able to turn as necessary to new bodies to meet specific needs.
On the relationship between disarmament and development, suggestions have recently been made, for example by Germany. Those are good suggestions, which is why France recommends the establishment of regional funds for the conversion of military research and development to civilian production, for the benefit, to begin with, of new States: republics, with urgent needs, which once formed part of the former Soviet Union. I am certain that other countries too will be able to benefit, including States of the Middle East.
Similarly, on the model of Europe, why should we not establish in each region appropriate arbitrating bodies? The European Community already has such a body.
Those are a few of the possible instruments.
We must, moreover, ensure that the United Nations has regular, increasing financing. To that end, arrears must be paid. I am not making any specific allusions, but I would remind the Council that this would make it possible to demonstrate that a spirit of cooperation will be present in our work.
(President Mitterrand)
My third and last point concerns the conditions for a new solidarity. Security cannot be conceived solely in military terms. Obviously, it has an economic aspect which is in fact supreme over the other as time passes and so long as economic insecurity does not generate new military conflicts.
Many proposals can be made. North-South confrontation should not be allowed to replace the East-West confrontation. I am sure all will agree to that. Politics, like economics, disarmament, social development and the environment, takes us back to the same law - that of solidarity. For a long time now the general term "developing countries" has not been in keeping with reality. Twenty years ago, we could believe in general and uniform progress. Today, there is in truth two basic categories of countries; some have succeeded in making progress, but many others - particularly in Africa but elsewhere as well, such as in the Indochinese peninsula - are bogged down in a situation from which they cannot emerge without our assistance.
If there are many kinds of developing countries - to use the traditional term that I am challenging - we need adapted forms of aid. Those developing countries which really are developing need private and public investment, cheap credit, and growth in international trade. Hence the importance of international negotiations currently under way.
As for other countries which have not yet succeeded in bringing about true development, let us not mince words: how can they be reinjected into the world economy? We should really examine this, giving particular thought to the necessary control of primary commodities. Otherwise, intolerable situations will arise and countries of goodwill, which work and require a great deal of their citizens, often find themselves in terrible crises. Their
(President.Mitterrand) two-, three- or five-year plans for recovery are demolished simply because in a single week international speculation has come into play.
Those are a few of the issues I would like the Council to consider. I very much hope - and my country is requesting it - that there will be a world summit on social development that will enable us to rejuvenate our thinking on development itself and to highlight the human dimension of things.
That is what I wished to say today. We are experiencing in Europe - in Western Europe particularly - an exceptional experiment: that of a community which has known atrocious wars. These wars monopolized the entire history of this century, piled destruction upon disaster, and long destroyed any chance our continent had. Well, we decided more than 40 years ago to settle our differences by negotiation, to bring about the necessary reconciliations and to learn to share our sovereignties and resources equally in the interests of security and the common good.
I do not wish to set that up as an example. Many others elsewhere have much to teach us by way of example. All are rich in tradition, culture and contributions to world civilization. I simply ask Your Excellencies to be good enough, on behalf of the Security Council of the United Nations, to exploit them.
The PRESIDENT: I thank President Mitterrand for his remarks. The initiative for a meeting of this sort did originally spring from President Mitterrand some months ago, and I am delighted to have been able to bring it about today.
I now invite the Constitutional President of Ecuador to take the floor.
President BORJA (interpretation from Spanish): In the maelstrom of concerns afflicting the spirit of modern humanity in this last decade of the twentieth century, four main issues are outstanding.
The first is violence in all its forms, nuances and manifestations: violence from above and from below; institutionalized violence and the violence of protest; political and economic violence; religious violence and racial violence - in brief, all the various and devastating forms of violence that beset the world.
Then, we have the age-old issue that political authority must be subject to the law - in other words, the limitation of power, which is a problem of conscience for any thinking person and which arouses profound ethical debate concerning the relationship between society and the individual, the balance between authority and freedom, the demarcation of authority, the juridical security of those governed, and respect for human rights.
Another of our concerns is undoubtedly the protection of the environment as an expression of solidarity with those who will follow us in this exciting adventure of life on our planet and to whom we are morally obliged to bequeath clean water, pure air, fertile land and green surroundings. It is a self-evident truth that no one can claim ownership of the freshness of the air or the purity of water.
Finally, there is human development, which is much more than economic development and the mere accumulation of material wealth, which goes beyond material consumption and which embraces a broad range of tangible and intangible possessions and values that together determine the quality of a people's life.
These, while not the only ones, are clearly the concerns that most deeply pervade the human spirit today. For a long time following the Second World
War, when the concept of economic development was born, the inevitable question was: how much does a society produce? The answer was always given in econometric terms of the gross: national product. Now things have changed and the questions are different. How are the inhabitants of a nation faring? What is their quality of life? And the answers must be found in the way in which the benefits of progress are distributed in a community and the fundamental needs of the human being are met. According to the criteria of the United Nations Development Programme itself, this involves longevity, education, personal security, political freedom, community participation and respect for human rights.
As President Mitterrand just put it, this is the human dimension of development. In the past, the concern was quantitative in nature, always involving national production indices measured by econometric formulas which were often deceptive in countries of great contrasts. Today, the concern is qualitative and human development is understood to mean freedom, health, security, well-being, culture, environment, satisfaction in one's work, the good use of leisure time and a wide range of other values.
Economic development does not necessarily and automatically presuppose human development. There are countries which, despite high levels of economic growth, have unacceptable social problems. Inversely, there are other
I countries that have low per capita income and, none the less, have reached considerable levels of human development.
The United Nations was established 47 years ago as an answer to the deeply felt need for peace and security in the world following the untold1 suffering caused by the last world war. Its birth was inspired at that historic time by the ideal so eloquently expressed in the preamble to its Charter, which states:
"We the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind ...".
We are far from having completely won the battle for peace. There still persist aggressive intentions, inferiority complexes that lead to violence, and misanthropy in the minds of certain political leaders. Racial and religious fanaticism, senseless nationalism, and xenophobia also constitute threats to the harmonious coexistence of peoples. The United Nations has lent invaluable services to mankind. Just consider how different the world of today is from the world of 50 years ago. We must remember the nature of nazi-fascism and the horrors of war and what followed. We had East-West confrontation with its implacable struggle to divide the planet into zones of influence, the madness of military expenditures, the SS-20s and the Pershing-2s that were targeted at human civilization, with the peace of the world subjected to the balance of terror. We need to recall these irrational and warlike elements in order better to admire and value the work done by the United Nations during its first 50 years of existence.
Let us begin by recalling the importance for the destiny of mankind of that one initiative taken on 26 June 1945 in San Francisco to establish a world-wide community of States capable of resolving, on the basis of unity and consensus, problems that States could not have been able to resolve individually and in isolation.
There is a clear parallel between the age-old process of forming human communities and the process of forming societies of States. In both cases, the same motivating factors exist. In the former case, man, an essentially incomplete being, ill-equipped to meet the needs of his own existence, was forced to join with others in order to survive; in the latter case, the State, which with the passage of years has proved incapable of resolving alone the problems of economic and social development, has also been compelled to establish communities of States in order to join forces and attain common
Jean Jacques Rousseau, one of the classic exponents of political thinking and universal thought, in explaining the origins of human society, affirmed that in a society its members, "giving of themselves to all give themselves to no one in particular and, since in any such partnership the partners enjoy equal rights towards each other, one wins in that exchange the equivalent of everything one loses, and greater strength to preserve what one has".
The same thing happens in the international sphere. The liberty of States, which is called sovereignty, is not undermined but rather is strengthened by the establishment of international organizations. The Italian philosopher and jurist, Giorgio del Vecchio, in referring to this issue, .
states:
"Only by obeying the law of our nature do we become truly free. Thus, the sovereignty of a State is truly affirmed as such only when the State does not betray its own essence, in other words, its nature as a participant in a possible and necessary community of States, in which it has the power neither to disregard nor to deny its own nature." Following the implosion of the Marxist regimes, in other words, the crumbling from within of the walls and scaffolding of their systems, the 1 bipolar distribution of global power and therefore East-West confrontation have disappeared. In this respect, I would say that I consider commendable the announcement made a few hours ago by Presidents Bush and Yeltsin of their readiness to eliminate nuclear missiles and reduce arsenals of other types of strategic weapons. This would be a major step on the road to disarmament. I say this as a leader who, deeply committed to the peaceful settlement of international disputes, proposed, last September before the General Assembly of the United Nations, the arbitration of Pope John Paul II to put an end to an old territorial dispute between my country and Peru. I am pleased in this connection to inform the Security Council that, since that time, we have begun an era of understanding and negotiation with the Government of Peru, inspired by the aspirations of peace and cooperation of both peoples.
There can be no doubt whatsoever that a new stage has begun in the history of mankind. I believe that this meeting symbolizes that fact. It is the turning of a page of history.
The challenge today is international economic and social justice and human development. A primary responsibility of the United Nations is to contribute to their attainment. Its fundamental mission as we look to the
future should be the attainment of a new order which does justice to the poor countries, which allows them to participate equitably in global income and which distributes with justice the benefits of progress. That is why Ecuador enthusiastically supports the initiative to which President Mitterrand referred just a few moments ago, of convening a summit meeting on social development.
Ecuador therefore enthusiastically supports the initiative, to which President Mitterrand referred just a few moments ago, of convening a summit on social development. We must be clear about the idea that behind poverty there lurk serious threats to the peace because - as they had not in times gone by -the peoples of today have passed value judgements on poverty. People used to View poverty as a household object and with the familiarity with which one views a household object, but they do not do so today. The conviction that poverty can be avoided leads to rebellion, and thus a dangerous and explosive political equation has now arisen: poverty plus a value judqmement on it plus rebellion equal the breaking of the peace.
The same thing is happening in the international sphere: mankind has become aware of its own imbalances; ethical value judgements have been passed on countries' situations, and this has added a new chapter to modern economic science, on the study of - to paraphrase Adam Smith - the causes of the poverty of nations.
Human development is, definitively, the most important issue of our day. Non-military risks to security have increased. Today, in the marginal countries, there is more poverty, more unemployment and more social instability than there was 10 years ago.
The end of the cold war, as the Secretary-General said in his last report, will make it possible for mankind to release very considerable financial resources to social and to human development. This is, in the view of Ecuador, the most important, most crucial task of the United Nations during the new, historic phase, which is beginning today.
The PRESIDENT: Mr. President, thank you very much. It was good to hear the environmental themes aired so thoroughly this morning, and many of us, of course, look forward to taking up that debate at Rio later this year.
I now have pleasure in inviting His Majesty the King of Morocco to address the Council.
Kina HASSAN II (interpretation from Arabic): Praise to the Lord, and prayer for the Prophet and his family.
The holding of a summit meeting of the countries members of the Security Council, upon the invitation of His Excellency the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Mr. Major, who is President of the Security Council this month, is an excellent initiative and, clearly, a commendable precedent in the history of the United Nations.
The high level of representation of the countries members of the Council confers a special significance on this exceptional, historic event. It reflects not only the desire of the members of the Council to discharge their responsibilities but also their commitment to international cooperation and their support for the noble mission of the United Nations for greater understanding in the interest of world peace, all of which is with a view to avoiding a return to international confrontation and its sorry train of harmful consequences for the world. The peace between the wars lasted only a short space of time, and hardly had one conflict been stanched when another confrontation of even greater fury and violence was unleashed, giving mankind no respite.
This summit meeting is being held in appropriate circumstances, as it is taking place after the historic changes which have just occurred in the world and have profoundly altered all the givens of international politics.
These changes have brought about a situation for our planet which was completely unforeseeable before the '80s. That is why this summit meeting is an invaluable occasion for us to exchange views on the events that we have experienced and to reflect, together, on effective ways to meet the challenges now facing mankind as it enters the last decade before the twenty-first 1 century.
We cannot fail to take this opportunity to express our warmest congratulations to the Secretary-General of our Organization, His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who, thanks to his intellectual powers and his moral qualities, has very deservedly assumed this highly responsible post. There can be no doubt that his election constitutes not only the consecration crowning his success in the duties he performed in his own country, but also a tribute to the region to which he belongs and a just recognition of the contribution of Arabs and Africans to the development of the United Nations and to the accomplishment of its mission.
We would be failing in our duty if we were not also to pay a special tribute to his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar who, through his tireless efforts, made an invaluable contribution to the revitalization of the United Nations and its positive development during a sensitive period in its history, so enabling it to tackle global problems and alleviate tension, thus commanding respect from the world at large.
The fact that Morocco is part, at one and the same time, of Africa and of the Arab and Islamic worlds gives it the duty, on this happy occasion, of expressing its ideas and views while at the same time taking into account the positions of the various parties which belong to these same regions. We are therefore honoured to be able to transmit to you the feelings, observations
(King Hassan II) and questions raised in our region by the initiative of the President of the Council in convening this summit meeting.
As far as the United Nations is concerned, we commend the major role it has played since the end of the Second World War in establishing a new era based on the maintenance of peace and security and on the attainment of progress for all the countries and peoples of the world. Nevertheless, the Security Council, which has functions in the field of the maintenance of international peace and security, has not always been capable of carrying out its mission under the Charter of the Organization, and in particular under Chapter VI. The Council has, for most of the time, been paralysed because of the cold war, which was reflected in the Council by the exercise of the right of veto by the great Powers of one or another bloc. For the same reason, the Security Council found itself incapable of finding satisfactory solutions to regional conflicts, which had harmful consequences in the international arena.
The desire to support the United Nations role requires, first and foremost, action to maintain world peace and achieve the peaceful settlement of disputes. In other words, dialogue and mediation must be given pride of place, and all of the mechanisms of the United Nations and the provisions of the Charter must be employed; the Secretary-General must be given all the means of preventive diplomacy to prevent the degeneration of disputes into armed conflicts.
In addition, the provisions of the Charter concerning collective security cannot become operational unless all countries fully respect international law and unless the principle of equality among States is made a reality.
Since the end of the cold war, the United Nations responsibilities have broadened and its role has been increased.
Given the new configuration of the world scene, the international community is itself confronting new difficulties and new challenges at a time when it aspires to peace. This is why all countries are hopeful that the Organization will be more effective at this crucial stage in the evolving international situation.
In this connection the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms the need to strengthen the organs of the United Nations, to improve their functioning and to review their mechanisms in order to increase their effectiveness and credibility and adapt them to the new realities they face.
Morocco can therefore only support the often-expressed will to revitalize the United Nations and reform its organs, and we hope that precise and concrete proposals will be made in this respect as soon as possible.
The strengthening of the organs of the United Nations and of their role in the maintenance of international peace and security requires that the
(King Hassan II) international community give serious consideration to disarmament questions. In this respect, it is our view that the international instruments concluded in recent years all provide glimmers of hope and encouraging prospects in this area.
Nevertheless, the progress achieved by the United Nations in the nuclear sphere should not prevent us from redoubling our efforts to ensure the success of the Geneva negotiations on the prohibition of chemical weapons and their destruction in order to rid ourselves of a devastating weapon that constitutes a negation of civilization and noble human values.
We believe that disarmament will have no true significance unless it engenders in the countries of the North the dynamics of cooperation with the countries of the South to help the latter to free themselves from underdevelopment. Moreover, we believe in the need to establish a link between peace and disarmament, and it is regrettable that the close relationship that exists between peace and development is underestimated.
We must not forget that underdevelopment has been and remains the greatest threat to world peace and security and that at the present time it represents the greatest challenge the international community must meet.
We are a part of Africa, a continent that we cherish and respect. We suffer its problems and we share its aspirations, even though we may not always have benefited from all of the understanding we had the right to expect from the Organization of African Unity. It is a continent whose situation is worsening and where living conditions are deteriorating under the combined effect of growing indebtedness, the decline in the prices of raw materials, galloping population growth and the scarcity of foreign investment.
.	(King Hassan II)
In addition, Africa is confronted with a worsening economic crisis because of natural disasters, famine and the displacement of over 10 million refugees to neighbouring countries. This is a crisis that will imperil the continent's future if the international community, does not take urgent measures to give effect to the commitments it has undertaken in this respect.'
It is impossible to envisage the establishment of a new world order when the Arab world is living a tragedy that has lasted for nearly a half century. That tragedy is the tragedy of the Palestinian people, deprived of the exercise of their rights, stripped of their territory and their homeland, threatened in their identity and their history, whose children are dying before the eyes of the entire world.
Although the international community has set out to find short-term or longer-term solutions to some political problems, the persistence of this problem for so long a time demonstrates the inability of the universal conscience to resolve it and to put an end to its negative consequences. Thus the international community must redouble its efforts to find a definitive solution to the problem of the Middle East in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, which have, inter alia, emphasized the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Arab territories and the recognition of the rights of Palestinians, including the right of refugees to return to their homeland.
Morocco was among the first to encourage dialogue among the parties to the conflict in the Middle East. In so doing, we were acting consistently in unhesitatingly supporting the peace initiative. We thus hope that that process will be completed and that the countries that have prepared the meeting of the parties to the conflict will encourage dialogue leading to a solution that will be just and acceptable to all.
In this framework, we should like to focus on the specific status of the city of Al Quds Al Sharif and recall that in 1979 the Organization of the Islamic Conference entrusted us with the chairmanship of the Al Quds Committee. Over these 12 years we have continuously sought to find an equitable and just solution to the fate of the Holy City.
We understand that the Holy Places in that city are of paramount importance to Muslims, Christians and Jews. That is why the Arab and Islamic side has shown openness in all the gatherings it has held, and in particular at the Summit Conference held at Fez in 1982, displaying a spirit of cooperation and taking the first steps towards the other side. However, and to our profound regret, that openness and the initiatives taken with a view to attaining peace have been met with political immobility, with rigid positions, the use of force and the fuelling of tensions.
Clear progress has been achieved in the international sphere in respect of human rights. Morocco takes this opportunity to express its pleasure at this fact, because the concept of human rights, as we see it, is universal and can in no way be departed from or called into question.
We believe that human rights mean respect for dignity and its corollary:' the safeguarding of individual and collective rights. It is to this principle that civilized communities are committed. It is a pleasure for us to say on this occasion that the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights reflect the human concepts which we have upheld for 14 centuries and which include political, economic and social rights. The second Caliph of Islam, Omar Ibn El-Khattab, proclaimed the principle of human rights in the following words: "How is it possible to subjugate man, when he is born free?".
Your initiative, Mr. President, gives the countries members of the Security Council the opportunity, for the first time, to meet at the highest level and enables them to have a thorough and interesting discussion of the problems of our day. The exchange of opinions and the discussion reflected in the final presidential declaration which will be the culmination of our work today will allow us to note the progress we have achieved and the breadth of the tasks that await us if we are to meet the challenges with which we are confronted.
While we cannot claim that our meeting will resolve the problems facing the world, we can at least affirm that this meeting has the merit of enabling us to consult together and to chart the course of that new world order to which we aspire.
The PRESIDENT: Your Majesty, we thank you for that very wide-ranging and comprehensive speech.
I now invite the President and Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation to address the Security Council.
President YELTSIN (interpretation from Russian): This summit meeting of the Security Council, the first of its kind on the political Olympus of the contemporary world, is a historic and unprecedented event. The end of the twentieth century is a time of great promise and new anxieties. The age-old search for truth and the attempt to discern what the future has in store for humanity seem to be getting a kind of second wind. Perhaps for the first time ever there is now a real chance to put an end to despotism and to dismantle the totalitarian order, whatever shape it may take. I trust that after all the unthinkable tragedies and tremendous losses it has suffered, mankind will reject this legacy; it will not allow the twenty-first century to bring new suffering and privation to our children and grandchildren.
The process of profound change is already under way in various spheres of life, and above all in the economic sphere. It is a problem that concerns not just individual nations or States, but the whole of mankind. After all, it is an economy mutilated by ideological diktat and built in defiance of all common sense that forms the principal material base of totalitarianism. A profound awareness of this causal relationship has led the Russian leadership to embark upon a most difficult course of economic reform. We have taken that risk in a country where an all-out war was waged against economic interests for many decades.
I am grateful to the world community for its support of our efforts and for understanding that the future not only of the people of Russia but of the
entire planet largely depends on whether or not these reforms are successful. I am also grateful to the people of Russia for their courage and steadfastness. They should take a great deal of credit for the fact that the world community is moving ever farther away from the totalitarian past.
Democracy is one of the major achievements of human civilization. All times and all countries have known people who have risen up selflessly in its defence. The people of Russia defended democracy at the walls of our Moscow White House. Now we must accomplish the most difficult task - that is, the creation of legal, political and socio-economic guarantees to make democratic changes irreversible.
All of us our weighed down by a tremendous burden of mutual mistrust. It is no secret that a most profound abyss has separated the two States that until recently were referred to as the super-Powers. This abyss must be bridged. That is the wish of our nations and the commitment of the Presidents of the United States of America and the Russian Federation.
The new political situation in the world makes it possible not only to advance new, original ideas but also to make even the most ambitious of them practicable. Our proposals have been outlined in our messages to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and the President of the United States, Mr. George Bush. Russia believes that the time has come to reduce considerably the presence of means of destruction on our planet. I am convinced that together we are capable of making the principle of minimum defence sufficiency a fundamental law of the existence of contemporary States. Today there are real opportunities for implementing deep cuts in strategic offensive arms and tactical nuclear weapons; resolutely
moving towards significant limitations on nuclear testing and even towards its complete cessation; making anti-ballistic-missile defences less complicated and costly and eliminating anti-satellite systems; considerably reducing conventional armaments and armed forces; ensuring practical implementation of international agreements on the prohibition of chemical and bacteriological weapons; and enhancing the reliability of barriers to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The problem of experts engaged in the development and production of such weapons, including nuclear physicists, has lately become a top priority. No country has the right to use its talents for political gains, at the expense of international security. Russia is fully aware of its own responsibility and is taking steps to make provision for the social security of such experts. At the same time, we support the idea of establishing international centres which could coordinate appropriate research and support the most promising areas of work.
I think the time has come to consider creating a global defence system for the world community. It could be based on a reorientation of the United States Strategic Defense Initiative, to make use of high technologies developed in Russia's defence complex.
We are ready to participate actively in building and putting in place a pan-European collective security system - in particular during the Vienna talks and the upcoming post-Helsinki-II talks on security and cooperation in Europe.
Russia regards the United States and the West not as mere partners but rather as allies. This is a basic prerequisite for, I would say, a revolution in peaceful cooperation between progressive nations. We reject any
(President Yeltsin) subordination of foreign policy to pure ideology or ideological doctrines. Our principles are clear and simple: primacy of democracy, human rights and freedoms, legal and moral standards. I hope that this is something that our partners in the Commonwealth of Independent States also hold dear. We support their early admission to the United Nations and believe that this will have a beneficial impact on the evolution of the Commonwealth itself. The Commonwealth has been formed by the participating States on the basis of full equality and of their own free will. It rests on natural human ties among tens of millions of people. Russia is fully aware of its responsibility for making the Commonwealth of Independent States an important factor of stability in the world. This applies above all to nuclear forces. The participating States of the Commonwealth share the view that nuclear weapons are an integral part of the strategic forces of the Commonwealth under a single command and unified control.
Today talks are under way about the future of the armed forces of the former Union. The main task is to carry out the transformation of them in a civilized manner and on a clearly defined legal basis.
Our top priority is to guarantee all human rights and freedoms in their entirety, including political and civil rights and decent socio-economic and environmental living standards.
I believe that these questions are not an internal matter of States, but rather their obliqations under the United Nations Charter, international covenants and conventions. We want to see this approach become a universal norm. The Security Council is called upon to underscore the civilized world's collective responsibility for the protection of human rights and freedoms.
In the near future Russia intends to adopt legislation that will reflect the highest international standards in the field of the protection of human freedom, honour and dignity. This applies above all to ensuring personal security, to the Criminal Code and the Corrective Labour Code, to protection of Russian citizens abroad, to alternative military service and to other issues.
We are prepared to accede to the international .instruments on migration and to join in the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. I believe that the experience of the world community in these areas will be useful for Russia and other States of the Commonwealth.
A few days ago the 10 remaining political prisoners were pardoned by a decree of the President of the Russian Federation. There are no longer any prisoners of conscience in free Russia.
A special role in establishing a new international climate in the world belongs to the United Nations. This Organization has stood the test of time and managed, even in the ice age of confrontation, to preserve the nascent norms of civilized international cohabitation contained in its Charter.
We welcome the United Nations increased efforts to strengthen global and regional stability and to build a new democratic world order based on the equality of all States, big or small.
Russia is prepared to continue partnership between the permanent members of the Security Council. The current climate in the activities of this body is conducive to cooperative and constructive work.
For us, the peace-making experience of the United Nations is particularly valuable.
The new Russian diplomacy will contribute in every possible way to the final settlement of conflicts in various regions of the world that have been unblocked with the assistance of the United Nations. We are ready to become more fully engaged in these efforts.
We will make use of the effective role of the United Nations and the Security Council and take part in the search for lasting solutions to the Yugoslav and Afghan problems and for a normalization of the situation in the Near and Middle East, in Cambodia and in other regions.
I believe that we need a special rapid-response mechanism, as mentioned by President Mitterrand of France, to ensure peace and stability. Upon decision of the Security Council it could be expeditiously activated in areas of crisis.
We are prepared to play a practical role in United Nations peace-keeping operations and contribute to their logistical support.
My country firmly supports steps to consolidate the rule of law throughout the world. It is necessary to enhance the prestige of the International Court of Justice as an effective instrument for the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
On the whole, I think it is high time we considered serious reform of the United Nations. The world has changed and certain areas of United Nations activities have lost their relevance. We should do away with those structures which yield no practical benefits to Member States. We are ready to present our proposals for reform of the United Nations.
It is a historical irony that the Russian Federation, a State with centuries-long experience in foreign policy and diplomacy, has only just appeared on the political map of the world. I am confident that the world community will find in Russia, as an equal participant in international relations and as a permanent member of the Security Council, a firm and steadfast champion of freedom, democracy and humanism.
Last year's events have confirmed that the nations of .the world have now come of age and are capable of adopting responsible and meaningful decisions.
This was vividly demonstrated by the developments in the Gulf, when our joint efforts resulted in the just punishment of the aggressor, and by the defeat of the coup in Moscow last August.
Difficult work lies ahead for us all to consolidate the positive trends in the evolution of today's world and to make them irreversible. It is only on this basis that we can ensure a decent and prosperous life for our nations and every individual. Russia is prepared to do all it can to achieve this goal.
In conclusion, permit me to wish Mr. Boutros-Ghali every success in his important post of Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT: Mr. President, thank you. I know the Council would wish me to welcome Russia as a permanent member of our Council. You are very
welcome indeed.
I now invite the President of the United States of America to take the floor.
President BUSH, Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you for your key role in convening this first-ever summit of the United Nations Security Council.
Mr. Secretary-General, I offer congratulations to you as you take office at this time of tremendous challenge and opportunity.
For the United States it is a high honour to participate and speak at this history-making event.
We meet at a moment of new beginnings - for this institution and for every Member nation. For most of its history the United Nations was caught in a cold-war crossfire. I think back to my days here in the early 1970s as a Permanent Representative and of the way polemics then displaced peace-keeping. Long before I came onto the scene, and long after I left, the United Nations was all too often paralysed by cruel ideological divisions and the struggle to contain Soviet expansion. Today all that has changed.
The collapse of imperial communism and the end of the cold war breathe new life into the United Nations. It was just one year ago that the world saw this new invigorated United Nations in action as the Council stood fast against aggression, and stood for the sacred principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Now it is time to step forward again, to make the internal reforms, accelerate the revitalization, accept the responsibilities necessary for a vigorous and effective United Nations.
I want to assure the members of the Council and the Secretary-General that the United Nations can count on our full support in this task.
Today, for these brief remarks, I will not talk on the economic and social agenda so eloquently addressed by President Borja, but, rather, I will mention the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, regional conflicts, destabilizing renegade regimes that are on the horizon, terrorism, and human rights; they all require our immediate attention.
The world also challenges us to strengthen and sustain positive change. We must advance the momentous movement towards democracy and freedom - I believe our Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali called this "democratization" -and expand the circle of nations committed to human rights and the rule of law. It is an exciting opportunity for our United Nations. We must not allow it to slip away.
Right now, across the globe, the United Nations is working night and day in the cause of peace. Never before in its four decades have the United Nations blue helmets and blue berets been so engaged in the noble work of peace-keeping, even to the extent of building the foundation for free elections.
And never before has the United Nations been so ready, and so compelled, to step up to the task of peace-making - both to resolve hot wars and to conduct that forward-looking mission known as preventive diplomacy. In the lives of millions of men and women around the world its import is simples it can mean the difference between war and peace, healing and hatred. Where there is fear and despair, it can mean hope.
We look to the Secretary-General to present to this Council his recommendations to ensure effective and efficient peace-keeping, peace-making and preventive diplomacy. We look forward to exploring these ideas together.
We must be practical as well as principled as we seek to free people from the spectre of conflict.
We recognize every nation's obligation to invest in peace. As conflicts are resolved and violence subsides, then the institutions of free societies can take hold. As they do, they become our strongest safeguards against aggression and tyranny. Democracy; human rights; the rule of law - these are the building blocks of peace and freedom.
We have witnessed change of enormous breadth and scope, all in but a few short years. A remarkable revolution has swept away the old regimes from Managua to Moscow. But everywhere, free Government and the institutions that give it form will take time to flourish and mature.
Free elections give democracy a foothold, but true democracy means more than simply the rule of the majority. It means an irrevocable commitment to democratic principles. It means equal rights for minorities. And above all it means the sanctity of even a single individual against the unjust power of the State. The will of the majority must never degenerate into the whim of the majority. This fundamental principle transcends all borders.
Human dignity, the inalienable rights of mans these are not the possessions of the State. They are universal. In Asia, in Africa, in Europe, in the Americas the United Nations must stand with those who seek greater freedom and democracy. That is my deep belief, and that is the belief of the American people. And it is the belief that breathes life into the great principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Our changed world is a more hopeful world indeed. But it is not absent those who would turn back the clock to the darker days of threats and bullying. Our world is still a dangerous world, rife with far too many terrible weapons.
In my first address to the United Nations as President, I challenged the Soviet Union to eliminate chemical weapons and called on every nation to join us in that crusade. His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco made that point so well right here today. What greater cause for this great body than to make certain the world has seen the last of these terrible weapons? So let us vow to make this year the year all nations at long last join to ban this scourge.
There is much more to do regarding weapons of mass destruction. Just three days ago, in my State of the Union message, I announced the steps -far-reaching unilateral steps - that we will take to reduce our nuclear arsenal. These steps affect each element in our strategic triad: the land, the sea and the air.
In addition to those unilateral steps we are prepared to move forward on mutual arms reductions. I noted the constructive comments of President Yeltsin here today, and tomorrow in my meeting with him we will continue the search for common ground on this vitally important issue. He responded with some very serious proposals just the other day.
We welcome - the world welcomes - statements by several of the new States that won independence after the collapse of the USSR that they will abide by the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty. Yet realism requires us to remain vigilant in this time of transition: the danger of proliferation remains. Let me single out the remarks earlier by the President of the French Republic, President Mitterrand, on this subject: a clarion call to do something about it.
We must act together so that from this time forward people involved in sophisticated weapons programmes will redirect their energies to peaceful endeavours. We will do more, in cooperation with our allies, to ensure that dangerous materials and techology do not fall into the hands of terrorists or others. And we will continue to work with these new States to ensure a strong commitment in word and deed to all global non-proliferation standards.
Today, the threat of global nuclear war is more distant than at any time in the nuclear era. Drawing down the old cold-war arsenals will further ease that dread. But the spectre of mass destruction remains all too real,
(President Bush) especially as some nations continue to push to acquire weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them.
Our triumph in the Gulf is testament to the United Nations mission: that security is a shared responsibility. And today, this institution spearheads a quarantine against the outlaw regime of Saddam Hussein. It is the strong belief of my country that we must keep sanctions in place and take the following steps to preserve our common security:.
We must continue to focus on Iraq's capability to build or maintain weapons of mass destruction. And we must make clear to the world and, most important, to the people of Iraq that no normalization is possible so long as Saddam Hussein remains there, remains in power.
As on all the urgent issues I have mentioned today, progress comes from acting in concert. We must deal resolutely with these renegade régimes, if necessary by sanctions or stronger measures, to compel them to observe international standards of behaviour. We will not be blind to the dangers we still face. Terrorists and their State sponsors must know there will be serious consequences if they violate international law.
Two weeks ago, this Council in unity sent a very strong message to Libya, and let me repeat today: resolution 731 (1992), passed unanimously by this body, the Security Council, calls on Libya to comply fully with the requests of three States members of this Council. I would just like to use this meeting today to call on Libya to heed the call of the Security Council of the United Nations.
Last year in the Gulf, in concert, we responded to an attack on the sovereignty of one nation as an assault on the security of all. So let us
(President Bush) make it our mission to give this principle the greatest practical meaning in the conduct of nations.
Today we stand at another crossroads. For perhaps the first time since that hopeful moment in San Francisco, we can look at our Charter as a living, breathing document. Yes, after so many years it may still be in its infancy, requiring the careful and vigilant nurturing of its parents, but I believe in my heart that it is alive and well. Our mission is to make it strong and sturdy through increased dedication and cooperation, and I know that we are up to the challenge.
The nations represented here - like the larger community of the United Nations represented by so many Permanent Representatives in this Chamber today - have it in their power to act for peace and freedom. May God bless the United Nations as it pursues its noble goal.
The PRESIDENT: Mr. President, thank you for setting out so clearly the opportunities and responsibilities that lie ahead for the United Nations.
I now invite the President of Venezuela to take the floor.
President PEREZ (interpretation from Spanish): Ever since the San Francisco Conference in 1945, Venezuela has underscored the principles that, in its view, should guide the action of the United Nations. Then as now, that action is to organize the peace.
But to organize the peace, the United Nations was compelled, owing to the circumstances of its foundation, to sacrifice sovereign equality in the fulfilment of its mandate. In San Francisco Venezuela expressed its hope that the formula adopted on the powers of the Security Council and the General Assembly
"might evolve in time towards modalities that are more democratic and more representative of all peoples". .
The end of the East-West conflict; the momentum of the process of democratization throughout the world; interrelation and global economic interdependence; the end of the decolonization process and, more recently still, the resurgence of nationalities on the Euro-Asian continent all show us that circumstances are so different today that it would be imprudent to disregard the implications.
The right of veto has been an extraordinary power. The circumstances on which it was based have to a great extent been superseded by history. It was highly useful in ensuring the survival of the Organization, which, without that power, might perhaps have met the same fate as the League of Nations.
Now that those risks are gone, the Organization must restore the basic principle underlying its validity: that of equality of rights and obligations. The Security Council reflects political realities as they existed at the end of the Second World War, and not current realities. The General Assembly is repetitive in its resolutions and weak in providing political guidance to humanity. Its organs in the field of cultural, economic and social cooperation must be reviewed, reinvigorated, streamlined and effectively redesigned to contribute to North-South dialogue and the development of the peoples of the third world. The office of the Secretary-General must be strengthened and provided with modern management.
I believe that another priority of the United Nations in maintaining peace is the strengthening of regional organizations in an operational relationship with the United Nations.
The role of the international Court in The Hague should be complemented by the establishment of an international penal tribunal, as has so often been requested. The situations that have arisen in the Republic of Panama and now
(toritot-fftrsa)
in Libya, bearing serious risks for peace and the enforcement of international law, alert us clearly to that need.
Regional conflicts, which could become the most serious and aggressive threat to the peace, must be approached through a methodology that sets aside the interests that predominated in the past and reflected the quest for hegemony and zones of influence among the dominant Powers.
The permanent representatives to the United Nations of the Rio Group, to which Venezuela belongs, prepared a document for the consideration of the General Assembly. Its title is an accurate reflection of this change in global life: "From Confrontation to International Cooperation". I wish to stress the main lines of the Rio Group's declaration because they reflect the thinking of all Latin America on the role which this Organization should play.
We can replace the nuclear threat with the challenge of disarmament. This task is not the exclusive responsibility of those who confronted each other during the cold war. It is a collective responsibility. It means reconverting to peaceful uses the industrial-military apparatus and controlling the flow of technology. It means the development of guarantees and controls by the international community.
We must adapt the traditional concept of national sovereignty, incorporating into it the transnational responsibilities implicit in the interdependence of all our nations and in supranationality, which has been fully recognized through the democratization of global society. We must reshape the traditional concept of national sovereignty to the full range of State duties and peoples' rights. This is obvious when it comes to the issue of the environment and, even more so in connection with natural resources, which have been described as a collective heritage. We must also adapt and
(President Perez) reshape it to an essential body of human rights and States' commitments among themselves and towards their peoples with the new concept of a democratic legal philosophy.
The Rio summit on development and the environment can be an initial staging ground for the democratization of international relations and the role which relations between North and South must now play. It must be followed by a summit on social development, as proposed by President Mitterrand, if we wish to be consistent with the goals that we have expressed.
May I recall that Venezuela was the country which proposed an international convention on the question of the traffic in narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances. Venezuela was also spokesman for efforts to focus the international community's attention and action on the serious and persistent absurdity of underdevelopment, which continues to distort the fabric of North-South relations. Venezuela has been and remains a staunch promoter of relations among developing countries - South-South relations - in the conviction that it is in the interest of all nations to put an end once and for all to the inequality of conditions and opportunities on which contemporary international society has been built.
The welcome reconciliation and cooperation between East and West must not be at the expense of the necessary cooperation and agreement between North and South. These are no longer national problems. If anything demonstrates that fact, it is the constant tension that exists between models of global economic organization and new regional structures ■ that are exclusive in nature and threaten to create not only competitive but antagonistic blocs.
Here I wish to quote the reflections contained in the annual statement of the Canadian Institute for International Peace and Security, which I believe to be particularly timely and eloquent:
"Can anyone seriously envisage a ’new world order' composed of three closed blocs formed by the wealthy sector of humanity wielding the economic dagger, calmly advocating democracy, market economies and disarmament to a majority that is ever more desperate, and all of this in a world of overburdened natural systems, openly proclaimed divergent values and massive migrations such as have never been seen before, as well as technology and weapons of mass destruction proliferating throughout the world?"
We must deal with all of these risks in a democratic and legal way, just as in each of our national societies only the rule of law can safeguard international coexistence through a legal system that ensures international justice. No longer can the United Nations live on the sidelines of history. We have the good fortune to be able to strengthen and guide it. Undoubtedly, this will require new instruments of action in accordance with the new priorities we set together. And it is clear, perhaps for the first time, that the United Nations is indispensable to us all. We cannot and must not presume that this will be easy. But we can and must determine how it can be made part of the solution of present-day challenges.
This means placing our trust in its leadership and in its set-up, as well as in the decision-making machinery. The guiding principles must be those that inspired its establishment, now brought to complete fruition.
That is how I see the task of peace-building, peace-making and peace-keeping.
The PRESIDENT; Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you also for drawing some fresh subjects to the attention of the Council.
I now invite the Federal Chancellor of Austria to address the Council.
Mr, VRANITZKY (Austria); Mr. President, your initiative to convene this high-level meeting of the members of the Security Council is indeed timely; the end of the cold war has freed minds and resources which were for so long bound by a wasteful and useless confrontation. Dramatic changes have occurred in a very short time; a new quality in international relations is making itself felt. Austria, situated on the former iron curtain, can certainly testify to that, These changes also provide us with a new, maybe unique, opportunity to face new challenges with a new perspective. There is a new partnership in global responsibility shared by all members of the Security Council. Permanent and non-permanent members alike have worked together and have enabled the Council to take a number of unanimous positions on some of the most complex and critical issues.
In this Organization the powerful and the weak, the large and the small, the wealthy and the struggling come together as equals to solve their problems, to look for support, to look for justice. It certainly is in our interest to have the United Nations as effective as possible, as respected as possible, as' influential as possible, so that it can really fulfil our common goal, the maintenance of international peace and security. This Organization,
(Mr. Vranitzky, Austria) its new Secretary—General and this, in many ways, new Security Council, must be agents of peaceful and constructive change.
There are four major issues of great importance in this context: the strengthening of the United Nations in peace-making and peace-keeping; the need for further progress in disarmament and arms control, including the dismantling of weapons of mass destruction; the significance of human rights, minority rights and democratic processes for development, prosperity and peace; and the need for effective measures against poverty to create a long-term basis for stability and security in international relations.
Peace-keeping activities are a very effective instrument of the United Nations. From its modest beginning, conceived with ingenuity and carried out pragmatically, peace-keeping has grown in size and scope, has grown into a universally accepted and by now indispensable tool.
Much experience has been gained over the years. I fully agree with the former Secretary-General who, when accepting the 1988 Nobel Peace Prize for the United Nations peace-keeping forces, stated that the principles and techniques involved in peace-keeping may also be applicable to conflict resolution in general: the principles of impartiality and objectivity, the symbolic representation of international authority, the process of seeking compliance through cooperation, the capacity for fact-finding, the monitoring of the implementation of agreements, and the development of a capacity to prevent conflicts.
Now the Security Council has begun to fulfil more effectively its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Now we also have the chance to give a new impetus to a stronger role of the United Nations in these areas.
Some of the recent crises have made one fact very clears there is an urgent need for an early reaction to potential conflicts. Preventive diplomacy both by the Secretary-General and, where appropriate, by the Security Council will have to be developed further.
An early deployment of peace-keeping personnel, possibly also at the request of only one party to a conflict, may help to contain a dispute and facilitate a process of negotiation and compromise before the outbreak of hostilities. I strongly believe that the Security Council will have to consider the possibility of this measure and other preventive measures.
Many of the questions currently on the agenda of this Council relate directly to internal conflicts. They are born of ethnic, nationalistic or religious rivalries or are the result of long suppressed grievances.
Nevertheless, they all sooner or later affect regional or international peace and security.
The tragic situation in Yugoslavia provides an instructive example. Austria was among the first to call at an early stage for international peace-making efforts in this conflict and for the deployment of United Nations peace-keeping forces. We welcome the fact that the United Nations role in solving this crisis is now universally accepted. However, some of the bloodshed and destruction could have been avoided by a swifter response.
In other areas the United Nations has clearly shown that it is indeed able to give an adequate response to new challenges by expanding the mandate of peace-keeping to new responsibilities, such as the protection of human rights or the supervision of free and fair elections.
It may also be useful to recall the Charter's ambitious goal of multilateral peace enforcement and the creation of an effective system of global collective security. The authorization given by the Security Council
(Mr, Vranitzky, Austria) to a coalition of States to use all necessary means to implement the mandatory resolutions of the Council was a significant step in this direction.
Another step would be to have ,a fresh look at Article 43 of the Charter.
As one of the most important future tasks of the Security Council, I see a more active involvement in the areas of arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament. In Article 26, the Charter has given us an excellent programme for future action of the Council.
This is not only a political priority of the first order; it also responds to the wishes of our peoples. Given the tremendous challenges of achieving sustainable development and international economic progress and social justice, the need for reduction of military budgets becomes obvious. Security can be achieved at a lower level, and the achievements in the intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF), the strategic arms reduction talks (START) and the conventional armed forces in Europe (CFE) negotiations clearly show that this is possible. The latest announcements by Presidents Bush and Yeltsin of further cuts are very promising indeed and highly welcome.
New successes seem within reach also with regard to chemical weapons and a broadened acceptance of non-proliferation. The nuclear-weapon States in the terms of the non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) are also the permanent members of the Security Council. They have a special responsibility to develop policies that at least contain the promise of a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The global efforts and the negotiations in Europe will, in my view, have to be complemented by regional and even subregional moves towards arms reduction and disarmament in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and also South America. They also can profit from the so-called peace dividend. A reduction of their military budgets can provide financial resources acquired for economic and social development.
It is obvious that such efforts will be possible only in a climate of international trust and confidence. Existing verification instruments will have to be strengthened and expanded. Technical expertise has been accumulated in specialized agencies; now, it has to be put to good use. One such organization, without a doubt, is the International Atomic Energy Agency, located in Vienna. Given its experience and its capacity, I am convinced that it should have a central role in the very special problem of the destruction of nuclear weapons.
The protection of human rights and, in particular, of the rights of ethnic minorities too, has had an important impact on the development of peaceful relations between States. There is a direct connection between democratic processes within countries and the evolution of a political culture which is conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes. From our own history, we know that peace was most threatened when human rights were abolished and minorities persecuted and when democratic processes gave way to totalitarian practices. Human rights, minority rights and democracy are, therefore, important cornerstones in our common endeavour.
The Secretary-General has identified these issues as priority areas for the future work of the Organization. I fully share and support this view. Today, nobody should be allowed to use outdated interpretations of legal documents as protective walls behind which human rights can be systematically and massively violated with total impunity.
Democracy and human rights are easily endangered in a state of poverty, as has already been said this morning. No system has ever been able to ensure peace and security unless at the same time it provided social justice. Our search for peace cannot be separated from the need to improve economic and
(Mr, Vranitzkv, Austria) social conditions everywhere in the world. Adequate strategies are necessary. They will have to be formulated quickly and implemented with speed and efficiency.
As we move, through the actions of this Council, to strengthen an international system based on international law and justice, increased support will also be required for those institutions which care for and uphold the effectiveness of international law. In particular, I am referring to the International Court of Justice: its role must be expanded and strengthened in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I should like to touch, briefly and in general terms, on the future of this Council. If our ideas are truly to bear fruit, we must act on behalf of as well as in the interest of all States. We must act in an even-handed, impartial manner, and we must also be perceived as doing so. If we truly want to turn over a new page in the book of this Organization today, then we must also be aware that the realization of our hopes depends on the trust of all the world's States and peoples in our impartiality and in our goodwill. This trust we must earn - over and over again. Today is only a beginning.
The PRESIDENT: Mr. Federal Chancellor, thank you for your very comprehensive remarks.
I now invite the Prime Minister of Belgium to take the floor.
Mr, MARTENS (Belgium) (interpretation from French): The framework of international relations has gone through profound changes during the past few years. The balance of power that emerged after the end of the Second World War has now dramatically shifted. As history is unfolding at such great speed, it is undoubtedly appropriate to call for an exceptional meeting to
(Mr, Martens, Belgium) discuss some of the consequences of these changes for our Organization. That is why Belgium immediately welcomed your initiative, Mr. President, of convening a meeting of the Security Council at the level of Heads of State or Government.	'
The radical turn in the balance of international relations indeed requires an updating of the role of the Security Council. It also requires a rethinking of the interplay between the various bodies of the United Nations. In the course of this process, the Secretary-General will have to exercise fully his right to take initiatives. In our changing world, the Secretary-General must invent new kinds of diplomacy; he must take new risks and meet many kinds of challenges, such as terrorism, the recurrence of civil wars and the emergence of international conflicts linked to the violation of human rights. His function will take on a more vital importance, and the international community will have ever higher expectations of him.
When in 1978 Egypt took the "peace risk" and embarked on extremely difficult negotiations, our new Secretary-General seized the opportunity to show his courage and his talents as a diplomat. Needless to say, Belgium is extremely satisfied at seeing Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali occupying that seat within the Council.
Your predecessor, Mr. Secretary-General, had the very difficult task of carrying out his important responsibilities at a time which was extremely important for the United Nations and for the world. Mr. Perez de Cuellar succeeded in becoming a true incarnation of the hopes of our Organization and its Member States. The success of his efforts bear witness to his tenacity and his skill. Recently, thanks to his diplomatic talent, we saw a solution
(Mr, Martens, Belgium) to the painful problem of the hostages in the Middle East. We fervently hope this process will be brought to fruition.
Among the most important tasks before us, I see three which may be implemented through the means of action at our disposal: cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and international regional organizations; extension of the powers of initiative and inquiry of the Secretary-General and the Security Council; and the greatest possible efficiency of the United Nations peace-keeping operations. Furthermore, for Belgium, it is essential that the Security Council and the Secretary-General take full account of the importance of universal observance of human rights in international peace-keeping and security issues; they should act accordingly, with the full weight of their authority.
First of all, I should like to address the issue of international regional organizations, which should be involved systematically in the Security Council's actions. Very recently, in its resolutions concerning the Yugoslav crisis, the Security Council constantly referred to the intervention of the European Community as well as to the efforts made within the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) framework. Belgium considers this road to be very promising, inasmuch as regional structures genuinely carry out their actions within the United Nations framework of values.
In this context, some aspects of the Treaty on Political Union, which the 12 States members of the European Community have just concluded in Maastricht, should be highlighted. The Treaty invites the Twelve to broaden their cooperation to Security Council matters in order to defend their common positions. As far as Belgium is concerned, the framework of common foreign policy and security policy should enable the Twelve to speak with a single
(Mr, Martens, Belgium) voice in due time. A particularly positive example of this increasing coordination of the Twelve is their common diplomatic initiative which led to the adoption by the General Assembly of the idea of an arms transfer register. In the same spirit, the Twelve will shortly be considering what action they can take to support the recent proposal of the German Government aiming at preventing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The power of the Security Council and the Secretary-General to take initiatives is a second means of action at our disposal. That role would become more efficient if we could facilitate a swift United Nations response whenever conflicts or pre-conflict situations arise.
My country has been defending the principle of an extension of the Secretary-General's preventive-diplomacy powers since 1983. Belgium's diplomatic efforts, which Germany, Spain, Italy, Japan and New Zealand have joined, resulted in the adoption of a resolution at the forty-third session of the General Assembly exclusively addressing the prevention of conflicts. Belgium and the aforementioned States, together with Czechoslovakia, then went on to examine the issue of fact-finding, which resulted in the adoption of a resolution a few weeks ago during the forty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
The central theme of both of those documents is the role of the Secretary-General and the Security Council in the early stages of conflict situations. The Secretary-General should enjoy the full support of the Security Council whenever he considers taking early initiatives to deal with delicate situations. If need be, the Security Council could enhance that political support by requesting the Secretary-General to prepare a report on a specific issue. Moreover, he could be requested to contact the various parties as soon as it became clear that the conflict might reach alarming proportions. Accordingly, the Secretary-General might be invited by the Security Council to formulate concrete proposals aimed at preventing a deterioration of the situation.
The third issue I should like to take up is that of peace-keeping operations, which are one of the most efficient means of action available to
the Security Council in coordination with the Secretary-General. The Secretariat should now reorganize and streamline their management and administration, given the success of such operations and their increase in number over the past few years, and given also the new scope of those operations that will be initiated in the near future in our often very delicate political environment.
We must first of all ensure the immediate availability of funds from the moment the Security Council decides on the launching of a peace-keeping operation. In this regard Belgium proposes the creation of budgetary reserves. The size of those reserves would be agreed on annually according to the operations planned. The Council could allocate a portion of them to the provisional financing of the preliminary stages of peace-keeping operations.
Within the framework of peace-keeping operations set up by the Security Council, my country will give favourable consideration to the secondment of troops and observers to the United Nations for possible deployment. Through specific training programmes, Belgium will ensure rapid deployment of Belgian contingents in United Nations peace-keeping forces.
In addition to the procedures and means of action at the Organization's disposal, the time has now come to place our actions once more in the perspective envisaged by the authors of the Charter, to which all peoples aspire. In this endeavour to allow the fundamental principles of the Charter to prevail, it is essential that the Security Council and the Secretary-General show courage and initiative. The new solidarity has permitted the collective defence of international law; it should now serve the collective defence of human rights.
Last October in the General Assembly Belgium stated that:
(Mr, Martens, Belgium) "States are liable internationally for their national policies in the field of human rights." (A/46/PV.27, p, 49-50)
Every State here today will agree that the fate of civil populations that fall victim to internal repressions fully justifies the compassion and concern of the United Nations. Indeed, all States Members of the Organization concur in their determination to defend human rights. They have committed themselves to acting to that end, in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations.
My country believes that the raison d'être of the principle of non-interference is to allow States to foster in freedom the well-being of their peoples. However, no Government should use that principle as a legal argument to condone abuses of human rights. State rights are subservient to human rights.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General should focus especial attention on these matters. The Commission on Human Rights already provides mechanisms for denouncing serious violations of human rights. In this connection, Belgium would suggest that the Security Council deal with such cases at an early stage and support any action taken elsewhere to put an end to unacceptable situations that could pose a direct threat to international peace and security.
Recently, the United Nations has participated in the organization and supervision of free elections. Such assistance could also be provided in situations where administrative structures have collapsed as a result of natural disaster or conflict. The United Nations might decide on procedures to be implemented on short notice. Member States could thus draw up lists of national civil servants available for rapid deployment on certain missions.
In addition to international peace and security, we should also make an effort to pursue justice in other fields in order, in the words of the preamble to the Charter, "to promote better standards of life in larger freedom" for the largest possible number of people.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General are facing difficult tasks in the field of international peace and security. For the sake of efficiency, a thorough symbiosis with other United Nations bodies is required, taking into account their respective fields of competence. In that respect, all other objectives pursued by the United Nations continue to be of crucial importance, in particular, the need to pursue, together, sustainable economic development for all, fruitful dialogue between richest and poorest nations and the common fight against such scourges as hunger, disease, illiteracy and pollution. Belgium will continue to cooperate actively in the implementation of the decisions of the Security Council and, as it has in the past, it will continue to support the actions of the Secretary-General.
If the better-organized and more unified world I have just outlined is to live in peace, it should also pay due regard to the problems of the less-well-off and poor in a more effective way. Respect for the dignity and worth of every human being is a universal aspiration, one we should uphold not only in principle but one we should also try to translate into facts. Peace is a necessary step - but only a step - towards man's self-liberation, which requires the joint efforts of all Member States and of the whole of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Prime Minister of Belgium for dealing so well with the matters at the heart of our debate today.
I now invite the Prime Minister of Cape Verde to address the Security Council.
Mr, VEIGA (Cape Verde) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): It gives me great pleasure. Sir, to see you presiding over this important meeting of the Security Council. I congratulate
Your Excellency on this timely initiative of convening this high-level meeting of the Security Council at this important time in the history of nations.
I take this opportunity to affirm publicly my Government’s great satisfaction at the election of Mr. Boutros-Ghali as the new Secretary-General. I pledge our full cooperation with him and wish him a successful mandate.
This meeting is convened at a time when profound changes are taking place in the world. In many parts of the planet one witnesses a redefinition of the political structures and goals of nations. At the same time, a strong movement for democratization is gaining momentum and taking hold everywhere; human rights concerns are gaining ever-increasing importance, while the serious problems of the world environment are capturing our attention and the need to address poverty and underdevelopment are becoming more acute and pressing.
These are global symptoms of a world that is going through a process of deep transformation, the end result of which we only hope will be a better, safer, more just and prosperous world order.
The Charter of the United Nations conferred upon this Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, so as
(Mr, Veiga, CapeVerde) to ensure a stable world, free from the scourge of war. This is a function whose implementation is becoming ever more pressing in a world that has accumulated massive amounts of highly destructive conventional armaments and has not ceased building and perfecting nuclear arsenals. This important United Nations responsibility was not successfully carried out in the past, as is well known to us all.
For decades the ideological confrontation of the cold war crept into the deliberations of the Security Council and made it impossible for us "to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security" - to use the words in the preamble of the Charter.
We are glad to note that with the end of the cold war the Council has now developed a new approach to its work, based on cooperation, especially between its permanent members. This cooperation has enabled the Council to assist, through negotiations, in the settlement of age-old conflicts in many parts of the world and to take swift and decisive action to reverse aggression and restore the independence and sovereignty of Kuwait.
We believe that the Council has now embarked upon the right course of action by effectively and efficiently shouldering its responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. As a result, the eyes of the world have now turned to the United Nations as a source of international peace, stability and justice, and nations seem to have a renewed interest and faith in the Security Council as a peacemaker and as a guarantor of the independence and territorial integrity of countries.
As a small, peace-loving country that under no circumstances condones the threat or use of force to settle international conflicts, Cape Verde welcomes
(Mr, Veiga. Cape Verde) this new era of positive cooperation in the Council and strongly believes that it should be further strengthened, in order to allow for full and regular implementation of the Charter collective security system. The United Nations, through its Security Council, has to act - as envisaged by the Charter - as the guardian of the security of nations, especially the small countries, and as a catalyst for the promotion of the primacy of the rule of law in international relations. The actions and decisions of the Council in the last two years have raised new hopes in this regard.
We strongly urge the Council to pursue this course and, certainly, as one of its members we shall spare no effort to promote and strengthen its Charter role of taking prompt and decisive action against aggression, of labouring to bring existing conflicts to a peaceful end and of creating a more stable and peaceful world environment.
It is therefore imperative that, now that the Council has gained new impetus in carrying out its function and has gained the respect of the people of the world, it should act in such a way as to strengthen its international credibility and its moral authority, so that it will become an ever-present instrument for maintaining world peace and promoting and strengthening international security.
A strong Security Council is certainly one whose decisions are based upon frank discussion by all its members and are a reflection of the views of all of them. In our view, the moral authority of the Council is bound to suffer whenever a decision is taken without exhaustive efforts to achieve consensus. We believe that when decisions of the Council command across-the-board support from its members, the possibilities of their implementation are considerably increased.
The Council, in addressing aggression and illegal occupation, must be even-handed. Whenever a selective approach is taken in this respect, it necessarily damages the Council's credibility and substantially weakens its moral authority. Equally damaging to the Council's credibility is what could be perceived to be selective implementation of its resolutions. In our view, if the Council is to have, in the eyes of the peoples of the world, the credibility such an important organ deserves, then it becomes highly advisable that the Council secure the implementation of all its resolutions.
The Security Council's role in promoting a safer and more stable climate needs to be strengthened. One of the most important tasks facing the Council in this regard is the implementation of the collective security system envisaged in the Charter. The new climate of cooperation between the members of the Council seems to have contributed to creating the conditions that will facilitate measures leading to the implementation of that system.
It is unfortunate that we live in a world where there is still aggression by some States against others. We believe that aggression should always be swiftly and decisively reversed by the United Nations.
On the other hand, we believe that the role of the peace-keeping forces should be strengthened. Although peace-keeping activities were ingeniously invented to fill, partially, the vacuum created since the early days of the United Nations, by the inability of the latter to implement the collective security system, we think that such activities have gained a life of their own and have become an indispensable and important tool in the hands of the Security Council in its conflict-management role.
United Nations peace-keeping operations have been deployed in various parts of the world with proven success, and in many instances have contributed to defuse tension and prevented the escalation of hostilities and in some cases have even become an indispensable element of a negotiated solution.
We also believe that, without interfering with the sovereignty of countries, the deployment of United Nations peace-keeping forces can play an important and decisive role in helping bring about a speedy peaceful outcome to national conflicts whenever no Government is really in charge and chaos sets in.
National conflicts are sometimes as destructive as the fiercest international conflicts. The enormous loss of life and the human tragedy they produce demand no less attention and appeal for no less speedy a response from the international community.
Apart from the loss of human lives, every national conflict has an international dimension, for it generates massive numbers of refugees, thus creating enormous social pressure in neighbouring countries, threatening their peace and stability.
We are glad to note the positive response of the Security Council in this respect in recent cases, and we encourage the Council to pursue this course.
(¡fciJaisazJtoOwJfi)
Because of its important role and its beneficial result in conflict-management, we favour a review of the United Nations peace-keeping activities with a view to consolidating their performance and increasing their effectiveness.
The Secretary-General has an important Charter role to play in assisting the Security Council in its peacemaking efforts, by bringing to its attention any matter that may, in his judgement, threaten international peace and security. This eminently relevant political function of the Secretary-General has not been implemented in the past as it should have been.
In the current international climate, characterized by a proliferation of violent conflicts, we believe it to be of great importance that the Secretary-General use, as often as required, this prerogative of his as an inescapable functional duty that, when performed in a timely manner, might prevent a potential dispute from developing into an open conflict. We encourage the Secretary-General to make effective use of preventive diplomacy.
Whatever the efforts of the Security Council in maintaining international peace ¿nd security, and however commendable the cooperation between its members might be, the Council measures, in and of themselves, will not suffice to secure the permanent stability of nations, to quell regional rivalries once and for all and to weed out violence.
The Council's role will be facilitated when, and only when, the root causes of instability and conflicts are properly addressed.
Therefore, if we, Members of the United Nations, are to succeed in creating a safer and more stable world, we should be prepared to couple the efforts of the Security Council with those of the United Nations system and the international community in general to help find an urgent and satisfactory
(Mr.......................................................veiga,..Cape.Beas) answer to poverty, underdevelopment and social problems, all of them natural ferments that brew frustration and violence and spawn constant instability in world affairs. In this respect, we firmly support the initiative to convene a world summit on social development.
In many instances, the best, most efficient and longest-lasting security measure to avoid conflict is to invest in the solution of social problems, the eradication of poverty and underdevelopment and to promote a cult of respect for, and strict observance of, the Charter principles - particularly, strict observance of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The PRESIDENT; Thank you, Prime Minister, for your speech and your very strong support for the United Nations role.
I propose that we now suspend our meeting until 3 p.m., when I shall invite Premier Li Peng to address the Council.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m, and resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The PRESIDENT: I now invite the Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China to make a statement.
Mr. LI Pena (China) (interpretation from Chinese): For the first time in the 47-year history of the United Nations the Security Council is meeting here today at the level of Heads of State or Government of its member States. I am very glad to have the opportunity to attend this meeting as the representative of the People's Republic of China and, together with my colleagues from other countries, to discuss major international issues including in particular ways to give support to a greater role for the United Nations in maintaining peace and promoting development in the world, as well as to exchange views on other issues of common interest.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to thank the Right Honourable John Major, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, for his initiative to hold this meeting.
I should also like to express once again our warmest congratulations to Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali on his assumption of the office of Secretary-General.
The present-day world is at a vital turning-point. The old structure has come to an end, while a new one has yet to take shape. The world is moving in the direction of multipolarization. World peace, national stability and economic development are aspirations shared by peoples everywhere. The tense face-off between the two major military blocs in Europe, which lasted for nearly half a century, is no longer in place. Some regional hot spots have either been or are in the process of being removed. The international situation has eased to some extent.
However, factors threatening world peace and causing international tension have not been removed completely. While some old contradictions and confrontations have disappeared, new ones have cropped up, rendering our world neither tranquil nor peaceful.
The Middle East question remains unresolved after the Gulf war, and the peace talks between the Arab countries and Israel are likely to be a long and difficult process. In some European countries conflicts of varying intensity, or even wars, have broken out as a result of ethnic strife. No one can say for sure that similar conflicts and wars will not take place in other parts of Europe.
What deserves the close attention of the international community is the fact that the developing countries, whose populations constitute the overwhelming majority of the world total, are finding themselves in an increasingly difficult position. The gap between the North and the South continues to Widen, with the rich countries becoming richer and the poor poorer. That state of affairs, if allowed to continue, will eventually lead to fresh disturbances or even new regional conflicts. The stark reality shows that the questions of peace and development, the two principal themes of the present-day world, remain to be solved.
In contrast to a turbulent Europe, the Asia-Pacific region enjoys relative stability. The signing of the Paris Agreement has laid the foundation for a final settlement of the Cambodian conflict. Following their simultaneous admission to membership of the United Nations, the North and the South of Korea have signed a protocol on mutual non-agression and a joint declaration on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. The situation on the peninsula is moving towards relaxation and stability.
Quite a few countries in the Asia-Pacific region have enjoyed a rather high economic growth rate thanks to political stability at home. This region has now become a dynamic and promising region in world economic development.
A stable and economically prosperous China not only is in the fundamental interests of the Chinese people but also constitutes an important factor making for peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and in the world as a whole. Over the past decade or more, China has firmly implemented the policy of reform and opening to the outside world initiated by Comrade Deng Xiaoping, which has brought enormous changes to the country. Now China enjoys political stability, social tranquility, ethnic harmony and sustained economic growth. With full confidence, the Chinese people are advancing on the road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. As a developing country with a huge population, China knows full well that its modernization will take a considerably long period of time. The attainment of this goal requires two indispensable conditions, namely an environment of prolonged peace and stability internationally and prolonged political stability at home. China pursues an independent foreign policy of peace. It always maintains that differences in social system, ideology, cultural tradition and religious belief should not be an obstacle to establishing and developing normal relations between States.
China is ready to develop friendly relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. It will never become a threat to any country or any region of the world. China is of the view that no country should seek hegemony or practice power politics. This should be made a principle to be observed universally in international relations. China does not seek a sphere of influence for itself. It does not seek hegemony now and will not seek hegemony in future when it grows stronger.
The past few years have seen a further strengthening and development of friendly and good-neighbourly relations between China and the countries surrounding it, as a result of the concerted efforts of China and those countries. This in our view not only serves the common interests of both China and those countries but also contributes to the peace and development of the region and the world as a whole.
In order to win a genuine peace in the world and create a favourable environment for development for the people of all countries, the international community is focusing more and more on the subject of what kind of new international order should be established. In our view, such basic principles as the sovereign equality of Member States and non-interference in their internal affairs, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, should be observed by all its Members without exception. In compliance with the spirit of the Charter and the established norms governing international relations, and in the light of the changes in the international situation, the Chinese Government wishes to share with the Governments of other countries some of its basic views concerning the establishment of a new international order that will be stable, rational, just and conducive to world peace and development. These basic views ares
The new international order should be established on the basis of the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality, mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence. The core of these principles is non-interference in each other's internal affairs. The people and Governments of the various countries are entitled to adopt the social system and ideology of their own choice in the light of their national conditions.
All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are entitled to participate in world affairs as equal members of the international community and to,make their own contributions to world peace and development. ^ - The new international order should include a new economic order. As the ever-widening gap between North and South and the continued exacerbation of the disparities between them have become a destabilizing factor in international life, the establishment of a just and rational new international economic order based on equality, mutual benefit and providing for appropriate handling of the debt burden has become ever more urgent and crucial.
The human rights and fundamental freedoms of all mankind should be universally respected. Human rights cover many aspects. They include not only civil and political rights but also economic, social and cultural rights. As far as the large number of developing countries is concerned, the rights to independence, subsistence and development are of paramount importance. In essence, the issue of human rights falls within the sovereignty of each country. A country's human rights situation should not be judged in total disregard of its history and national conditions. It is neither appropriate nor workable to demand that all countries measure up to the human rights criteria or models of one country or a small number of
(Mr^IiL Pena,.....................................................China) countries. China values human rights and stands ready to engage in discussion and cooperation with other countries on an equal footing on the question of human rights on the basis of mutual understanding, mutual respect and seeking consensus, while reserving differences. However, it is opposed to interference in the internal affairs of other countries using the human rights issue as an excuse.
Effective disarmament and arms control should be achieved in a fair, reasonable, comprehensive and balanced manner. Efforts should be stepped up
to attain the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear and
chemical weapons at an early date and to ban the development of space weapons. Countries in possession of the largest nuclear and conventional arsenals should take the lead in discharging their special responsibilities for disarmament. All nuclear-weapon States should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to use or threaten to use such weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones. The nuclear weapons of the disintegrated Soviet Union should be placed under effective control. As the disarmament issue bears on the national security of all States, it should be discussed and addressed with their participation.
-	The United Nations should uphold justice and play a more active role in maintaining world peace and promoting development, as well as in helping to establish a new international order. As most States Members of the United
Nations belong to the developing world, it is only reasonable for people to expect that the Organization will do more to defend the rights and interests of the developing countries.
In recent years, the United Nations has played an important role in maintaining world peace and security, accelerating the settlement of regional
(Mr, 11.....................................................Peng,...ghipa) conflicts and promoting the economic and social development of various countries. In so doing, the United Nations has enhanced its prestige and that of its Security Council and increased peoples' confidence in the Organization. While affirming this, we must also be aware that the drastic and profound changes in the international situation have led to the re-emergence of numerous contradictions previously hidden from public view, adding to instability in the pursuit of peace and development in the world. It is in this sense that the responsibility of the United Nations and its Security Council has become heavier and that the challenges facing them have grown more formidable.
China is ready to cooperate with all the other members of the Security Council, to discuss issues of common interest to the international community and to exchange views with them as equals in the spirit of seeking common ground while reserving differences, so as to expand areas of consensus. China sincerely hopes that the United Nations and its Security Council will play a still more active and constructive role in international affairs. We now have a newly elected United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali. China supports the work of the Secretary-General and wishes to pledge its full cooperation. We are confident that, in discharging his duties, the Secretary-General will receive extensive support from the developing countries and the international community at large.
It is our hope that this meeting will have a positive impact on the maintenance of world peace and security and that it will play an important role in helping to establish the new international order and to defend the rights and interests of the developing countries, thus making a contribution to the progress of humanity.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Premier for his valuable contribution to start our afternoon session.
I now invite the Prime Minister of India to take the floor.
Mr, RAO (India): Mr. President, we appreciate the initiative you have taken in convening this meeting. Its deliberations can show us a direction which is indeed important at this juncture. It is good of you to have helped us make a beginning.
I also wish to pay a tribute to a personal friend and colleague of distinction and eminence, whom the United Nations has rightly chosen as its Secretary-General. To my brother Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our heartiest greetings. May I also recall with gratitude and appreciation the services of Mr. Perez de Cuellar, which have left so distinctive a mark on this Organization.
We miss today the presence of a distinguished member of this fraternity, President Mugabe. We grieve with him in his personal bereavement and convey to him, through his delegation, our deepest condolences. To the President of Hungary, our good wishes for a speedy recovery from his indisposition.
We are living in a time of change, palpable change. Until very recently, the Security Council's effectiveness was inhibited by the cold war. We have since witnessed an upsurge of democratic sentiment all over the world. We have been touched by the desire in diverse countries that the values of liberty, economic justice and the dignity of man should govern the conduct of world affairs. These are trends of which our discussions must take cognizance.
The United Nations and the Security Council played the role required of them in recent months because the permanent members of the Council adopted a harmonious, cohesive and firm stance in dealing with the threats to the cherished values of man.
India's support to the United Nations has been complete and consistent. It has had no fluctuations. Today, we welcome this fresh effective role of the Security Council and shall continue our support. In visualizing its future role, it is essential that we take note of the emerging forces, the socio-political undercurrents, that result in unrest, instability and the recurrence of violence across the globe.
Lasting peace and security necessarily require comparable levels of human happiness across the globe. It is impossible to think of a United Nations functioning usefully or harmoniously while humankind continues to be riddled with ever-increasing disparities and while the world's natural resources -land, water and air - which are really humanity's common heritage are getting fast depleted by thoughtless acts of overexploitation and environmental
degradation. This is the single simple truth which this Organization has to take note of. All else falls in place, although the overall task remains extremely complicated, even with the best will in the world.
The role of the United Nations must naturally rest on the Charter, which incorporates the vital framework for action for maintenance of international peace and security. But the Charter is only as legitimate and secure as its underpinning by the collective will of the international community. At every step, the interpretation of the Charter as well as the actions by the Security Council must flow from that collective will and not from the views or predilections of a few. A general consensus must always prevail. What is right and just must become transparent. It is as simple as that. Members of the Security Council, whether permanent or elected, should insist on this consensus, scrupulously avoiding the temptation to dictate for quick results. Besides, while prescribing norms and standards for national or international conduct, the Security Council must scrupulously accept those norms for itself.
As the composition of the General Assembly has trebled since its inception, the size of the Security Council cannot remain constant any longer. Wider representation in the Security Council is a must, if it is to ensure its moral sanction and political effectiveness.
While implementing its resolutions in good faith, it is incumbent on the Security Council to anticipate all the consequences of its decisions. Some consequences may be unintended, but they can affect those whom they are least intended to affect. For instance, economic sanctions against one country can have a major impact on its trading partners. For developing countries, this impact can be catastrophic. If the Security Council's actions are to continue
(Mr, Rao, India) to command adherence and support, it must take speedy and parallel action to address problems arising in a third country from the implementation of its resolutions. Besides, it must act decisively and in time to alleviate human suffering in the country in question, once the primary purpose of imposing economic sanctions has been fulfilled.
I have profound respect for those who are crusading for the protection and preservation of human rights. A country with a history of over 5,000 years, with a record of non-invasion and non-annexation of alien territories, with the shining example of a powerful monarch like Asoka turning into an apostle of non-violence, another powerful heir apparent becoming the one and only Buddha, with a contemporary political system modelled on the best traditions of human rights and liberties - such is my country. Indian culture and human rights in their loftiest form are almost synonymous. However, having stated this, we cannot countenance a situation where all human rights are reserved only for the practitioners of terrorism, while Governments dealing with this menace are arraigned day and night on grounds of violation of human rights - real or imaginary, mostly the latter.
I am fully conscious of the obligations of the State in preserving human rights, as contrasted with terrorist and secessionist elements killing innocent citizens with impunity. What should really be suggested at this meeting is perhaps to delineate the parameters that harmonize the defence of national integrity with respect for human rights. In this view, India is ever willing to discuss and contribute in the endeavour.
It is also important to note that the content and nature of human rights are conditioned by the social, traditional and cultural forces that inform different societies. While the endeavour of the United Nations as being
intimated in this meeting is gradually to move towards creating uniform international norms for human rights, such norms should not be unilaterally defined and set up as absolute preconditions for interaction between States and societies in the political or economic spheres. Our endeavour should be to work towards a just and fair world economic order and to encourage countries to move towards universal norms of human rights.
We fully share the concerns expressed by several leaders on the threat posed to international peace and security by the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Another dimension of international security today is that of the possible loss of control over nuclear arsenals. What we are faced with is no longer the possible acquisition of such weapons by a handful of threshold States, but an uncontrolled spread of ready-made nuclear weapons across the globe by a variety of means and methods. The proliferation issue has thus assumed a qualitatively and frighteningly new dimension.
While sharing these concerns, we wish to underline, however, that measures of preventive or punitive action on a selective basis will not achieve the results we are aiming at. The sense of disquiet and urgency that pervades the discussion of this issue is precisely because it has now become a global problem and not of a few potential nuclear-weapon States. In this imponderable yet terrible scenario, technical fixes or regional arrangements can no longer suffice. The difficulties of monitoring and policing activities in a large number of States, several of them not even accurately identified at any given time, preclude effective results. The Secretary-General cannot, I submit, be expected to be inspecting basements and searching for bombs. This can hardly succeed, as anyone can see. There must be some other way.
What then is the answer to this difficult dilemma? In our view, the only logical route available to us is to pursue a global approach, based on a new international consensus on non-proliferation. To be effective, this global non-proliferation regime must be universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory and linked to the goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
At'the third special session of the United Nations devoted to disarmament, held in 1988, the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India put forward a specific Action Plan for Disarmament, which would eliminate all weapons of mass destruction in stages, eventually leading to a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world. The plan contained all the key elements of a new international consensus on nuclear non-proliferation. First, it called for the conclusion of an international convention on the prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. Second, it advocated a comprehensive test-ban treaty. Third, threshold States would undertake obligations not to cross the threshold, and this would be linked to corresponding obligations by nuclear-weapon States to eliminate their nuclear arsenals by the year 2010 at the latest.
At the time this action plan was put forward, some nuclear-weapon States expressed difficulty in accepting these ideas in view of their adherence to the so called doctrine of nuclear deterrence. This doctrine was anchored in the specific context of East-West confrontation and the cold war. The cold war is now over; the nuclear stand-off is a thing of the past. The doctrine of nuclear deterrence is no longer relevant.
We are now offered a historic opportunity to exercise statesmanship and move, quickly, to eliminate nuclear weapons altogether from the face of the Earth. In particular, the ideas India put forward in its action plan - or any alterations thereof - for example, a universal pledge to abjure the use of nuclear weapons, to conclude a comprehensive test-ban treaty and to develop a new, universal and non-discriminatory approach to non-proliferation, acquire compelling relevance. It is only within the framework of such a consensus, and through no other means, that the Security Council can deal effectively with the threats to peace emanating from the proliferation of nuclear weapons in its current, global dimension. If our meeting today can make a declaration along these lines, we will have made a truly historic contribution to the promotion of lasting peace and security.
In fact, I would venture to suggest that, going even beyond India's action plan, the target date for a nuclear-weapon-free world should now be advanced to the end of the present century. It would be a hopeful note on which to enter the twenty-first century.
Mr. President, the statement you will be reading out on behalf of the members of the Council at the end of today’s meeting has been the subject of intensive, productive discussions. We were happy to be part of the exercise and to have made our contribution to it. We consider it an important
•	(Mr, Rao, India)
statement. However, I find that the statement does not reflect one or two of India's crucial concerns. These I have mentioned clearly in my intervention just now. This, of course, does not detract from the significance of the statement you are about to make or from India's cooperation. Indeed, I trust that today's meeting will spur our common efforts to cooperate to mutual benefit and in the interest of all, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
The PRESIDENT; Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for that comprehensive contribution.
I now invite the Prime Minister of Japan to address the Council.
Mr, MIYAZAWA (Japan): The year 1992 marks a point of departure towards a promising future for the United Nations. It is thus most appropriate that, for the first time in its history, the Security Council has convened a meeting of Heads of State or Government at the beginning of the year. I should like to convey my sincere respect to Prime Minister John Major for his excellent leadership in making this summit meeting a reality.
I should also like to extend a heartfelt welcome to President Boris Yeltsin, who is here at the United Nations for the first time as the leader of the Russian Federation. The political and economic stability of the Federation is of great importance to the peace and stability of the entire world. I am confident that Russia will successfully discharge its awesome responsibilities, not only as a Member of the United Nations but also as a permanent member of the Security Council.
I also extend my warmest congratulations to Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, who has assumed his new post amid growing expectations of the
(Mr, Miyazawa. Japan) role to be played by the United Nations. I take this opportunity to express the firm determination of my Government to support him in all his endeavours.
The cold war that divided East and West throughout the post-war period has finally ended, and the configuration of the world is about to undergo epochal change. While the international situation in this post-cold-war era is highly fluid, it also presents abundant opportunities to build a new and peaceful world order. The precise shape of this new world order is not yet clear, but all countries must join together to construct a new peace order appropriate to the new era, for the sake of the freedom and prosperity of humankind and the future of our planet.
At this time of transition, the United Nations has begun to play, both in theory! and in practice, a central role in efforts to achieve and maintain world peace. Expectations of the United Nations among the peoples of the world have reached new heights; its role, and particularly that of the Security Council, during the Gulf crisis, remains vivid in our memory. United Nations involvement has been central to the attainment of peace in Central America, to the resolution of the conflict in Yugoslavia and to the final phase of the Cambodian peace process.
United Nations peace-keeping operations have played a major role in ensuring world peace and security over the more than 40 years since the operation was first established. Their importance continues to grow, as reflected in the fact that five new peace-keeping operations were established in the last year alone, and, in the Asia-Pacific region, the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, soon to be established, will have a range of activities unprecedented in United Nations history.
Clearly, more active cooperation by Members of the United Nations will be needed in this area. Keenly aware of this need, Japan is now striving to make the necessary domestic arrangements to contribute personnel to peace-keeping operations. I shall do my utmost to have the relevant legislation approved by the Japanese Diet during its current session, which commenced this month.
What are the issues confronting the United Nations today as it responds to expectations for the role it is to play in the attainment and maintenance of peace? The major issues are, in my view: first, how the United Nations will adjust itself to the epochal changes; secondly, how it will improve its effectiveness in peace-keeping and peace-making efforts; and, thirdly, how it can secure a sound financial base that will enable it to carry out those efforts.
First of all, I believe that, in securing a peaceful world order, the ideals and purposes of the United Nations Charter, which represent fundamental and universal values, will be of even greater relevance than ever before. It is incumbent on Member States to strive, constantly, to ensure that each of these values is respected in practice. At the same time, it is also necessary for the United Nations to evolve while adapting to a changing world. For example, certain sections of the United Nations Charter are based on the realities prevailing in 1945, when the United Nations was founded, which predate even the cold war.
In addition, since the Security Council is at the centre of United Nations efforts to maintain international peace and security, it is important to consider thoroughly ways to adjust its functions, composition and other aspects so as to make it more reflective of the realities of the new era. This is a process in which Japan is prepared to take an active part.
(Mr, MiyazaBS/—JapM)
Secondly, it is important to consider concrete measures to strengthen the functions of the United Nations so that it can work more effectively to secure a peaceful world order. The importance of peace-keeping activities does not need to be repeated here, but I should like to comment on the need to strengthen the functions of the United Nations in the area of conflict prevention. It is essential that the Secretary-General, who plays a crucial role in the United Nations mediation efforts and good offices, be given sufficient information concerning tensions that could escalate into international conflicts. An important step in that direction was made last December with the adoption by the General Assembly of the Declaration on Fact-Finding by the United Nations in the Field of the Maintenance of International Peace and Security, which was proposed and sponsored by Japan and other countries. It would also be useful if countries with sophisticated information-gathering capabilities would provide the Secretary-General with relevant information, as appropriate. I hope that this issue will receive due consideration.
Thirdly, a sound financial base is essential to enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations and to ensuring that its various activities are conducted smoothly. As reported last autumn by the then Secretary-General Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, the United Nations continues to be faced with critical financial difficulties. At the end of 1991 a total of approximately US$ 800 million in assessed contributions was still outstanding. If the United Nations is to play a central role in establishing a new and peaceful world order, serious efforts by all Member States are urgently required to resolve this issue. Nor are peace-keeping operations immune to these difficulties. In particular, the availability of funds
necessary for the start-up phase of a peace-keeping operation is essential to its smooth deployment. It is also important that States concerned, including those which would extend considerable financial support to the peace-keeping operations, become involved in consultations on its establishment from the earliest steps.
I should add that the International Court of Justice also plays an important role in promoting the peaceful settlement of international conflicts. At this time, when strengthening the rule of law in international affairs should be an important element in the creation of a new and peaceful world order, it is necessary to make better use of the Court and to enhance its functions.
The threat of military force has long been considered the primary threat to peace and security. While this threat seems to have subsided considerably, humankind's economic and technological achievements have, ironically, given rise to a host of global environmental problems and other threats to human survival of a non-military nature. The United Nations will consider global environmental problems at the Conference on Environment and Development to be held in June. I would hope that this is just a beginning and that the United Nations will hereafter address these new threats with the determination and effectiveness they demand.
The trend towards world peace that we are witnessing today will not endure unless the dividends of peace are shared by all - but especially by the peoples of the South who are beset with famine, poverty, disease and other hardships. The serious efforts of the United Nations in addressing the North-South problem should contribute to world peace and stability. It is also necessary to extend appropriate assistance to the self-help efforts of
(Mr, Mivazawa^—ifiRan) developing countries. Those efforts, in turn, will foster respect for human rights and the spread of democracy, values shared by peoples in all parts of the world.
In securing peace the United Nations also has a tremendously important role to play in the field of arms control and disarmament. Japan has been actively contributing to strengthening the role of the United Nations in that field and has strongly supported the efforts of the countries concerned towards disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, with, a view to attaining strategic stability at a lower level of armament. I welcome the disarmament proposals made very recently by President Bush and President Yeltsin. I sincerely hope that, through consultations between the United States and the Russian Federation, they will lead to concrete results.
The dramatic changes in the international milieu have once again highlighted the importance of disarmament efforts, including those to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I need not point out to those assembled here today that, with the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the birth of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the guestion of how to prevent the dissemination of those weapons, of their production facilities and of related technologies is one of vital importance. I commend the leaders of the CIS for their determination to liberate their institutions from military domination, and I hope that they will continue to work to prevent the proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction as well as related technologies.
The proliferation and transfer of weapons is a matter of concern to every member of the international community. Spurred by the initiatives from Japan and countries of the European Community, the General Assembly last year
formally adopted a resolution to establish a United Nations Register on Arms Transfers. I call upon the members of the Security Council to work together for the smooth implementation of this Register. Steps to strengthen the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to conclude successfully negotiations on the convention on chemical weapons this year are also of major importance. The Security Council ought to be seized of the developments made in these areas.
In the light of the circumstances I have just described, I should like to propose the following measures to render the United Nations more suited to the international situation of the twenty-first century.
First, looking ahead to 1995, when the United Nations will celebrate its fiftieth anniversary, I should like to propose that discussions be held within the Organization to ensure that it plays a central role in maintaining and strengthening the peaceful world order. These discussions should include a consideration of the functions and organizational structure of the United
Nations.
'	(MrUijyaoaxJLam)
Secondly, in order to secure the smooth functioning of peace-keeping operations, I would propose the creation, as necessary, of a consultative mechanism on their establishment, particularly the establishment of large-scale peace-keeping operations. This mechanism would be in the form of a consultative group of an appropriate size whose members would include countries which are major contributors of funds, among other things, as well as the countries concerned in the region. I would also emphasize the importance of securing sufficient funds for peace-keeping operations at their initial stage, and invite Member States to make voluntary contributions to the peace-keeping-operation Trust Fund in the United Nations.
Thirdly, I propose that concrete ways be sought to strengthen the role of the United Nations in facing non-military threats to the future security and prosperity of humankind, including those relating to the environment, refugees and poverty. I hope that the Secretary-General will bring these non-military threats to the attention of the relevant United Nations organs.
Fourthly, in the area of arms control and disarmament, I propose that concrete measures be urgently considered for bolstering the efforts of the United Nations and the countries concerned to strengthen the control of, and to prevent the proliferation of, nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, in the wake of the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and to restrain the international transfer of conventional weapons.
It is the responsibility of all the members of the international community to work for the maintenance of world peace. As we enter the twenty-first century, the Security Council and, indeed, every country in the world are required to face in earnest the problems which lie before us as we shape a new and peaceful world order. Having recently commenced its term as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, Japan realizes that present circumstances confer upon it particularly weighty responsibilities. Japan earnestly embraces these responsibilities without reservation and, as envisaged in its Constitution, is determined to continue to extend maximum support to the United Nations in the name of international cooperation.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the Prime Minister for stressing his commitment to the work of the United Nations and setting out some proposals for its future.
I now invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Personal Emissary of the Prime Minister of Hungary to address the Council.
Mr, JESZENSZKY (Hungary): At this meeting of historic significance, I have the honour to deliver my statement also on behalf of the Prime Minister of Hungary, who regrets that he is not able to be present amongst us. I have just spoken to him on the telephone.
The world order that appeared unshakeable for decades is now passing through a period of stormy and radical change. Following the end of the cold war, the world is witnessing the growing advance of freedom, democracy and the rule of law. A striking manifestation of this progress was the announcement made this morning by President Yeltsin about the release of the very last political prisoners in Russia. However, this transformation is accompanied by tremendous difficulties and tensions which are especially manifest in the former Communist countries. At the present juncture, all the democratic Governments are being called upon to play an active role in shaping the course of world history for the coming decades.
Mr. President, the Republic of Hungary welcomes and highly appreciates your initiative of inviting the States members of the United Nations Security Council to meet in New York. The very fact that the States represented in this body are meeting at the highest level for the first time in the history of the world Organization is a telling indication of the increased role and importance of this forum, bearing as it does primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. My country, as well as the region I come from, has always looked to this body with great expectations and hopes. We did so particularly in the dramatic days of 1956, when we believed that the United Nations would be able to stop the Soviet tanks from suppressing the democratic revolution and the freedom fight of the Hungarian people and could prevent bloody reprisals. Today, we are pleased that after 35 years the leaders in Moscow openly dissociate themselves from those past Soviet actions. For well-known reasons, however, no active assistance was forthcoming at that time, but the moral and political support of the United Nations still meant a lot to us. The experience of that period should encourage us to urge the United Nations, with its increased capacity for action, not to leave peoples alone in their struggle for the realization of their right to self-determination, and to do its utmost to ensure free and democratic development and the exercise of human rights in each and every country of the world.
The favourable changes of recent years have created proper conditions for the United Nations to put into practice the principles and purposes enshrined in its Charter as long ago as 1945. The world Organization has now escaped the paralysing effect of great-Power confrontation, and is now able to respond
more effectively to the challenges to peace and security. It is our firm belief that, along with its peace-keeping activities and by its involvement in making and building peace, the United Nations is becoming an irreplaceable factor of international relations. We hold that the peace-keeping missions of the United Nations should no longer be seen as some kind of an external force designed merely to confine conflicts and to preserve status guos, but as factors contributing creatively to removing hotbeds of crisis by upholding democratic values and enforcing respect for human rights. As a member of the Security Council, Hungary wishes to take its share in ensuring that this new philosophy of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping is translated into concrete and effective measures.
In this phase of profound transformations, a review of the activities and the efficiency of the United Nations has become necessary. What the world needs is a renewed and reformed United Nations capable of meeting the challenges of the present and the future.
It was exactly a year ago that, under the authority of the Security Council, the multinational coalition of countries took action to liberate Kuwait. The operation against the Iraqi aggression was a landmark in the history of the United Nations. On the one hand, it provided evidence of the capacity of the international community, through the Security Council, to undertake peacemaking actions and to deal with local conflicts in the interest of collective security, as set forth in the Charter. On the other hand, it highlighted another, exemplary Security Council actions launching a large-scale humanitarian operation to save the Kurds of Iraq. We view those steps taken by the Security Council as a manifestation of the peace-building activity to safeguard human rights and the rights of minorities.
(Mr, Jeszenszky, Hungary)
For the Republic of Hungary, respect for human rights and the rights of national minorities is not merely a legal and humanitarian question: it is also an integral part of international collective security. Therefore, it is indispensable for the Security Council to take resolute action to defend and protect these rights.
The presence, wherever needed, of United Nations personnel to guarantee the enforcement of those rights should be seen as an integral part of United Nations peace-building activities.
The decisions of the Security Council regarding the military arsenal of a United Nations Member State having committed aggression are, in our judgement, a precedent deserving unreserved support. The limitation of the armaments and the number of troops of an aggressor State or, for that matter, of an aggressor army out of political control, as well as their disarmament under an international verification system, should be a new, important dimension of the activities of the Security Council.
Central and Eastern Europe is the scene of major, crucial changes. The peoples of that region, after long decades, are again free to decide their own destiny.
At the same time, the communist-dictatorial system has bequeathed a grave legacy. This may be a source of tensions jeopardizing and weakening the hoped for stability in the region. The United Nations is faced with great tasks in ensuring, with its authority and through avenues open to it under international law, that the transition to democracy and a market economy in the countries of that region follow a peaceful course and lead to stability.
One of the most urgent tasks stems from the situation emerging after the disintegration of the former Soviet Union. Following more than seven decades of rule by a totalitarian regime, which took a toll of millions of human lives, what emerges is an economy in ruins with ensuing grave social problems, no clear-cut arrangements for the control of formidable nuclear weapons and the eruption of violent ethnic discords. This situation could plunge the world into a critical state. The successor States of the defunct empire are
fully justified in their efforts to build the closest possible ties with the world community. This, in turn, can offer us reliable prospects for a positive settlement of the many relevant security and arms-control questions, as well as for the full observance of international standards in the fields of human rights and minority rights. Hungary is guided by these considerations when it lends support to a strong involvement of the former Soviet republics in the work of multilateral forums, primarily the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and also the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe process.
The processes of rearrangement taking place in our region have led not only to potential crisis situations but also to an actual explosion in what was Yugoslavia. The senseless war raging in our vicinity has affected Hungary most directly. Continuous violations of our airspace and borders and the flow of over 50,000 refugees to our country are indications of a critical situation that poses a serious threat to international peace and security and carries additional grave implications.
Public opinion in Hungary and the Government are deeply concerned at the human misery and material devastation brought upon the peoples of that land, including the continuous and systematic violations of the human rights and minority rights of hundreds of thousands of Hungarians who live in the province of Vojvodina and the sufferings of those Hungarians who live along the Croatian front lines. The future of the Hungarians there, like that of any other minorities inhabiting the southern Slav States, could be assured by, among other things, the institution of territorial and cultural autonomies, as proposed by Lord Carrington. In our opinion, during the political negotiations aimed at reaching a durable and satisfactory settlement of the
(Mr. Jeszenszkv, Hungary) problems it is incumbent upon the Security Council to monitor carefully, in close cooperation with the European Community, the developments in that land and to deploy United Nations monitors or peace-keeping forces in all areas where tensions or conflicts might arise.
In the present situation the United Nations has a major contribution to make to the solution of the conflict between the southern Slav peoples. Hungary pledges its full support for an early dispatch of United Nations peace-keeping forces, in accordance with the plan formulated by the Secretary-General. We expect such action - together with the embargo on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment, which must be strictly observed by all Member States of the United Nations - to facilitate significantly the reaching of a comprehensive political settlement there. The admission of former Yugoslav republics to membership in the United Nations would be a further step along the way to peace and stability in the whole region.
The current involvement of the United Nations in the Yugoslav crisis can in no way replace talks between the peoples and minorities concerned, nor should it impede the conclusion of arrangements which would have to take into account the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned. We are of the view that a peaceful future for the region can be ensured only by reaffirming the inadmissibility of the forcible change of borders, recognizing the rights of peoples to self-determination and enforcing human rights. We consider that the setting up of a control mechanism for the verification of the provisions of the relevant agreements could be highly important elements of a comprehensive settlement.
At this historic moment of unprecedented change we ought to consider another no less important repercussion of these transformations. The world
has to face the challenge of dismantling enormous war machines and related manpower. Today we are witnesses of armies with unclear orientations or with no political control. Not only should war industries be converted to civilian purposes, but a large number of scientists, experts and professional soldiers also need to be retrained or reprogrammed. The future of the newly independent States in the Balkans and in the former Soviet Union hinges largely on the success or failure of this huge endeavour of human conversion.
Parallel with this demolition and recycling process, there should be some new creations as well. In our view, under the changed international circumstances, due consideration should be given to the idea of the United Nations instituting a force readily and constantly available that could be mobilized on very short notice, at any given time, and deployed without delay in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter to any conflict-stricken region of the world.
Today's event, unique in the history of the United Nations, and made possible by the fading away of the obsolete ideological confrontations of the past, gives us an opportunity, and creates much better conditions, to take up successfully the challenges of our era and to give the right answers to the global problems of security, democracy, economic and social development and ecology that we are faced with. In this context, the idea of convening a meaningful summit meeting on questions of social development merits our close attention.
Our gathering here also gives us an opportunity to reaffirm our confidence in, and support for, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the new Secretary-General of our Organization, whose well-known commitment to peace and international understanding is a guarantee that the effective role of the
120 '
(Mr, Jeszenszky, Hungary) United Nations in international relations will continue to grow in the years to come. The Government of the Republic of Hungary is ready to contribute fully to the strengthenng of our world Organization and to the improvement of its functioning in accordance with the exigencies of our times. There can be no doubt that the United Nations, born in 1945, will be a major factor in the world of the twenty-first century.
The PRESIDENT; Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your statement on your own behalf and on behalf of Prime Minister Antall.
I have been asked by the Prime Minister of Hungary to convey his apologies and most sincere greetings to all the Heads of State or Government of the countries participating in this meeting of the Security Council, and I do that most happily.
I now have pleasure in inviting the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Personal Emissary of the President of Zimbabwe to take the floor.
Mr, SHAMUYARIRA (Zimbabwe): May I say how very pleased I am to see you. Prime Minister Major, presiding over our deliberations today. I congratulate you and I thank you for the very timely initiative you have taken in convening this historic gathering.
I also take this opportunity to welcome our new Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to convey to him Zimbabwe's congratulations on his election. Those of us who come from Africa have known him as one of our eminent intellectuals and as an unflinching defender of peace. We are appreciative of the enormous wealth of experience and skill he brings to the helm of this world body.
We are greatly indebted also to his predecessor, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, a dignified arbiter who, during his terms of office, turned around the fortunes of this Organization and tirelessly worked for peace, even to the very last minute of his tour of duty. We are grateful to him and we wish him good health and many successes in his retirement.
As we meet today we are witnessing ominous developments that threaten to suffocate the fragile positive trends we had begun to see recently. Signs abound that we have entered a world situation almost as unpredictable and dangerous as that which prevailed in the cold-war era. Conflicts and tensions of a new nature are erupting in regions that had been spared instability in the post-Second World War era. We have heard many references to those situations in the speeches made this morning and this afternoon in this distinguished gathering.
The bold strides in disarmament that had been made by the United States of America and the then Soviet Union had given us enormous comfort and hope that we were at last safe from the threat of nuclear annihilation. But
122
(Mr. Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe) instead of entering a post-nuclear age we are now witnessing the possible beginning of an age of dangerous and uncontrolled proliferation and civil strife in several areas. As was said by another speaker earlier, some of those areas of civil strife spill over into regional and international threats to peace and security. To make matters worse, as business booms in the international arms bazaar, the weak economies of the South remain in the grip of deepening crisis, while growing poverty - a tragically potent source of instability - is becoming a menace to recent gains in democracy.
The responsibility lies squarely with the United Nations and in particular with this Council to rescue us from this unpredictable and dangerous situation. The Organization of African Unity looks to this body to democratize the international system so that all nations big and small can participate fully in peace-making and peace-keeping. As the principles of the United Nations Charter must govern the global order we wish to construct, and since our efforts should result in a United Nations that is stronger and more effective, Zimbabwe holds the view that the process must begin with a reexamination of the Charter itself in the context of the changing international circumstances. That is also the expressed view of the Organization of African Unity. A new world order can best be constructed by reexamining the Charter, rectifying the flaws and closing the gaps that have been revealed by recent developments, and updating those of its provisions that have been rendered obsolete by the new international circumstances.
The fact that we have had to resort to improvisation in certain cases is in itself clear evidence of the need to revise the Charter. For instance, as Mr. Perez de Cuellar's report of 1991 rightly observed, the costs and capabilities demanded by modern warfare inevitably led to major modifications
in the application of Article 42, Chapter VII, with respect to carrying out combined international enforcement action during the Gulf crisis. Also, we have developed and pursued peace-keeping and peace-making operations which are not provided for anywhere in the Charter. Yet these are among the most effective and successful activities of the United Nations. In the presentations made this morning and this afternoon, much stress has been placed on the importance of the peace-keeping role of the United Nations in the world. We strongly support that view. Certainly, the Organization of African Unity would like to see greater assistance from the United Nations in areas of strife in Africa that need some international external intervention. But, as I said, this was not specifically provided for in the Charter; we have been operating under arrangements we made in the early 1960s as the problems arose.
It is in this context that I wish to comment on some aspects of the Charter and to share with colleagues some preliminary suggestions regarding how we can bring some missing pieces into the Charter, how we can reinforce those of its provisions that have served us well in the past, how we can revive some of its potentially valuable provisions that have been dormant, and how we can update the provisions we feel have been rendered obsolete by the changed international situation.
Obviously, I will not deal at length with these provisions; my task has been made lighter by some of the references already made by earlier speakers such as the President of Venezuela, the President of France and the Prime Minister of Japan to the need to look again at the Charter.
In the emerging international situation we would like to see increasing use of Article 41, Chapter VII, of the Charter, relating to effective
(Mr, Shamuvarira, Zimbabwe) collective measures that can be taken, but not involving the use of armed force. That means more use of measures such as economic sanctions to ensure compliance with Security Council resolutions. But the problem with economic sanctions is the adverse effect they may have on third countries, or what are called victim States. Although Article 50 was designed to give some protection to such States, the experience of the Gulf war revealed that some gaps need to be closed. The application of sanctions against Iraq brought hardship to many countries in the region and beyond. The fact that representations continue to come to the sanctions Committee from the most affected States even today demonstrates the inadequacy of Article 50. What is required are clear criteria for determining who deserves assistance and standing United Nations arrangements for the mobilization of the resources needed to assist the affected States.
We hope that when the Secretary-General presents his recommendations to us before July, as we shall request him to do at today's meeting, he will have had time to reflect on some of the issues that we are only mentioning now. We shall certainly cooperate in looking at those issues in much greater depth.
A related issue that may need to be looked at again is the effect economic sanctions may have on innocent civilians living in a State whose Government they cannot change. Such people lack the political means to reverse the very policies that give rise to the offence that is the object of sanctions.
In order to avoid the many misgivings expressed by some regarding the prosecution of the Gulf War, future collective enforcement operations must be fully accountable to the Security Council and should be truly representative. This can be achieved by strengthening Article 46 of the Charter, which gives a role to the Military Staff Committee. However, if we are to give such an important role to the Military Staff Committee, its membership cannot remain limited to only a few. Non-permanent members should also participate in all the work of the Committee. This would ensure that collective enforcement actions are not dominated by a single group of countries.
Collective enforcement arrangements of the United Nations should also ensure uniformity. In the event of aggression, combined international enforcement action should be taken irrespective of who the aggressor is or who the victim. Zimbabwe believes that a collective security system liable to a veto by one or a few States is not reliable. It means that the Security Council cannot take any action in a conflict in which one of the permanent members has a direct interest. Undoubtedly, this was one of the considerations at San Francisco, but has that issue not now been overtaken by events? In this regard, consideration could be given to extending paragraph 3 of Article 27, which provides that in decisions relating to peaceful settlements of disputes under Chapter VI, a party to a dispute shall abstain from voting. Our view is that this should also apply to Chapter VII, so that those who wield the veto power may not block the imposition of sanctions or any other collective enforcement action where they are party to a conflict.
A very positive development in the emerging new world order is the increasing reluctance we see on the part of the permanent members to use their own veto. They now prefer to reach decisions by consensus. We welcome and encourage this trend, and hold out the hope that the veto may eventually be
(Mr, Shamuvarira, Zimbabwe) abolished or will fall away because of disuse. While in the aftermath of the Second World War the victorious Powers had special privileges, now in the post-cold war era we believe that we are all victors and that there should be no losers. Consequently, no one deserves any special privileges.
Zimbabwe and other non-aligned States have always subscribed to the principle that general and complete disarmament can only be achieved in the multilateral forum of this body of the United Nations. In the face of the growing menace from the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, which has been referred to, we hope that by addressing thè issue of disarmament in resolution 687 (1991) and in the draft declaration before us, the Security Council has now come to recognize this principle as well.
We also believe that the Security Council should ensure that the initiators of the Arms Transfer Register established by the General Assembly only last month, and to which Zimbabwe lent its support, will follow through on their assurances to us that, in time, it will develop into a comprehensive and non-discriminatory register that also covers nuclear-weapon stockpiles, domestic production and the transfer of dual-purpose items.
In tandem with the Arms Transfer Register, we believe that multilateral disarmament could further be boosted by the use of the provisions of Article 26 and of paragraph 1 of Article 47 of the Charter, which empower the Security Council, with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee, to put in place a system for the regulation of armaments. These provisions, which have been dormant since the founding of the Organization, would have rendered unnecessary the ad hoc creation by resolution 687 (1991) of the Special Commission currently dealing with the disarmament measures imposed on Iraq. It is our view that an opportunity still exists to utilize them in
128
(Mr, Shamuvarira, Zimbabwe) implementing the disarmament measures for the wider Middle East region provided for in resolution 687 (1991).
In addition to unilateral reductions of nuclear arsenals, those who hold nuclear weapons should demonstrate their commitment to making the post-cold war world a safer place by subscribing to the conversion of the present partial test-ban Treaty of 1962 into a comprehensive test-ban treaty. Having ourselves recently acceded to the non-proliferation Treaty - and we are happy to note that some members at this table are in the process of acceding to that Treaty - we hope that at the next review of the Treaty our oft-voiced concerns will be adequately addressed. In particular, we hope that the International Atomic Energy Agency's inspections of the nuclear facilities of recent adherents to the non-proliferation Treaty will be thorough and detailed. We should avoid taking action when it is too late. But the route we should take in the area of disarmament is to demilitarize consistently both the domestic and the international situations. The manufacturers as well as the recipients and users of dangerous weapons should be stopped from trading in death. We should demilitarize our societies in the new world order.
In Africa, many Governments are rightly linking disarmament to development. They visualize a situation where more funds will now be made available for debt relief and various forms of aid. The vast sums of money being spent on armaments would go a long way towards ameliorating the plight of millions of people in developing countries who are in dire need of resources to raise their standards of living. In the new climate resulting from the ending of ideological confrontations, a reexamination of the conclusions of the International Conference on the Relationship between
129
(Mr, Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe) Disarmament and Development, held here in New York in 1987, might help us to go forward.
A. proposal to expand the membership of the Security Council and to ensure equitable representation in this body has been before the General Assembly since 1979, alongside the other items which I mentioned earlier, which have also been before this body for some time. The Council. cannot afford to shield itself from change at a time when all the other major organs of the United Nations are going through a process of reform and when new international circumstances call for readjustments. The increase in the total membership of the United Nations alone is sufficient to warrant expansion of the membership of the Council. The Prime Minister of India gave us some figures to indicate the rapid increase that has taken place in the membership of the United Nations itself.
The Security Council takes decisions of major importance on behalf of the entire membership of the United Nations. Those decisions should be made representative of the will of the general membership. In 1945, the Council represented 20 per cent of the United Nations membership; but now, with United Nations membership having risen to 166, the Council represents less than 10 per cent. Clearly, the Council has become less representative than it was before, and the question of equitable geographical representation also has to be addressed. One region is clearly overrepresented on the Council, while Africa and Latin America are not represented at all among the permament members.
Zimbabwe believes that the decisions of an expanded and more representative Council would carry more weight. We support the proposal of the Organization of African Unity that matters of restructuring the organs of
the United Nations should be discussed in the General Assembly so that members there can express their views and contribute to the new world order which we are discussing.
On the question of human rights, Zimbabwe is fully committed to the promotion of the full enjoyment of all basic human rights by all citizens in any State that is a Member of the United Nations. Established principles governing inter-State relations - such as that of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and infringing on the sovereignty of States -will have to accommodate efforts by the United Nations and by regional organizations to protect the basic human rights of individuals and social groups that are threatened in particular States.
For example, when the United Nations condemned the doctrine of apartheid in South Africa, it became a concern of the whole international community to promote human rights there. It could no longer be described or regarded as a domestic issue in South Africa alone. We are pleased that steps are now being taken to dismantle the ugly edifice of apartheid in South Africa. Massive and deliberate violations of human rights or the existence of situations of oppression and repression can no longer be tolerated anywhere in the world.
In the era we are entering, the Council will be called upon to deal more and more with conflicts and humanitarian situations of a domestic nature that could pose threats to international peace and stability. However, great care has to be taken to see that these domestic conflicts are not used as a pretext for the intervention of big Powers in the legitimate domestic affairs of small States, or that human rights issues are not used for totally different purposes of destabilizing other Governments. There is, therefore, the need to strike a delicate balance between the rights of States, as enshrined in the Charter, and the rights of individuals, as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Zimbabwe supports very strongly both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Charter on these issues. Zimbabwe is a firm subscriber to the principles in the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights. However, we cannot but express our apprehension about who will decide when to get the Security Council involved in an internal matter and in what manner. In other words, who will judge when a threshold is passed that calls for international action? Who will decide what should be done, how it will be done and by whom? This clearly calls for a careful drawing up and drafting of general principles and guidelines that would guide decisions on when a domestic situation warrants international action, either by the Security Council or by regional organizations. This could be one of the tasks this Council could entrust to the Secretary-General.
The welcome end of East-West confrontation should propel us to end the North-South confrontation as well. I am very glad that the President of France dwelt at some length on this matter this morning. Hence I will not belabour the point. The growing economic gap between the two sides will
lead to catastrophe for us all. We should provide a forum for analysing and discussing these issues and finding viable solutions. The environment conference in Brazil next June will give participants an opportunity to discuss the very pressing problem of increasing poverty in developing countries and the alarming rate of degradation of the environment. After the debates, it will be up to the United Nations and its specialized agencies to implement those recommendations on which action could be taken. The specialized agencies of the United Nations are doing most valuable work in bringing expertise and skills to developing countries. We look forward to the convening of the projected World Summit on Social Development as another important forum for exchanging views, experiences and knowledge. The social condition of millions of people in developing countries must be a source of great concern to all leaders of Governments. While the technology of developed nations is enabling them to reach outer space, ours is not sufficient to reach the village, especially in Africa. A new world order that does not make a special effort to eliminate poverty and narrow the widening disparities existing between industrialized and developing countries will not be sustainable.
African States face a multitude of problems as they enter the new world order. They are taking painful steps of political, social and economic adjustments of existing structures in order to be accommodated in the emerging new order and also in order to improve the standard of living of their own people generally on a more sustainable and permanent basis. They will need strong Governments to implement these reforms, and they will require financial and material resources on an increasing scale. Zimbabwe supports strongly the proposal of the Secretary-General to mediate in the civil strife in Somalia in
particular. But we would urge him to take similar steps in five other African countries facing similar strife. Some of the problems of civil strife in Africa could be contained with vigorous preventive diplomacy by the Secretary-General as well as the Secretaries-General of the Organization of African Unity and the Arab League. We are pleased that the Secretary-General is taking very vigorous steps in this direction early in his tenure of office.
We have also recently witnessed how ill-equipped the United Nations is to deal with problems of drug-trafficking and international terrorism, which are likely to become a major threat to international peace and security in the era we are entering. The President of the United States, in his intervention this morning, made reference to some of these important problem areas. We believe this could very well be the time to revive the idea of an international criminal code and to create an international criminal court.
In a document entitled "The Hague Declaration on the Rule of Law in Inter-State Relations", the non-aligned States offered some useful ideas which were well-received by the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, when it declared the 1990s a Decade of International Law. We hope that the Security Council will also consider taking decisions that will result in the establishment of the primacy of law in the emerging world order and, in particular, consider proposals to strengthen the authority of the International Court of Justice. The Non-Aligned Movement has taken very vigorous steps in the direction of strengthening international law in the important meeting which was held in The Hague and which produced this very important Declaration.
In the final analysis, I think we can all agree that peace and security based on mutual interests and shared values is much more likely to be enduring than that based on the threat of arms. It is therefore imperative that we take full advantage of the disappearance of cold-war rivalries and mutual suspicions to create and promote this shared community of interests and values. Where disputes do arise, let us focus on the root causes rather than on the symptoms. It is much better to prevent conflicts and disputes than to resolve them. This calls for the primacy of preventive diplomacy we are expecting from our Secretary-General. This calls for an activist role on the part of the Secretary-General in terms of Article 99 of the Charter, which calls upon him to bring before the Security Council any matter which, in his opinion, threatens international peace and security.
It goes without saying that in order to play the key role envisaged in the Charter, both the Secretary-General and the United Nations require adequate resources. Is it not one of the great ironies of our time that, when it comes to war-making, resources become available in abundance, but when it comes to peace-making, resources become extremely scarce? It will not be possible for the United Nations to play a key role in the peace and security of a new world order if it is not rescued from its continuing financial crisis. We trust that, as we are giving the new Secretary-General a strong mandate and an elaborate programme over the next five years, he will be provided with the means of executing that task.
The PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your contribution. Perhaps I might ask you to take back to President Mugabe on behalf of the Council our deepest sympathy at his recent bereavement. Mrs. Mugabe was very well known, I know, to many people present and she will be very greatly missed. I would be grateful if you would pass our very strong sense of loss to President Mugabe when you return.
With the permission of the Council, I should now like to make a statement in my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
Today’s meeting is, I think, a historic event, the first time in its history that the United Nations Security Council has met at the level of Heads of State or Government, an extraordinary event to match extraordinary times. We meet here today partly to celebrate - to celebrate the appointment of a new and distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali. And in one way, our new Secretary-General is a lucky man: he is the first Secretary-General in many years to inherit a United Nations that is confident in its own ability to solve problems while still being conscious of the magnitude of its task. We celebrate too a new world Power: the Russian Federation, the Power which has now emerged from an aberration that lasted for 70 years.
I think we are here also for other reasons: to gather strength from each other for the tasks ahead; to revitalize our joint sense of purpose; to reaffirm the intention of the United Nations to redouble its efforts in the cause of peace - but not to forget, as we do so, that we need economic development and prosperity in order to achieve lasting peace and stability.
A great deal has already been achieved. Last year, the United Nations authorized the international community's response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. Today, Baghdad is still defying international law and human rights. Iraq must comply with all the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions. Saddam Hussein's defiance hurts the Iraqi people, but sanctions must remain fully in force until all the resolutions are implemented.
In the aftermath of Iraq's eviction from Kuwait, Saddam Hussein turned on his own people. Resolution 688 (1991) set up a humanitarian mission to help the fleeing Kurds and Shi'ites. Their plight still remains our responsibility. As time goes on, more of Saddam Hussein's wickedness is
revealed. Even today he is stopping food, medicines and other vital supplies going to the Kurds. The Security Council cannot ignore that breach of resolution 688 (1991). We cannot lay down the shield we provided to protect Iraq's vulnerable communities. There will be other such crises. People everywhere expect the United Nations to react, to save lives. This can be done with full respect for Charter principles; but people increasingly agree that humanitarian affairs are every man's affair.
In recent weeks, the Security Council has been involved in taking decisions on Yugoslavia, Cambodia, El Salvador, Somalia and Western Sahara. The Council recently adopted resolution 731 (1992), unanimously condemning State terrorism, and Libya must respond positively to the demands that this Council has made of it. The world already has an effective instrument to uphold collective security, but it is not yet a perfect instrument, and I hope this meeting will set in hand work to strengthen the United Nations.
New ideas focus on new opportunities in preventive diplomacy, in peace-making and in peace-keeping, but what do we mean by preventive diplomacy? I believe we mean action to avert - or at least to contain -crises, and we must exploit the unrealized potential of the United Nations Charter.
We need also to be more active in crisis prevention. That is just as important - if not more so - than perfecting our skills at crisis management. The Secretary-General - our new Secretary-General - should take the initiative boldly, the initiative to draw potential conflict to the attention of the Security Council. In the past, his predecessors have often been hobbled by the political rivalry between Member States, often reflected most sharply in the Council. In future, the Council must be prepared to act before tension
becomes conflict. The Secretary-General deserves an assurance of our good faith in his good judgement. This meeting can give him that assurance.
Peace-making and peace-keeping should run in parallel. Demand, in the future, is not likely to decrease. We should like to enhance the United Nations ability to respond. We recognize the load placed on the Organization and the skills and experience of its staff, but we want the United Nations to be able to carry out its mission even more effectively, and that is why we propose that the Council should invite the Secretary-General to give his ideas on how this might be done. It will be an important report. The report might look at the United Nations role in identifying, and dealing with, the causes of instability and potential crises, as well as the contribution to be made by regional bodies in helping the work of the Council.
If we are to safeguard international peace and security, the States Members of the United Nations - all of them without exception - must also be active in arms control, and this means giving high priority to three central objectives:
First, we must implement what has already been agreed, notably in the START and Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaties.
Secondly, we must commit ourselves to working for further measures of disarmament, both regional and global, with special attention in 1992 to the chemical weapons convention. I strongly endorse what was said earlier by a number of speakers on this particular point.
Thirdly, we must make sure that each of us has in place arrangements which prevent proliferation and discourage the accumulation of lethal weaponry. I can announce today that the United Kingdom Government is acting to strengthen controls on the export of specific biological materials and
organisms which could be misused for weapons purposes. We are also looking at the ideas of others, including our German colleagues, which are intended to limit further the scope for proliferation.
These are daunting challenges at a time when the map is being radically reshaped, but we can draw on valuable new assets: a new degree of cooperation between the former enemies of East and West; a new readiness to help each other, for example in the destruction of surplus nuclear weapons; a new awareness, from the Iraq war, of the dangers of proliferation; and a new willingness, shown in the adoption of the United Nations register of arms transfers, to cooperate on a global basis here in the United Nations itself.
Between now and the Conference to renew the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1995, we have a unique chance to consolidate the gains of the last few years on a truly durable basis.
Britain believes that all States must respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. Good government is not a luxury, it is the bedrock on which we build a stable and prosperous society, and that in turn is essentially built on international peace and security. Peace-keeping operations tend now to include provision for human rights verification and free and fair elections as vital components of a peaceful settlement. I am sure that is right, and I hope that will continue to be the case.
In the first four decades of the United Nations, my own continent experienced fewer dramatic changes than almost any other area of the world. The cold war imposed upon Europe immobility of an unenviable sort - the uneasy stand-off of two nuclear-armed, opposing camps. But this decade has been different. This decade has seen headlong and profoundly hopeful change come to Europe - a chain-reaction of revolutionary change. That change is
personified, clearly and unmistakably, by the presence in this Council today of two outstanding figures from the first generation of post-communist leaders - President Yeltsin of Russia and Foreign Minister Jeszenszky of Hungary. We meet them here as friends and partners. Today, we share a common outlook and common objectives. Other things are different: no longer are the leaders of East and West competing. No longer does ideology drive us apart. No longer do we threaten each other. And not least among the benefits is the prospect of making ever more productive use of the United Nations.
The 1990s will be a decade of transformation in Europe. There are huge tasks to be accomplished in the rebuilding of economies smothered by communism for generations, and in rooting democracy firmly in the soil of open politics and free markets. There are risks too: the communist empire has bequeathed a host of potential problems between peoples and States. Some of them have already led to conflict. The United Nations can play a key role in promoting acceptance of the principles of the Charter and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Colleagues, we in Britain will work closely with the Secretary-General -closely, to strengthen and enhance the United Nations capacity to respond to crisis, and incipient crisis, wherever it threatens. The challenge is a formidable one, and it is one which only the United Nations, with the full support of Member Governments, can meet. Today I am happy to pledge to you the full support of the British Government in that movement.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.
I should like to turn to the presidential statement that is the outcome of our negotiations and deliberations today. It is my understanding that the members of the Security Council are content for me to issue the declaration which, in accordance with custom, I shall read in a moment as a presidential statement on their behalf. I am grateful for that authority, and I should now like to read out to the Council the statement that has been agreed. It reads as follows:
"The members of the Security Council have authorized me to make the following statement on their behalf.
"The Security Council met at the Headquarters of the United Nations in New York on 31 January 1992, for the first time at the level of Heads of State and Government. The members of the Council considered, within the framework of their commitment to the United Nations Charter, 'The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security,.
"The members of the Security Council consider that their meeting is a timely recognition of the fact that there are new favourable international circumstances under which the Security Council has begun to fulfil more effectively its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
"A time of change
"This meeting takes place at a time of momentous change. The ending of the Cold War has raised hopes for a safer, more equitable and more humane world. Rapid progress has been made, in many regions of the world, towards democracy and responsive forms of government, as well as
towards achieving the Purposes set out in the Charter. The completion of the dismantling of apartheid in South Africa would constitute a major contribution to these Purposes and positive trends, including to the encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
"Last year, under the authority of the United Nations, the international community succeeded in enabling Kuwait to regain its sovereignty and territorial integrity, which it had lost as a result of Iraqi aggression. The resolutions adopted by the Security Council remain essential to the restoration of peace and stability in the region and must be fully implemented. At the same time the members of the Council are concerned by the humanitarian situation of the innocent civilian population of Iraq.
"The members of the Council support the Middle East peace process, facilitated by the Russian Federation and the United States, and hope that it will be brought to a successful conclusion on the basis of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
"They welcome the role the United Nations has been able to play under the Charter in progress towards settling long-standing regional disputes, and will work for further progress towards their resolution. They applaud the valuable contribution being made by United Nations peace-keeping forces now operating in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe.
"The members of the Council note that United Nations peace-keeping tasks have increased and broadened considerably in recent years. Election monitoring, human rights verification and the repatriation of refugees have in the settlement of some regional conflicts, at the
request or with the agreement of the parties concerned, been integral parts of the Security Council's effort to maintain international peace and security. They welcome these developments.
"The members of the Council also recognize that change, however welcome, has brought new risks for stability and security. Some of the most acute problems result from changes to State structures. The members of the Council will encourage all efforts to help achieve peace, stability and cooperation during these changes.
"The international community therefore faces new challenges in the search for peace. All Member States expect the United Nations to play a central role at this crucial stage. The members of the Council stress the importance of strengthening and improving the United Nations to increase its effectiveness. They are determined to assume fully their responsibilities within the United Nations Organization in the framework of the Charter.
"The absence of war and military conflicts amongst States does not in itself ensure international peace and security. The non-military sources of instability in the economic, social, humanitarian and ecological fields have become threats to peace and security. The United Nations membership as a whole, working through the appropriate bodies, needs to give the highest priority to the solution of these matters. "Commitment to collective security	.
"The members of the Council pledge their commitment to international law and to the United Nations Charter. All disputes between States should be peacefully resolved in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.
"The members of the Council reaffirm their commitment to the collective security system of the Charter to deal with threats to peace and to reverse acts of aggression.
"The members of the Council express their deep concern over acts of international terrorism and emphasize the need for the international community to deal effectively with all such acts. "Peacemaking and peace-keeping
"To strengthen the effectiveness of these commitments, and in order that the Security Council should have the means to discharge its primary responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security, the members of the Council have decided on the following approach.
"They invite the Secretary-General to prepare, for circulation to the Members of the United Nations by 1 July 1992, his analysis and recommendations on ways of strengthening and making more efficient within the framework and provisions of the Charter the capacity of the United Nations for preventive diplomacy, for peacemaking and for peace-keeping.
"The Secretary-General's analysis and recommendations could cover the role of the United Nations in identifying potential crises and areas of instability as well as the contribution to be made by regional organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter in helping the work of the Council. They could also cover the need for adequate resources, both material and financial. The Secretary-General might draw on lessons learned in recent United Nations peace-keeping missions to recommend ways of making more effective
(The President) Secretariat planning and operations. He could also consider how greater use might be made of his good offices, and of his other functions under the United Nations Charter.
"Disarmament, arms control and weapons of mass destruction
"The members of the Council, while fully conscious of the responsibilities of other organs of the United Nations in the fields of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation, reaffirm the crucial contribution which progress in these areas can make to the maintenance of international peace and security. They express their commitment to take concrete steps to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations in these areas.
"The members of the Council underline the need for all Member States to fulfil their obligations in relation to arms control and disarmament; to prevent the proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of mass destruction; to avoid excessive and destabilizing accumulations and transfers of arms; and to resolve peacefully in accordance with the Charter any problems concerning these matters threatening or disrupting the maintenance of regional and global stability. They emphasize the importance of the early ratification and implementation by the States concerned of all international and regional arms control arrangements, especially the START and CFE Treaties.
"The proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to international peace and security. The members of the Council commit themselves to working to prevent the spread of technology related to the research for or production of such weapons and to take appropriate action to that end.
"On nuclear proliferation, they note the importance of the decision of many countries to adhere to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and emphasize the integral role in the implementation of that Treaty of fully effective IAEA safeguards, as well as the importance of effective export controls. The members of the Council will take appropriate measures in the case of any violations notified to them by the IAEA.
"On chemical weapons, they support the efforts of the Geneva Conference with a view to reaching agreement on the conclusion, by the end of 1992, of a universal convention, including a verification regime, to prohibit chemical weapons.
BCT/ed
"On conventional armaments, they note the General Assembly's vote in favour of a United Nations register of arms transfers as a first step, and in this connection recognize the importance of all States providing all the information called for in the General Assembly's resolution.

"In conclusion, the members of the Security Council affirm their determination to build on the initiative of their meeting in order to secure positive advances in promoting international peace and security. They agree that the United Nations Secretary-General has a crucial role to play. The members of the Council express their deep appreciation to the outgoing Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his outstanding contribution to the work of the United Nations, culminating in the signature of the El Salvador peace agreement. They welcome the new Secretary-General, His Excellency Dr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and note with satisfaction his intention to strengthen and improve the functioning of the United Nations. They pledge their full support to him, and undertake to work closely with him and his staff in fulfilment of their shared objectives, including a more efficient and effective United Nations system.
"The members of the Council agree that the world now has the best chance of achieving international peace and security since the foundation of the United Nations. They undertake to work in close cooperation with other United Nations Member States in their own efforts to achieve this, as well as to address urgently all the other problems, in particular
■ . 9ï
those of economic and social development, requiring the collective response of the international community. They recognize that peace and prosperity are indivisible and that lasting peace and stability require effective international cooperation for the eradication of poverty and the promotion of a better life for all in larger freedom."
That concludes the statement we have agreed. I would inform the Council that the statement will be published as Security Council document S/23500.
The Security Council has thus completed its business for this meeting, and I therefore declare it adjourned.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.