United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
THIRTY-EIGHTH SESSION
Official Records*
COPY
FOR REFERENCE ONLY-DO NOT CIRCULATE
FIRST COMMITTEE 11th meeting held on Monday, 2b October 1983 at 10. 30 a. m. 
New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 11TH MEETING
Chairman: Mr. VRAALSEN (Norway)
CONTENTS
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
UN LIBRARY
NOV 2iS83
un/sa collection
•This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member of ihe delegation concerned within one week of the dale of publication to the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-75O, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record. 
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate fascicle for each Committee. 
Distr. GENERAL A/C. 1/38/PV. 11
31 October 1983
ENGLISH
83-63057
The meeting was called- to order. at 10. 45 a. m. 
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN: This morning the Committee is observing Disarmament Week and it is a particular pleasure for me, on this occasion, to welcome to the Committee the President of the Gehei’al Assembly and the secretary-General. We appreciate the fact that they have found time to be with us today. This testifies again to their dedication to the important work which is being done within the framework of the United Nations towards disarmament and arms control. 
I have pleasure in calling upon the President of the General Assembly. 
The PRESIDENT of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY (interpretation from Spanish): Once again, on the anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations, we mark the beginning of Disarmament Week, the week in which we attempt to focus attention, both here and in many other parts of the world, on the efforts needed to make progress towards disarmament. 
Once again the world is seeing exacerbation of conflicts and worsening of international tension, lives cast away, property destroyed, families and societies caught in the deadly exchange of gunfire and hatred. On many occasions we have manifested our sorrow at the sufferings of the Lebanese nation and other peoples in different lands. Today we must express our profound feelings of sadness at the losses yesterday in Beirut. And over all the events of the past 12 months have loomed ever darker the threatening storm-clouds of an escalation of the nuclear threat, while charge and counter-charge, proposal and counterproposal, have been made in volley after volley, seemingly perceived by the other side as intended for visual effect rather than for practical purposes. 
Each side in the separate, bilateral negotiations concerning strategic arms and Intermediate-range nuclear forces, on which so much public attention is at present focused, has marshalled its arguments and sought to demonstrate its resolve. Nevertheless, no progress has been achieved and we have before us the prospect of yet another vicious twist in the spiral of the arms race. The world as a whole is spending enormous amounts of money, while at the same time a quarter of the world's population does not know where the next day's meal will come from. 
AU/ap
>	(The President of
	the General Assembly)
We are observing Disarmament Week this year at a time when the international situation is becoming increasingly threatening. Tensions and conflicts have intensified in several parts of the world. The arms race is poised -consequently, on the brink of a leap into a new phase of deadlier weapons of greater speed and accuracy. World military expenditures are reaching astronomical proportions, and the basic needs of millions of people, especially in the third world, continue to be denied them. The search for absolute security by the great Powers serves only to increase their sense of insecurity, and the nuclear arms arsenals pose a general threat to the very survival of mankind. 
This is truly a revolutionary situation that concerns all peoples and nations equally. We cannot go on in this way without gravely tempting fate. It was Einstein who warned that the advent of nuclear weapons had changed everything - except our ways of thinking and reacting to one another. Arnold Toynbee, the British historian, who analysed the rise and fall of civilizations, revealed that militarism and the arms race have been in the past the most common causes of the decline of 14 civilizations. Of course I do not refer to armed forces for national defence which are essential for self-preservation. 	
We must stop reacting to other societies in a military manner. We must cure the military mind before it is too late. It is significant that hundreds of thousands, millions, of people are staging anti-nuclear demonstrations. The irreversible consequences of nuclear war will affect all human beings everywhere. World public opinion has realized this and people - men, women and children - in many countries have begun to express their feelings in a variety of ways. It is they who will be the victims in a nuclear war and they are having their say about the risks to peace that they are not prepared to accept. 	
It is the fatal perversity of some men that makes them seek to guarantee peace by threatening the	future	of mankind, 	but what sort of peace	is it that is based
on terror? Terror	by its	very nature	cannot be balanced and	is likely to lead
to error and war. 	Are we	so bankrupt	intellectually that we	have nothing
better to rely on for peace than the so-called balance of terror? Relations between human societies can never be peaceful if they are based on terror. 
The military approach to political and security problems has never led to their solution. A decade ago President Kennedy was right in his belief that "the basic problems facing the world today are not susceptible of a military solution". The indifference of the military mind to life itself is a symptom of a terrible form of inhumanity, and the nuclear weapon symbolizes this inhumanity in the most extreme manner possible. There is much weight in the affirmation of those who believe that militarism is the characteristic not of an army but of a society. We cannot afford to think of the use of force in this age of nuclear weapons. 
Plato and Socrates believed that man was capable of rational choice and that a bad choice was the result of faulty thinking. The future of mankind depends as never before on rational thinking and right choice. We must return to the wise ways of thought of our ancestors who brought mankind to the present great heights of our civilization. 
Here in the United Nations our Charter sets out as the first of our purposes the maintenance of international peace and security, and yet the world seems to have precious little of either. It is widely recognized that disarmament and international security must go hand in hand. No nation can be expected to risk its fundamental security in a climate of international mistrust and suspicion engendered by an arms race, particularly one of the dimensions that we are witnessing at the moment. 
With all the moral responsibility and authority at my command as President of the General Assembly, I call on all Member States, particularly the leaders of the major Powers, to exercise the utmost care and caution in the coming weeks and months. What is needed is a bold, imaginative step to reduce tensions, to improve international relations, to promote development as well as international economic co-operation, and to turn away from the precipice that confronts us. 
In launching the World Disarmament Campaign the General Assembly sought to inform, to educate and to generate public understanding of and support for the objectives of the United Nations in the field of arms limitation and disarmament. That Campaign, still in its early stages, is already attracting public attention to the nature of the international machinery, whether bilateral or multilateral, which persistently fails to find ways of achieving progress towards a better and safer future. A decisive element in restoring public confidence in an effective United Nations would be a demonstration in this Committee's deliberations here and in the multilateral negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament in I984 that common interests can be identified, that compromises can be made and agreement can be reached that will set the international community on the road towards disarmament. 
BG/3/mes
Our foremost task is to remove the threat of nuclear war and ensure the survival of mankind. At the same time negotiations on measures of disarmament should be pursued with greater imagination and realism and with emphasis on those eternal qualities that unite people rather than on those ephemeral things that divide us. Through the process of dialogue and discussion human societies can remove their misconceptions of one another and create the right climate for reaching agreement and accommodation. The United Nations was intended to be a forum for mutual understanding and for harmonizing the actions of nation States in the attainment of common ends. Let us use the United Nations for the purpose for which it was created. 
Let us rededicate ourselves to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and let us work together by word and deed to save succeeding generations from the danger of a world war - a nuclear war. The nuclear weapon is our common enemy, but, more than that, we are our own worst enemy. There are limits to everything - limits to enmity, limits to the arms race, limits to deterrence and limits to freedom of action. But there are no limits to the further evolution of the human species towards that higher goal of peace, justice and freedom. 
The CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): It gives me great pleasure to address the Committee during its first meeting in Disarmament Week. I firmly believe that there is a need to take advantage of this important debate so that the Governments and the peoples of Member countries should concentrate, as much as possible, on the urgent need to make a start on the reduction of the increasingly vast and sophisticated arsenals of armaments. This is not the first time that we have met for this purpose. Notwithstanding the evident fact that at the present time there is much greater awareness of the grave dangers inherent in the arms race, particularly. the. nuclear one, it has to be acknowledged that the Governments of the world have not yet found the necessary formulas to achieve either a limitation of armaments or disarmament. We are not blind to the fact that, as is borne out by new evidence every day, the world is at a dramatic crossroad's, because whatever path is chosen can have a direct impact on the destiny of the world and on the well-being of all its inhabitants. This is particularly so in the field of disarmament. 
However, nothing justifies despair or resignation. We have valuable opportunities within our reach. On the one hand, the two major nuclear Powers are holding bilateral talks on strategic missiles and on Intermediate-range missiles. It is true that these negotiations are taking place under the oppressive shadow of great tension and of profound bilateral disagreements. None the less, from the point of view of the security and prosperity of those same Powers, as well as of the other countries and peoples of the world, there is no doubt that the importance of an equitable and reliable agreement designed to reduce nuclear arsenals and limit their technological up-grading and their deployment transcends the importance of any bilateral disagreements. We well know that the problems involved are highly complex, but we must also admit that if the negotiations were to fail, the inevitable result would be a further intensification of competition in the nuclear-arms sphere and a new source of danger and fear for mankind. The negotiating Powers must duly weigh their colossal responsibility not just to their own peoples but indeed to the entire international community. 
Given the particularly urgent nature of the situation with regard to Intermediate-range weapons, it is my hope that the Soviet Union and the United States will give serious thought to the adoption of provisional measures which, should it prove necessary, would give more time for negotiations to achieve
positive results. Tn the sphere of strategic armaments, I believe that both parties must consider the possibility of setting up less dangerous and more stable systems, pending the attainment of the ultimate objective of the elimination of all nuclear weapons, but right now the most important thing is that the negotiations must go on. If they were abandoned the parties would have missed an opportunity which may well not present itself again and they would find themselves moving along a road fraught with dangers, while the other path, which offers more hope, would be unexplored. On the other hand, the broader forum of the Committee on Disarmament also provides opportunities for progress in the limitation of the threat posed by armaments and the enormous economic burden they represent. The comprehensive and useful studies which have been carried out with a view to the elaboration of a treaty on the prohibition of the use of chemical weapons, the complete prohibition of nuclear testing and other disarmament questions are the basis for future progress and must be put to good use. The draft treaty on the prohibition of radiological weapons is at an advanced stage and I take the liberty of urging a renewal of efforts to bring about its prompt conclusion. Let us bear in mind that it is easier to reach an agreement on banning the deployment of a system of armaments or on the manufacture of a new series of weapons before and not after those systems and weapons have become an irreversible reality. Consequently, we. must urge that the negotiations within the framework of the United Nations should continue with greater determination in order to establish a peaceful regime for outer space before military systems which could impede future negotiations are actually deployed there. 	
These are just some of the subjects to be considered in the Committee which is now dedicating all its efforts to disarmament issues in the light of their paramount importance for world security. It is fitting and auspicious that Disarmament Week should be starting on 2U October, the thirty-eighth anniversary of the United Nations. Apart from its concern with the arms build-up, as expressed in Article 26, the United Nations Charter, rather than defining the prerequisites for the maintenance of peace, attaches paramount importance to the need to avoid the use of force in the settlement of disputes and, on the other hand, establishes the principle of collective responsibility, entrusting its application to the Security Council, in order to guarantee the security of all the Member States. These provisions provide the firmest basis for the actual
reduction of armaments and can resolve the most tragic contradiction of our age, which is the fact that increasing expenditures on security fail to achieve security, but instead constitute - as the Charter implies - a diversion of human and economic resources to armaments which in turn gives rise to acute insecurity, especially in the developing world. 
I thus appeal to the Governments represented in this Committee, as they proceed with their important work, to bear in mind the considerable progress which can be made in disarmament through a patient and constructive dialogue, in strict compliance with the principles and purposes of the Charter. This is the best way of achieving the rational utilization of the world's resources in order to meet the needs of so many millions of human beings and it is also the best road to a Just and lasting peace. 
The CHAIRMAN: I now call on the representative of Senegal, Mr. Sarre, who will speak in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of African States. 
Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French): This year we are celebrating Disarmament Week in what is unfortunately a somewhat pessimistic atmosphere. This is a period fraught with conflicts, when tensions have been constantly exacerbated and seem to be the harbinger of war rather than peace. This disturbing situation should confer special importance on this occasion. The improvement of international relations in an atmosphere more conducive to the promotion of disarmament is a particularly urgent matter for Africans, because not only do we live, like peoples in other parts of the world, under the constant threat of a nuclear holocaust, but in addition, we are powerless as we witness the squandering of enormous resources, which could have eradicated several times over the scourges that we and other peoples of the third world suffer from, namely, disease, hunger and ignorance.
Thus our bitterness can be understood, as we see that indifference to our appeals has turned,into, deafness when any, question arises that relates directly to the, freedom and dignity of the peoples of the third world, and yet when we emerged four decades ago-from the nightmare-of war, we hoped that mankind would be able in future to prevent the outbreak of a new war by building a new system of international relations based on confidence, co-operation and solidarity. Today justice and peace have become a reality only for a small number of countries in the world, ^or the overwhelming majority the historic injustice that condemns them to living on the periphery is becoming increasingly intolerable, especially since the ,great scientific and technological-advances that have been made in our time would .have made possible considerable improvements in the lot of mankind at a cost far less than that of armaments,	.
At times the world seems to have forgotten the sense- of what it is striving' for. It is strange indeed to try to conquer outer space and to install devices of death there, and at the some time standing idly by while witnessing the deadly scourges of our time ravaging the world, In addition to these evils of our century, common, to all of us, which we are trying over the short term to eliminate, we, Africans have another danger to face,that of having to live side by side with a regime which everyone hastens to condemn,but which has nevertheless succeeded in obtaining help to discover the secret of how fo" produce atonic weapons. 	 This threat is particularly real, since there is no evidence that South Africa, which docs not hesitate nowadays to invade and occupy a good part of its 	■ neighbour^ territories, would hesitate, for a moment to use atonic weapons in tines of crisis or, in war, Ue believe that at this tine the nuclear Powers have a decisive role to play in eliminating that threat. They should enter into specific binding commitments. guarantee observance of the non nuclear status of Africa and refrain iron transferring any nuclear technology to racist South Africa, whose policies they so vehemently condemn, -	■	,	■.■
That would not be too high a price to pay to preserve the achievements of the non--proliferation regime, especially when wo consider the consequences for international peace and security of possession by the leaders in Pretoria of atomic weapons, since everyone knows that their racial policies is likely sooner or-later to lead to an unprecedented explosion.	"
(Hr. Sarre, Senegal)
On this question of disarmament, so vital to the future of the world, the small countries have no alternative hut to preach reason to the major Powers of the world which have in their hands the key to our common destiny. Yet, we are not sure that our appeals will he heard:, still less heeded. All we can do is to hope that by appealing directly to national and world public opinion, as proposed in this Disarmament Week, we can create militant political forces capable of bringing the necessary pressure to bear on the various Governments to induce then to realize finally that there is no alternative to disarmament and peace if we do not want to see the smouldering embers of war throughout the world explode into a world wide conflagration.
The CHAIRMAN: I now call Hr. El-Fattal, the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic and Chairman of.the Group of Asian States.
Hr. EL--FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Hr. Chairman, I wish to offer you my delegation’s cordial congratulations on the occasion of your election, and at the same time to thank you for giving me this opportunity to address the First Committee at this special meeting, on behalf of the Group of Asian States, over which it is my honour to preside.
The occasion that we are celebrating today is the beginning of Disarmament Week, which it is the custom of the United Rations to celebrate annually, since the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1978, which, in its Final Document, instituted Disarmament Week to promote the aims of disarmament.
Although we are celebrating Disarmament Week for the fifth consecutive year, we see with regret and bitterness that thus far the nations have made no progress towards disarmament. Moreover, the international community feels that no progress has been achieved in the spheres covered by the first special session on disarmament and that no worth-while measure has been taken to. bring about disarmament, although the second special session on disarmament, in 1982, which was itself.a failure, stressed the importance of disarmament. The international situation has been steadily worsening. There is a climate of distrust prevailing which affects relations among the major Powers. The signs of a cold war are
beginning to loon over international relations and as a result the arris race seems to be a priority for certain Powers, in particular the nuclear Powers.
The conventional arms race has accelerated recently as a result of the fears of certain countries, especially small and developing countries, that the policy of aggression, intervention and occupation is becoming common practice. The fears and misgivings of the countries of the world are due to the build -up in the arms race and its consequences: in other words, the danger of a nuclear war that would wipe out the whole of mankind. We all realize that a nuclear war would not be limited, that there would be neither victor nor vanquished, and that a nuclear war could not be confined to a specific region. Thus a nuclear war would mean the end of the world.
If Disarmament Week, which we are now celebrating for the fifth time, has secured any positive results, it is the feeling of indignation of the peoples of the world, who are standing out against the arms race and the installation of nuclear weapons. Disarmament Week has been successful in that respect, and has made public opinion in different parts of the world more sensitive to these issues.
In speaking about Disarmament Week and evaluating its results I would like first to take up two important issues closely related to disarmament and which constitute a matter of global concern: the relationship of disarmament to development, on the one hand, and international security, on the other.
The great enemy of development in the third world countries is their increasing desire to acquire weapons, since in order to defend their frontiers, their independence and their resources against the Zionist, fascist, racist regimes in various parts of the world, or against aggressive imperialist forces, the developing countries are forced to buy weapons and to squander their financial resources on those purchases instead of devoting them to economic and social development. A quick glance at the situation in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Middle East clearly shows how gloomy the picture is in those regions. Millions of people are afflicted with sickness, illiteracy, hunger and malnutrition in those countries. The $800 billion spent annually on the purchase of weapons would have been enough, if used rationally, to change the situation of those countries. There is no denying that disarmament is not a matter that concerns only the nuclear Powers, and in particular, the super-Powers. It affects all the countries of the world, most of which are represented in this hall.
I wish to point out the essential link between disarmament and international security. International security will continue to be under threat as long as a. policy of the might, hegemony, domination, aggression, annexation, and the occupation of foreign territory remains the official ideology of certain regimes in various parts of the world and is carried out by force of arms. We have no guarantee that we can avoid a conflict by pinning our faith to the possibility of using nuclear weapons within a limited area and to a limited extent. Peaceloving countries have categorically rejected this doctrine. The Asian countries are non-nuclear-weapon .States, and any Asian country which is trying to make use of nuclear energy is doing so for peaceful purposes. We support the idea of establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, and most of us have already signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
What we find particularly disturbing on the other hand, are the attempts of the Zionist regime in occupied Palestine to develop weapons of mass destruction in co-operation with the racist régime of South Africa. International intelligencegathering has shown that the enemy has already acquired a nuclear-weapon capacity, and it should be noted that it has refused to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
At the beginning of this Disarmament Week, let us reaffirm that we shall spare no effort in this cause and restate, our full support for our Organization, in which we have placed all our trust, so that we can carry out this difficult task and seek solutions to the problems the world must face today.
The CHAIRMAN: I now call upon Mr. Gurinovich of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, who is speaking on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States •	.	.	.	_	.
Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): ' I have the great honour, of speaking as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States at this special meeting at the beginning of Disarmament Week. This present Disarmament Week happens to coincide with the fortieth anniversary of the Moscow Conference, attended by the Foreign Ministers of the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom. That Conference adopted, among other important documents, a four-Power declaration on questions of general security; in those harsh years of the Second World War, the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and China stated, in paragraph 4 of their declaration-that they recognized the need to establish, as early as possible, a universal international organization for the maintenance of international peace and security, based on the principle of- the sovereign equality of all peace-loving States, and whose membership would be open to all.such States, large and small. Two years later the United Nations Charter was drafted, signed and entered into force, the Charter of an organization which now has 158 Members.
In the declaration to which I have referred the parties recognized the need to establish and maintain international peace and security in the post-war period and - again;I quote from the declaration - with the least possible diversion of world human and economic resources for armaments.
They went on, in paragraph 7 of the declaration, to state that they would confer-and co-operate with each other and with the other Members of the United Nations in order to achieve practicable comprehensive agreements for the regulation of armaments in the post-war period. .	.
It must be acknowledged that peace-loving forces have succeeded in achieving certain definite results in their struggle for the limitation and prevention of the nuclear arms race in various respects. Evidence of this is provided by ' the drafting and adoption of a number of treaties and conventions on the subject that are now in force. Otherwise, the situation would be even worse.
But we are also obliged to note that the threat of nuclear war has grown considerably, that the nuclear weapons now in existence are being constantly developed, that those means of destruction and annihilation which used to be given the old-fashioned name of conventional armaments are in no way comparable to the armaments of the Second World War, and that now annual military expenditures are much higher than they were during the years'of the' Second World War.
Tn other words, it is the fault of the forces of imperialism and reaction, that it has not proved possible to achieve the aim of the least possible diversion of world human and economic resources for armaments. The acute need for this not only has not been reduced, but indeed has grown, taking into account the tasks facing mankind in the elimination of hunger, disease, illiteracy, housing shortages, unemployment and inflation, in overcoming the economic backwardness of the young independent countries and of individual areas and population groups in the developed capitalist countries, and in guaranteeing stable and constant economic and social progress for all peoples.
We do not want the Disarmament Week proclaimed by the United Nations to be limited to the customary ritual speeches. We want it instead to become a. powerful stimulus to joint efforts to strengthen peace, to avert the danger of nuclear war, and to achieve agreements on real measures of nuclear and conventional disarmament, up to and including general and complete disarmament.
The World Disarmament Campaign, in which the peoples of the world are taking part ever more energetically, must play a part in this endeavour. It is our duty to heed the voice of the peoples and respond to their yearnings.
I should like to make a slight digression from the official style of my statement at this point. We all know that the children of different countries react identically to what they find pleasant or what they find unpleasant • they all laugh and cry in the same way. Once they have learnt to speak, naturally in their own language, they all express identically their attitude to what is good and to what is bad. As the years go by, differences come about in their attitude to what is happening around them. They then begin to adhere to different political, moral and other views and take a different position on religion and the state of affairs within their own country and abroad. But today practically all the peoples, regardless of race and the social structure of the country in which they live, all people of good will, from schoolchildren to old-age pensioners, whatever language they speak, all want the same thing. In a polyglot world we hear ever more loudly proclaimed the same demand: peace, not war; disarmament, not a nuclear catastrophe; co operation, not confrontation.
We are deeply convinced that the time has come for the politicians and diplomats of all countries at long last to make a similar choice and, combining their efforts, find constructive and mutually acceptable solutions to the pressing problems of our time, including those in the sphere of disarmament. They must respond to the demands of the people in whose name they speak in the international arena.
The United Nations is now discussing a whole range of disarmament questions and each delegation is making a detailed statement of its position on them. In this connection, I wish briefly to recall that the States of the socialist community, proceeding from the provisions of their joint documents adopted in Prague, Moscow and Sofia this year, have already submitted for consideration a complete set of constructive proposals. In the communique of the conference of Foreign Ministers of States parties to the Warsaw Treaty held in Sofia on 13 and 14 October this year, the participants:
"stressed the special importance and urgency of the proposals and initiatives of States parties to the Warsaw Treaty towards averting nuclear war, carrying on and enhancing the process of detente, halting the arms race, especially the nuclear arms race, and launching disarmament, strengthening security and developing co-operation in Europe and the world as a whole. They expressed the determination of their States to make every effort to implement these proposals and initiatives".
Fundamentally our proposals relate to the condemnation of nuclear war- the prevention of nuclear war; the need for all nuclear Powers which have not yet done so to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons; the renunciation of the deployment in Europe of new medium-range nuclear weapons and the reduction of those weapons, and the limitation and reduction of strategic armaments; nuclear disarmament ; the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones and a simultaneous freeze by all the nuclear Powers, primarily the Soviet Union and the United States, on nuclear weapons, in both quantitative and qualitative terms, and the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests.
'	'	.	' -	■ (Mr. Gurinovich, Byelorussian SSR)
Our proposals relate to agreement not to increase military expenditures;
the reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces’; the prohibition of the militarization of outer space and the use of force in space and from space	•
against the earth; a ban on and the elimination of neutron and other weapons, including new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction; and the liberation of Europe from chemical weapons as a first step towards a world-wide prohibition and elimination of such weapons.	•
In short, acceptance of our proposals would amount to the renunciation of : the use of either nuclear or conventional wea.pons by any State against any other States.	.	-	'	?	.........
In other words, we advocate agreements on the basis of the principle of equality and equal security. We advocate a world without wars and without the ;.- ... accumulation of stockpiles of armaments. We call upon all other countries to associate themselves with our efforts to achieve these aims by making use also of the possibilities of the World Disarmament Campaign, to which the socialist States have made an appropriate contribution.
We advocate that all peoples should be freed of the danger of a nuclear disaster and have àn opportunity to devote their efforts to créative nurposes, in conditions of undisturbed peace.	,	.
The CHAIRMAN : I now call on the representative of El Salvador, Mr. Rosales Rivera, who will speak in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of ' Latin American States.	.
Mr. ROSALES-RIVERA (El Salvador)(interprétâtion from Spanish): I have the honour to speak at the beginning of this commemorative Week, which is part of the World Disarmament Campaign, on behalf of the Latin American Group which, as in the past, gives its full support to all initiatives relating to. this item.
The deterioration of the international situation makes it particularly urgent that attention be given to disarmament, for the climate of international tension and the various sources of conflict in the world are all events which foster the escalation of rivalry between the super-Powers. Latin America as a
■	(Mr, Rosales-Rivera, El Salvador)
whole fully supports the fight for disarmament at all levels as regards conventional weapons, intermediate-range missiles, long-range nuclear-forces and, of course, outer space, which must be preserved from use for strategic or military purposes. Regrettably, this last dimension has become the object of the efforts to gain nuclear supremacy.	.
The area of conventional weapons is a source of special interest to Latin America. The arms race cannot be dissociated from its harmful effects on the . economic development and social development of States. Armament and development are opposing directions. Unfortunately, threats to the security of States and imbalances caused by the unequal groirth of the military weapons of certain....... countries in the same subregion conspire against the reduction of.military expenditure. Plans for economic and social development are curbed and vast basic needs remain unsatisfied.
This is illustrated in resolution 37/95 A, in which the General Assembly: "Declares once again its conviction that it is possible to.........	.......
. achieve international agreements on reduction of military budgets
Without prejudice to the right of all States to undiminished security, self-defence and sovereignty;
‘ "Reaffirms that human and material resources released through the reduction of military expenditures could be reallocated to economic and social development, especially for the benefit of the developing countries•*' (resolution 37/95 A, paras. 1, 2)
MD/dkd/jmb
The figures on world-wide military expenditures are astronomical - more than $550 billion a year - and the amount spent on economic development is insignificant in comparison. The link between disarmament and development is very relevant and important and has therefore rightly been stressed in international forums. The present trend must be reversed, in the interest not only of the countries of the third world but of the international community at large which would stand to gain. Furthermore, the accumulation and upgrading of weapons do not themselves bring security. On the contrary, the world has become more insecure and a riskier place in which to live because of the arms race.
In detente, there is a perception of good faith and confidence and a sense of security which is a psychological resource conducive to a greater degree of co-operation among States that can, in turn, bring about a reduction in armaments and take us closer to the concept of general and complete disarmament. This premise, based on the building of an atmosphere of mutual confidence, applies to conventional weapons and to nuclear weapons and other sophisticated methods of warfare.
We believe that substantive progress in the Geneva bilateral negotiations would have a positive impact on multilateral negotiations. Both forms of negotiation are interrelated.
When we consider the present state of the reduction of conventional weapons, we very often find that among those involved are not just the two States concerned in the conflict. In the event of a nuclear arms race, however, it is the super-Powers which bear the burden of responsibility for the fate of the world. The others concerned play minor roles even though, paradoxically, a failure in negotiations and a nuclear war would irrevocably affect all mankind. That is why the voices of all the peoples of the world, as potential victims of a nuclear war, must be heard in equal measure in representative international organizations such as the United Nations, the special sessions of the General Assembly which have been held under the aegis of the United Nations, and also in secondary bodies such as the Committee on Disarmament.	.
®/dkd/mes
In this regard, Latin America supports the work of the Ad Hoc Committee for the World Disarmament Conference. That Conference, as the Ad Hoc Conimittee has said, must be the result of consensus, bearing in mind the appropriate conditions. In addition, it should be preceded by proper preparation and commitment to universal goals and universal participation.
Although the awareness of the threat of a nuclear holocaust to the fate of the world has been particularly keen in the developed countries as a result of the media - and this certainly applies to Western Europe and North America -there has also been a reasonable level of concern in the third world.
Most people in Latin America consider,that their overriding needs have to do with everyday matters such as bread, housing, clothing and work. An understanding of the problems of nuclear war has been shown mainly by the intellectual elites and by Governments. But to be honest, it is not a need which is felt among the masses. Each social community expresses its own concerns.	.
Latin America was nevertheless the first region which concerned itself with the threat of atomic weapons. The Tlatelolco Treaty and its protocols are eloquent proof of this. Now other regions of the world are following our example.
Of course, in the whole problem of disarmament, the element of effective international control is of primary importance, for it supports the psychological factor of confidence and the subsequent verification that commitments entered into are truly honoured. So there must be reasonable machinery for verification.
The United Nations has been dealing with the question of disarmament as one of its primary objectives. This is clear from Article 26 of the Charter. Ever since its beginning, this world Organization has been associated with this difficult undertaking which has been slow and elusive and which has often been in a state of stagnation. This is the context in which we must view the report of the Committee on Disarmament.
It would seem that the resolutions adopted year after year on disarmament are in inverse ratio to their effectiveness. But they must be seen as an expression of the concern which exists on the subject. The present generations must meet this challenge for their responsibilities go beyond what would have been imaginable just a few years ago, for they are dealing with the destiny of mankind.
As was stressed bv the independent commission, in the nuclear era var cannot be an instrument of policy but merely a mechanism for unprecedented destruction. This Places the problem of disarmament in a context beyond the applied sciences and advanced technology. It goes beyond the field of politics and enters the field of ethics. ITo generation has the right to determine the fate of future generations nor does it have the right to eliminate the human race. The power of nuclear destruction is immense.
For all these reasons, Latin America gives.its support to disarmament and applauds initiatives to mobilize world public opinion in the world Disarmament Campaign, to which this week is contributing, a week which begins precisely on United Rations Day. Is it not ironic that just a week apo we celebrated World Food Day and were told that ^50 .million peonle are suffering from hunger, while today more than $1 million a. minute are being spent on the arms race? Can we continue with this dialectic of contradictions which the present generation is witnessing?
Latin America trusts that common sense will prevail.
The CHA.IRIW: I call on the representative of France, Ur. Louet, Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other Ftates.
Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretation from French): In mv capacity as Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other States, I take great pleasure in congratulating you. Sir, on your accession to the chairmanshin of the First Committee. I wish also to congratulate the other offices of the Committee. We are sure that your concern for objectivity and your great competence, which we all recognize, will lend great impetus to the work of the First Committee.
For the sixth consecutive year, the General Assembly is celebrating . Disarmament Week, beginning today, 2^ October, the anniversary of the founding of the United Rations. It might be useful to recall that the practice instituted by the first special session on disarmament is a response to the legitimate concern for involving the peoples of our countries in the efforts being made to promote disarmament. While it is primarily for our Governments to carry on a determined quest for significant progress in this field, the difficulty of the endeavour and the magnitude of the stakes make it quite right that their efforts should be accompanied by a flow of information to the populations who should be made more aware of what is happening.
(Mr. Louet, Franc e)
This concern is now more justified than ever at a time when there is increasingly acute awareness of the danger to peace of the lack of progress in this field. We are thus convinced that the activities in connection with this Week will help unite the entire international community in the search for ways of reducing military arsenals. After all, this is what it is about and it is worth recalling this in a context and at a time when there is no lack of declarations of good intent and when the need for specific significant measures was never more clear.
I should like to reaffirm the support of the Group of Western European and other States for all the efforts to achieve genuine disarmament in a more harmonious and united international community.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
United Nations GENERAL ASSEMBLY THIRTY-NINTH SESSION
Official Records*
FIRST COMMITTEE 12th meeting held on Wednesday, 24 October 1984 at 10.30 a.m. New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 12th MEETING
Chairman; Mr. SOUZA e SILVA (Brazil)
CONTENTS
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
•This fccofd is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the ugnature of a member of the ckk-ittioli concerned within one week of the dale of pubtiivilon io the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section, room 1X1*750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
Current ion* «¡11 be issued after the end of the session, in a separate fascicle for each Committee.
Distr. GENERAL A/C.1/39/PV.12 25 October 1984 ENGLISH
84-63069 7822V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10, 50 a. tn. 
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN; Today marks the commencement of Disarmament Week and, as has been done in previous years, the First Committee is holding this special meeting in observance of that occasion. I have the distinct pleasure and honour, therefore, to welcome to the Committee this morning the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
The observance of Disarmament Week affords all Members of this Organization an opportunity to recall their joint commitment to the common objective of disarmament and security. We live at a time when the gap between the powerful few and the powerless majority has never been so wide. That is why, in my view, the possibilities for progress within the multilateral framework are being increasingly overlooked by those who place their own interests and concerns above the interests and concerns of the international community as a whole. It is thus fitting that we take time on this occasion to reflect on the need to rededicate ourselves to the search for ideas and solutions within the aegis of the United Nations. Only in this way can we remain true to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter in discharging the mandate of the First Committee in keeping with the spirit of Disarmament Week. 
I now have pleasure in calling on the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): Disarmament Week, which we are gathered here to observe, coincides this year with the day on which we celebrate the thirty-ninth anniversary of the coming into force of the United Nations Charter. The first resolution of the first session of the General Assembly pertained to nuclear disarmament and since that time there has been no subject to which the Assembly has devoted greater attention. It is evident from the general debate of the current session of the Assembly that this attention has in no way diminished. The necessity of limiting armaments especially nuclear weapons, has been widely and emphatically reiterated. New ideas and proposals have been put forward and nations have taken advantage of the opportunity offered by the Assembly
to meet and exchange views. We must all hope that this will facilitate early progress in the ongoing negotiations and the resumption or the commencement of negotiations on matters which are of the utmost concern to the entire international community. 
The responsibility for national security is common to all Governments. They also share, I believe, a common and urgent interest in meeting this responsibility with the least danger to the peoples of the world and the least jeopardy to the economic and social progress on which lasting peace so heavily depends. This is acknowledged in much that has been said and done at this session of the Assembly. 
Yet it must be recognized that a greater degree of international confidence than exists at present is needed to facilitate real progress in arms reduction and limitation. I believe that this confidence can be encouraged through the greater understanding that emerges from exchanges of views such as those which have taken place within the framework of the United Nations in these past weeks. I should like to urge that they be pursued in this Committee where all Member States have the possibility to work together on an agenda which encompasses the broad range of disarmament issues. 
The cost of arms continues to mount with the likelihood, according to some estimates, that the level of military expenditures will reach $1 trillion in 1985. In mathematical terms - I should perhaps say astronomical -this figure exceeds the comprehension of many of us present here. It is clear none the less that even an approximation of that sum involves an enormous squandering of human and natural resources which, if directed to other ends, could be of great benefit to all mankind and, in particular, for the hundreds of millions of people still living in conditions of truly scandalous underdevelopment. 
No progress in disarmament would be without importance. With each step forward, small though it may be, some growth in the confidence needed for the larger steps can be expected. For this reason, I would suggest that a concentrated effort might now be made to identify specific substantive measures on which, with renewed commitment, agreement could be reasonably expected at a relatively early date. The long impasse in arms negotiations must be broken. And the way must be opened for successful negotiations on nuclear weapons, which constitute the gravest threat to the security not only of one or several nations, but of the whole world. 
Disarmament Week should serve to bring Governments and peoples - whether specialists or the public in general - to renew their efforts to find ways of overcoming the differences, both technological and political, which have stood in the way of progress. The time has also come to recall that the security of all nations can best be assured by common respect for the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. Therein lies the means to reduce dependence on military force, which will always remain the most stubborn obstacle to the comprehensive disarmament the Members of the United Nations have long held to be the ultimate and necessary goal. 
The CHAIRMAN: I now call on Mr. Jan Martenson, Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, who will read out a message from the President of the General Assembly. 
Mr. MARTENSON (Under-Secretary-General, Department for Disarmament Affairs): The President of the General Assembly has asked me to convey to you the following message:
"For the seventh consecutive time since 1978, Disarmament Week is being observed by the international community.
"It is sad, however, that after all these years we are still confronted with the reality of a non-stop increase in the arms race, particularly the nuclear-arms race. There has been no improvement in the field of arms limitation and disarmament.
"The past year has unfortunately witnessed not only an interruption of some of the important negotiations between the two major Powers, but also a further deterioration in international relations. Relations among certain Member States of the United Nations have reached such a state of mistrust and tensions to the detriment of international co-operation as proclaimed in the Charter of the Organization.
"The Final Document of the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament states, rightly so, that 'nuclear weapons pose the greatest danger to mankind and to the survival of civilization' and that 'it is essential to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms race in all its aspects in order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear weapons.'
"The General Assembly and, in particular, its subsidiary bodies entrusted with its mandate in the field of arms limitation and disarmament should therefore endeavour to assist the nuclear-weapons States, particularly the two major Powers, in the task of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament.
"However, it is not just in the area of nuclear weapons that the arms race has continued unabated. The question of conventional weapons and the fast pace at which their trade and transfer have been taking place must be seriously addressed. The complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and their destruction represent another urgent measure which must be achieved.
"Furthermore, it is shameful that in a world in which material, technical and human resources are urgently needed for development in all countries, military expenditures will have claimed over $800 billion by the end of this year and will continue to rise.
(Mr« Martenson)
nIt was almost 40 years ago that the founding fathers of our Organization resolved that they were determined not only to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, but also to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and to combine their efforts to accomplish these aims. Much has changed in our world since then, but the Charter of the United Nations remains an inspiration to all of us committed to the betterment of mankind.
"The facts are all before us. We do not need any further evidence that the present accumulation of weapons, in particular nuclear weapons, no longer represents a protection but, indeed, is a threat to the future of our planet.
"Therefore, on this anniversary of the United Nations, and on this special occasion of Disarmament Week, I would urge all Member States to renew their commitment to the principles of the Charter and rededicate themselves to the objective of general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
"The time has come for us to realize that, if we continue the arms race, we must also assume responsibility for contributing to the collective suicide of mankind.
"We, the peoples of the world here gathered, have a responsibility to the billions of fellow human beings who have put their faith in us to seek security in disarmament. Let us not disappoint them."
The CHAIRMAN: I call on Mr. Dinka, the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia and Chairman of the Group of African States.
Mr. DINKA (Ethiopia): At the outset let me pay a deserved tribute to all those ordinary men and women who, through the various peace movements all over the world, are striving to impress upon their Governments the imperative need and utmost urgency to put an end to the ever-increasing spiral of the nuclear arms race. Let me also pay an equally well-deserved tribute to all statesmen, political leaders, scholars and, indeed, all those whose policies, statements and writings have kept the burning issue of disarmament high on the agenda of the international community.
As we observe Disarmament Week this year, our thoughts - especially those of Africans, whom I have the honour to represent here - go to the millions of our compatriots who are confronted with the spectre of poverty and starvation as a result of the economic crisis engulfing Africa and the severe drought which is fast spreading to most parts of that continent.
(Mr. Dinka, Ethiopia)
While people in Africa are starving, the insatiable appetite of the war machines of the big and the powerful is fed with increased and more sophisticated nuclear-weapon systems. While our people are forced to live in ramshackle huts and makeshift tents, very secure and, indeed, comfortable shelters are being built to house and conceal nuclear missiles. While our people are denied the possibility and opportunities to learn the rudimentary elements of literacy, nuclear technology and know-how are being developed to the levels of devising "star war" weapon systems.
In short, billions are spent each year on the development, deployment and stockpiling of nuclear weapons, while millions of human beings are left to lead a life of deprivation, bereft of even the very basic necessities of life. Resources that could be used to save precious human lives are used, I dare say squandered, eventually to destroy mankind and his civilization. What an irony and what a wasteJ The world has, indeed, lost its moral compass.
The nuclear-arms race is depriving Africa, and, indeed, the whole world, not only of the necessary resources for development, but also of the confidence and optimism to face and meet the challenges of the future. The world today has enough nuclear warheads to destroy the world many times over. Can anyone say with any degree of certainty that those weapons will never be used? Throughout the ages, man has used all his inventions and creations. Is that also going to be the case with nuclear weapons? When nuclear weapons are possessed by a racist and terrorist regime, such as the one in South Africa, can anyone dare to assert that nuclear weapons will never be used? I submit that only uncertainty and grave concern can characterize our forecasts regarding the use or non-use of nuclear weapons.
The fate of humanity as a result is today in the hands of a few human beings leading the nuclear States. Even this, I am afraid, may not last long, for in a few years’ time the very fate of mankind could well be totally at the mercy of the cold and mechanical calculations of computers.
The mad race for nuclear superiority, I submit, is thus threatening the world not only with catastrophe, but is indeed in the process of dehumanizing man and depriving our common civilization of its human and humane elements.
I say this situation is intolerable and untenable. This mad race has to be stopped and reversed. The call by the overwhelming majority of mankind for a nuclear freeze and for a commitment by all the nuclear Powers not to be the first to use nuclear weapons must, therefore, be heeded immediately.
As we commemorate this solemn occasion, let me on behalf of the African Group at the United Nations, reaffirm once again Africa's total and firm commitment to the noble and ultimate objective of general and complete disarmament and its determination to keep our continent free from all types of nuclear weapons.
Africa is convinced that, in this nuclear age, the fate of all States has become one and indivisible. In the calculations of the nuclear Powers, therefore, the entire world, as a unit, and the survival of humanity, must be placed above their individual national interests.
Finally, I appeal once again to all concerned to stop the catastrophic and costly nuclear race for the sake of the peace and well-being of the entire human race.
The CHAIRMAN; I now call on Mr. Riyadh Al-Qaysi, the Permanent Representative of Iraq and Chairman of the Asian Group of States.
Mr. Al-QAYSI (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): I am greatly privileged to speak on behalf of the Asian Group of States at this special meeting celebrating for the seventh time Disarmament Week, which was proclaimed by the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. The issue of disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament, is accorded the highest priority, especially in view of the fact that our world has been deteriorating sharply. International relations are presently fraught with dangers and the world has been thrust once more into a state of cold war in which hotbeds of tension have proliferated and the principles of the Charter are being disregarded at a time when we need to adhere to them strictly. We are fully convinced that this unfavourable and dangerous climate renders the important work of achieving the desired goals of the comprehensive programme on disarmament more valuable than ever and also urgently requires the intensification and redoubling of efforts not only to resolve the chronic dilemmas facing humanity, but also to save life on this planet, which a handful of States have the capacity to destroy many times over.
The statements that were made in this Committee and during the plenary meetings of the General Assembly embodied the enormous fear resulting from the continuous deterioration in the international situation, on the one hand, and the escalation of the arms race and the increased waste of material and human resources on the other. We fully associate ourselves with this feeling of great danger.
The Asian group, in whose name my delegation has the privilege to speak, is fully convinced that international peace and security cannot be ensured without achieving complete and general disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament, in all its aspects, under effective international control. Common sense strongly urges the renunciation of concepts proclaiming that security cannot be achieved except through military superiority, developing and stockpiling weapons of mass destruction - especially nuclear weapons - which threaten the whole of mankind with extinction. These untenable ideas tend to lend a more conventional character and to legitimize nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. We call for an immediate ban on nuclear tests and the threat or use of nuclear weapons. We also reaffirm that the nuclear Powers must assure non-nuclear Powers that they will not threaten them or use nuclear weapons against them.
The Asian Group urges the creation of nuclear-free zones throughout the world and stresses the need to exert more efforts towards concluding international conventions prohibiting the development, production, use and stockpiling of chemical and radiological weapons, as well as other weapons and new systems of mass destruction.
Increased military expenditures, whether on nuclear or advanced conventional weapons which have enormous destructive capabilities, not only have serious and dangerous implications for the domestic economies of many countries but they also have far-reaching consequences for the developing countries that are already afflicted by severe economic crises.
At a time when we see the spectre of death and destruction looming over the ideals of the international community, as a result of our inability thus far to eliminate stockpiles of nuclear weapons on our planet, new steps are being taken that may lead to further obstacles being placed in the way of complete disarmament, because these steps will lead to the militarization of outer space through the introduction of new technologies and building defensive systems against nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, it behooves me to remind the Committee that what we have felt and witnessed thus far is a protracted debate on disarmament that is not commensurate with the modest progress that has been achieved towards that end. However, we are convinced that we can and must achieve the noble and humane objectives that preserve humanity and save it from the untold horrors which threaten it.
The CHAIRMAN: I call on Mr. David Meiszter of Hungary, who will make a
statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. MEISZTER (Hungary): I wish to express my delegation's cordial congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman, on your election.
Today, at the beginning of Disarmament Week, which is part of the World Disarmament Campaign, I have the honour and pleasure of speaking as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
This year we are celebrating Disarmament Week in a somewhat pessimistic atmosphere that makes even the word "celebrating" sound a little bit out of place. The reason is that Disarmament Week is taking place after a frustrating period during which the international situation has become increasingly threatening, with the sinister prospect of another twist in the vicious spiral of the arms race.
With that as background, the original aims of launching the World Disarmament Campaign and commemorating Disarmament Week during every annual session of this Organization, namely, to make world public opinion aware of the increasing dangers of war and to generate widespread public understanding of and active support for the objectives of arms limitation and disarmament, are more timely now than ever before.
An objective analysis of the progress of the World Disarmament Campaign would undoubtedly reveal some directly perceptible and, of course, some indirect results. It is an undisputed fact that public opinion in different parts of the world has become more sensitive to the questions of war and militarization. But an objective analysis of the situation, with all due respect to the efforts made, cannot conceal the fact that during the same period the arms race spiral - promoted by the imperialist circles having a vested interest in it - climbed steeply upwards as never before. At the same time, there is an increasing awareness of the fact that the perspective of a nuclear showdown would certainly threaten not only the States directly involved, but also all countries, whatever their differences in size, level of development, social sytem and, eventually, even regardless of their geographical location.
It is with that in mind that the socialist countries of Eastern Europe have formulated the top priorities of their foreign policies on the wide array of disarmament issues. We are fully conscious that the whole range of disarmament questions facing the present session of the General Assembly, namely, the prevention of nuclear war, nuclear disarmament, prohibition of the militarization of outer space, reduction of conventional armaments, a halt to the introduction of new weapons systems, a ban on chemical weapons, a freeze and reduction of military expenditures, and the relationship between disarmament and development, are all of
(Mr. Meiszter, Hungary) paramount importance for the future of the world and deserve our full devotion in our quest for their solution.
But, taking into account the special features of the time in which we live, we cannot but pinpoint two aspects as the absolute priorities of our policy concerning disarmament matters. We regard the prevention of nuclear war as the primary objective of our foreign policy, since there is nothing more dangerous for the future of humankind than an eventual nuclear catastrophe. Hence the array of measures such as the renunciation of the first use of nuclear weapons by all nuclear Powers, the quantitative and qualitative freeze of all nuclear weapons, the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests, and the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones - measures which seem to us to be of extreme importance and of the greatest urgency with the aim of the eventual total elimination of nuclear weapons.
By the same token, we attach great importance to preventing the extension of the arms race to outer space. There are good reasons for that, but it seems to me that the time allotted to this forum does not allow a detailed explanation. That will undoubtedly be done during forthcoming days in the First Committee's topical deliberations. At this point, suffice it to say that the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems and anti-satellite weapons in outer space envisaged by the Reagan Administration would seriously destabilize the situation and, coupled with the possession of nuclear weapons - contrary to what has been stated by some military circles - would make a nuclear conflagration imminent.
The task is urgent, because it is always easier to ban a system of armaments before, not after, it has become an irreversible reality.
At the beginning of this Disarmament Week, I wish to reaffirm that the Eastern European socialist countries are guided, as before, only by the desire to save mankind from a suicidal nuclear catastrophe and to spare the countries of the world a new twist in the arms race spiral. The time has come for practical steps in that direction.
The CHAIRMAN; I call on Mr. Donatus St. Aimee, who will make a statement on behalf of the Chairman of the Group of Latin American States.
Mr. St. AIMEE (Saint Lucia): The States members of the Latin American Group have always actively supported all thoughtful and well-balanced disarmament proposals. We have always been of the view that our acceptance of and commitment to the Charter of the United Nations compel us to pursue urgently all avenues that
(Mr. St. Aimee, Saint Lucia) may lead to general and complete disarmament, as is implicitly recognized in Article 26 of the Charter. We are appalled therefore that the arms race, both conventional and nuclear, that has spiralled and consumed millions of lives and billions of dollars since the Second World War continues unabated.
On a regional level, since 1967 we have made exciting progress aimed at ensuring that nuclear weapons are not introduced into our region within the purview of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and its Protocols. Conventionally, we are eagerly negotiating regional multilateral agreements designed both to eliminate all threats to peace and security and the reduction of military budgets.
Consequently, the States members of the Latin American Group support all the regional disarmament proposals. Since 1971 we have supported the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, and deeply regret that serious difficulties among the parties most concerned continue to thwart its implementation.
We believe that the nations of the world have taken some significant, though not substantial, steps towards disarmament, such as, for example, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the strategic arms limitation agreements. But recent reports of the use of biological and chemical weapons and the inability of the parties to the intermediate-range nuclear forces and strategic arms reduction talks to resume negotiations cause us some great concern.
It is therefore our intention vigorously to pursue all possibilities for disarmament, not only in our own region but also universally, until mankind has realized a peaceful, safe and secure world.
A fifth of the States of that region have no standing army, and we are all aware of the relationship between disarmament and development, noting that funds used on arms are funds lost for development. In this respect, we urge all States to give priority to peace initiatives, development programmes, and the gradual reduction of arms so that the vast resources of our planet can be used for the enjoyment of mankind rather than for its destruction.
The CHAIRMAN: I call on Mr. Anders Ferm, Permanent Representative of Sweden and Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. FERM (Sweden)-. It is an honour for me to address the First Committee on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States today when we mark not only the anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations but also the beginning of Disarmament Week.
Disarmament Week was instituted by the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Permit me to quote the opening paragraph of the Final Document adopted by consensus at the first special session. It reads as follows^
"The attainment of the objective of security, which is an inseparable element of peace, has always been one of the most profound aspirations of humanity. States have for a long time sought to maintain their security through the possession of arms. Admittedly, their survival has, in certain cases, effectively depended on whether they could count on appropriate means of defence. Yet the accumulation of weapons, particularly nuclear weapons, today constitutes much more a threat than a protection for the future of mankind. The time has therefore come to put an end to this situation, to abandon the use of force in international relations and to seek security in disarmament, that is to say, through a gradual but effective process beginning with a reduction in the present level of armaments. The ending of the arms race and the achievement of real disarmament are tasks of primary importance and urgency. To meet this historic challenge is in the political and economic interests of all the nations and peoples of the world as well as in the interests of ensuring their genuine security and peaceful future." (A/S-10/4, para. 1» In paragraph 18 of the Final Document it is stated-.
"Removing the threat of a world war - a nuclear war - is the most acute and urgent task of the present day. Mankind is confronted with a choice-, we must halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament or face annihilation." (ibid ., para. 18) This call for disarmament was made in 1978. It is equally valid today, six years later, and in fact we are not any closer to the goal that was set out in this Final Document.
A well-informed public is of great importance for the promotion of the process of disarmament. Disarmament Week was instituted to respond to the legitimate concern for involving the people of our countries in the disarmament efforts.
(Mr. Ferm, Sweden!
At a time when public opinion is showing increasing concern ever the dangers to peace and the lack of progress in the field of disarmament it is important to ensure a flow of information to our citizens on developments with respect to disarmament, it is in this perspective that the observance of Disarmament Week ought to be seen. It should help to unite the international community in the search for ways to reduce the military arsenals. No effort should be spared in the cause of disarmament.
The members of the Group of Western European and Other States pledge their full support for the United Nations and its Charter, which provide the basis for the maintenance of international peace and security and disarmament, and they reaffirm their support for all efforts which are conducive to progress in this field.
The CHAIRMAN«. We have heard all the speakers scheduled to speak today and I thank them and, through them, their respective regional groups for their co-operation in the celebration of Disarmament Week.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
exemplaires D’archives hle copy
Fortieth session
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.36 16 October 1985
ENGLISH
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 16 October 1985, at 10 a.m.
President;
Mr. DE FINIES
(Spain)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [18],
Special commemorative meeting in observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, Room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
85-64214/A 4196V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 18 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION ON THE GRANTING OF INDEPENDENCE TO COLONIAL COUNTRIES AND PEOPLES
SPECIAL COMMEMORATIVE MEETING IN OBSERVANCE OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE DECLARATION ON THE GRANTING OF INDEPENDENCE TO COLONIAL COUNTRIES AND PEOPLES
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): It is most appropriate that in the course of this session in which we are commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations we should be meeting here today to observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. It is an undeniable fact that in the period marked by this dual commemoration truly dynamic changes have taken place in world affairs as a result of the evolving process of decolonization. Indeed, during the short span of 40 years the number of dependent people has diminished from some 800 million to fewer than 3 million, while the membership of this Organization has trebled.
The sweeping changes thus brought about in the geo-politics of the world have as their foundation the basic tenets embodied in the Charter of the United Nations: respect for the principles of equal rights and the self-determination of peoples and human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. In order to attain those common purposes the United Nations resolved to be, and has become, a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations.
The realization that accelerated international action had to be taken to meet the rising aspirations of the peoples of dependent Territories led to the adoption by the General Assembly in 1960 of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to the establishment in 1961 of the Special Committee entrusted with the task of following its implementation.
S4S/4
The work of file Special Committee' over the past 25 years is a matter of record. Suffice it to note that its central role as a focal point of the conscience of the international community in support of peoples under colonial rule greatly facilitated the emergence of scores of newly independent States.
Our foremost concern, as regards the tasks that confront us today,centres on developments in and around Namibia, which is stil under the illegal occupation of South Africa, and the rapidly deteriorating situation in South Africa itself, where over 24 million people continue to be denied the opportunity to realize their just aspirations and to live under a repressive régime committed to perpetuating the institutionalized crime of apartheid.
Our course of action has been clearly charted in numerous decisions and .resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. If we are to succeed in preventing chaos in the region, we must act now and act decisively to bring about the faithful implementation of those decisions and resolutions.
With regard to other colonial Territories in various parts of the world, I have no doubt that, with the necessary co-operation of the administering Powers, the Special Committee will continue to contribute to the attainment in respect of those peoples of the purposes of the Charter and of the Declaration, in all their aspects and in the shortest possible time.
I am equally confident that the organizations of the United Nations system will, within their respective spheres of competence, continue to strengthen their programmes of assistance to the peoples concerned. 
It is incumbent upon us to redouble our efforts to bring about the full and speediest possible implementation of the Declaration and the total elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism. 
On this solemn occasion I should like to announce that messages have been received from the following Member States: China, Democratic Kampuchea, the German Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Nicaragua, Tunisia, Turkey, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Yugoslavia. Yemen has transmitted a message from the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Some of those messages already appear in document A/40/757, and the remainder will be distributed as addenda to it. 
I call on the SECRETARY-GENERAL. 
The Secretary-General: It is indeed fitting that as the General Assembly marks the fortieth anniversary of its foundation it should also commemorate the TWENTY-FIFTH anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 
By adopting that Declaration, the General Assembly helped to accelerate the historic march towards greater freedom promised by the United Nations Charter 15 years earlier. Evoking the themes of the Charter, it recognized that there was a passionate yearning for freedom among all peoples who remained NON-SELF-GOVERNING, that those peoples had the right to self-determination, and that by virtue of that right they should freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development. 

Following the adoption of the Declaration, the General Assembly moved quickly to establish a Special Committee to oversee its implementation. Ever since then the Committee has been at the centre of the efforts of the General Assembly to speed up the progress of dependent peoples towards self-government and independence. It has evolved innovative procedures and practices, whereby the co-operation of the administering Powers was elicited. In particular, the sending of visiting missions and the observation or supervision of democratic processes, such as elections, plebiscites and referendums, by the United Nations, in co-operation with the administering Powers, greatly enhanced the capacity of the Organization to promote and protect the interests of the peoples concerned. 
In effect, the Declaration gave a new impetus to the essential catalytic role of the United Nations in the process of decolonization. In the quarter of a century since 1960 some 59 former colonial Territories, inhabited by more than 80 million people, have attained independence and joined the United Nations as sovereign Members, making this Organization an almost universal one. Widespread recognition of the United Nations achievements in this field could be heard in the declarations and statements made in the course of the general debate during the past few weeks. 
Regrettably, notwithstanding the singular success of the United Nations in the decolonization process, a peaceful settlement in Namibia continues to elude us, for reasons which the Security Council has described as irrelevant and extraneous. The special responsibility of the United Nations for Namibia imposes On all of us an obligation to redouble our efforts to ensure a peaceful settlement of the Namibian situation. 
I should like to take this opportunity once again to urge that the Government of South Africa, in particular, and all others in a position to help make a
renewed and determined effort to expedite the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), so that the people of Namibia can exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence without further delay. 
While Namibia is of deep concern to the United Nations, there remain other Non-Self-Governing Territories to which the Declaration applies. Certain of those Territories are small in size, limited in resources or remotely located. There is wide agreement, however, that those difficulties should not be allowed to retard their political and economic advancement. On the contrary, special attention should be paid to assisting them in overcoming their problems so that their inhabitants can exercise the same inalienable rights as peoples elsewhere. 
In the case of some Territories, the process of decolonization poses complex and controversial problems, and in such circumstances it is essential to bear in mind that without some degree of flexibility on the part of all concerned viable solutions may remain elusive and hard to attain. 
The emergence of a large number of newly independent countries has brought, of course, new responsibilities for the peoples concerned and for their leaders. In particular it has posed new challenges for the international community. Among the most striking illustrations of those challenges to the current economic crisis facing Africa. While many of the countries directly affected suffer from a lack of a basic economic and social infrastructure, their people aspire to a better economic future as a legitimate concomitant of their political independence. In an interdependent world, the entire international community must do everything possible to assist them in their efforts to achieve stable and sustained economic and social progress. That is an objective to which the United Nations system is fully committed. I am confident that, with properly co-ordinated efforts at the national and international levels, we can help the Governments

concerned to fulfil the promise of independence by ensuring a better and more
  		  secure future for their newly independent peoples. 
We have arrived at a stage which was very difficult to envisage clearly at the beginning of this Organization. Our membership is now practically universal, thanks to the fact that scores of newly independent countries have rallied to the Charter, the beacon which guides our work. The Organization has benefited greatly from the principle of universality and from it flows much of the authority for collective action in a number of fields. Now that we have such an instrument it is the responsibility of each one of us to make it work effectively, to gear our efforts towards the achievement of goals that are in line with the Charter and the obligations that flow from it. Only thus will our Organization maintain a central relevance to international life. Only thus will the achievements of our first 40 years, including the noble process of decolonization, endure and blossom fully in a world of peace, justice and human advancement. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on Mr. Abdul Koroma of Sierra Leone, Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 
Mr. KOROMA (Sierra Leone), Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Special Committee of 24): Forty years ago the drafters of the Charter of this Organization, imbued with belief in the equality of human beings and with the conviction that the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories have an inalienable right to self-determination, that colonialism in whatever form represented a denial of fundamental human rights and a manifestation of injustice, proclaimed that one of the purposes of the United Nations is
"To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights, and self-determination of peoples," and prescribed a specific role to be played by this Organization to enable the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise their right to self-determination and ultimately to put an end to colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.
Concomitant with the basic principles enshrined in the Charter and in response to the yearning aspirations of dependent peoples for political freedom and economic advancement, the General Assembly in 1960 adopted the now famous Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. This Declaration simultaneously signified a reaffirmation by the community of nations of faith in the dignity and worth of the human person, while giving hope and faith to millions of people throughout the world who were still living under colonial rule.
Therefore, as we review the pace of decolonization over the past twenty-five years, we can justifiably take pride in the fact that, as a result of the continuing process of decolonization, this Organiztion is today far more representative, far closer to the goal of universality and a stronger body than at its creation four decades ago. Indeed, as its membership has increased, the role
of the United Nations in support of dependent peoples has been exemplary and often crucial, and dependent peoples have continued to invest their hopes and trust in this Organization. This role reflects the commitment of the United Nations which the Declaration symbolizes.
The results of tireless and unremitting efforts during the past twenty-five years are to be seen in the fact that over 150 million people of some 50 former colonial Territories have emerged from dependent status during that period, and the majority of those new nations have since joined the membership of the United Nations. The Special Committee, to which the General Assembly assigned the task of examining the application of the Declaration and making suggestions and recommendations in that regard, has played an inportant role in that process.
During the second decade after the adoption of the Declaration, and thanks to the efforts of the Special Committee, .we witnessed a quickening of the pace of the process of decolonization, and some 25 Territories emerged as free and independent States. These positive developments clearly demonstrated the fact that neither repression nor violence could arrest the historically irreversible tide of freedom and that colonial and alien domination of peoples was doomed to irrevocable failure. It is ultimately on the basis of the freely expressed wishes of its inhabitants that the destiny of a colonial territory will be decided.
The positive results achieved in the process of decolonization elsewhere during the past 25 years remain overshadowed by the grave situation still prevailing in Namibia. Despite efforts on the part of the international community, as institutionalized by the United Nations, the people of the Territory have still not achieved their basic rights and fundamental freedoms. At this stage of the Namibian conflict, the international community must resort to every available means to ensure that the Namibian people exercise their legitimate right to
self-determination and independence. Furthermore, it must continue to give its unequivocal moral, political and material support to the Namibian people, under the leadership of their national liberation movement, the South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO).
As we take stock of our accomplishments over the past twenty-five years, we are keenly aware of the fact that some 3 million people still remain under colonial rule, over one-third of whom live in Namibia, under a very reprehensible form of repression. Only when the true aspirations of all dependent peoples are fulfilled and colonialism has been eradicated from the face of the earth, can the United Nations afford to feel a full measure of satisfaction. To say this is not to underestimate the considerable achievements of our Organization. Bather, it is to recognize and stress the important unfinished business before the world community.
As we move closer to the day when the last vestiges of colonialism will be eradicated from the face of the earth, it is necessary, now more than ever, to ensure that the genuine interests of the inhabitants of those remaining Territories continue to be of paramount concern. We must do our utmost to bring about the free and unrestricted conditions which would enable the peoples concerned to express their true aspirations and, at the same time, ensure that the national unity and the territorial integrity of those Territories are fully respected and safeguarded.
On behalf of the members of the Special Committee, I wish to reiterate to the Assembly the Committee's resolute commitment and determination in continuing to dddo its utmost in the search for the most suitable ways and means for the full and speedy inpiementation of the Declaration.
Before concluding, I wish, in all solemnity, to pay a special tribute to the thousands of known and unknown heroes who have sacrificed their lives in the cause of freedom, justice and independence. Most certainly, on this occasion our
thoughts turn to many a great African leader of liberation, such as
Eduardo Mondlane and Amilcar Cabral. Our tribute also goes to those in southern Africa who have been subjected to persecution for the cause of freedom, and for the principles to the realization of which we all aspire.
On this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations and on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, let us pledge anew our determination to assist effectively all colonial peoples in the attainment of their right to self-determination and independence in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now call on His Excellency, Major-General Joseph Garba of Nigeria, Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, who will be speaking on behalf of the Group of African Countries.
Mr. GARBA (Nigeria), Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid: On behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid and in my capacity as Chairman of the African Group for the month of October, I should like to convey our deep appreciation for the invitation extended to our Committee to participate in this important meeting being held to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the historic resolution 1514 (XV) entitled "The Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples".
This Declaration is rightly considered a landmark in the history of the United Nations, for through it tremendous progress has been made in the difficult and painful task of decolonizaiton. Such progress has resulted in the attainment of national independence by a large number of States all of whom have since taken their rightful place in the international community of nations. The increase in the membership of our Organization has reinforced the principle of universality from which it derives its strength.
RH/7
Despite this laudable achievement, however, a sizeable number of territories are under colonial subjugation, and the peoples of those Territories are being denied the opportunity to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination. It is highly regrettable that the efforts of the United Nations to ensure that all peoples are given the opportunity to exercise the inalienable right to self-determination are being frustrated. South Africa and Namibia have a special status among those States.
The Special Committee against Apartheid and the African Group are particularly disturbed by the situation in southern Africa, where the indigenous black population*of South Africa and Namibia, which constitutes the overwhelming majority, continues to be subjected to the degrading and harrowing experience of apartheid domination. The perpetrator of this dual act of criminality is the racist minority regime in Pretoria, aided and abetted by its Western allies. The brutality and ruthlessness of that regime is well known to this Assembly, and I would not want to dwell on this.
The events recently unfolding in South Africa have given us cause for hope and concern, we are more hopeful than ever because we see the foundation of the apartheid system crumbling, which gives a clear indication that the years, if not indeed the days, of apartheid are numbered. At the same time we are gravely concerned that the regime has redoubled its brutality and ruthlessness, and its imposition of the so-called state of emergency last summer has contributed to this. The continuing wave of massacres of defenceless black men and women, and even children, is gathering new force. It is acknowledged even in the regime's official account that about 800 black people have been killed by its police and military machinery in the past 12 months. Thousands are languishing in detention without trial and hundreds are being tortured daily. Their only crime is that they
seek to exercise their right to self-determination, which the United Nations declared to be inalienable 25 years ago when it adopted the Declaration whose anniversary we are celebrating today.
The situation is not much different from the pathetic one prevalent in Namibia, a Territory for which South Africa's Mandate was terminated 19 years ago, but over which South Africa has continued to exercise authority. South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia, in violation of relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, is a serious challenge to the United Nations. As the fortieth anniversary is commemorated, serious thought should be given to this unprecedented challenge to the authority of our Organization. Namibia remains a classic colonial problem, and should be seen as such in the efforts to resolve it. The attempts to portray it in contexts different from that must be repudiated.
The racist regime has defied the international community successfully and with impunity, and one cannot help wondering why that has been possible. The obvious answer is that it is protected by the Western allies. The regime has been continuously shielded by those allies, particularly those that are permanent members of the Security Council. The Council's attempts to take adequate measures against the regime have been frustrated on countless occasions through the use of the veto by those members. With this immunity accorded it, the regime has not stopped at dominating and subjugating the blacks in South Africa and Namibia but has in fact gone a step further by launching unprovoked armed attacks against independent neighbouring States. Such acts of aggression have twice in the past four weeks been the subject of Security Council meetings.
In the face of this arrogant intransigence, what must the international community do? The General Assembly has made numerous calls for the imposition of
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter, but the Security Council has not been able to act because of the positions of the two ardent supporters of the racist regime. It is a matter for deep regret that those same countries, which often proclaim the superiority of their values of freedom and democracy and which have arrogated to themselves the apostleship of democratic choice, should become the celebrated defenders of such a pariah régime as that in Pretoria because of narrow economic expediency and short-sighted strategic considerations.
It is my fervent hope that those States will reconsider their positions and join the majority of Member states in order to facilitate action by the Security Council to expedite the decolonization of Namibia and the eradication of apartheid. No occasion seems more suitable than this session, which marks not only the fortieth anniversary of our Organization but also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.
Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana), Acting President of the United Nations Council for Namibia: I wish to express the appreciation of the United Nations Council for Namibia for the invitation extended to us to attend this special commemorative plenary meeting in observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
In observing this twenty-fifth anniversary the General Assembly is celebrating what is one of the more successful aspects of the work of this Organization. This Declaration is not only the freedom charter of peoples under colonial domination: it has also laid the groundwork for the development of law in some of the most vital areas of the relations between States and peoples.
The adoption by this Assembly in 1960 of the Declaration on decolonization was a historic step in the development of international law with regard to self-determination. Whereas in the Charter the self-determination of peoples is stated as a principle, the Declaration of 1960 proclaims that self-determination is a right which all peoples possess.
The Declaration itself did not confer the right of self-determination. That right, like other rights, predates that Declaration; it predates even the creation of this Organization.
The evolution in law which has taken place following the adoption of the Declaration in 1960 has been clear and unambiguous. Since decolonization is more than a political phenomenon, in analysing that evolution it is both relevant and necessary to recall related decisions of this Assembly, such as the adoption of the Declaration on Permanent Sovereignty over Natural Resources, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and, of course, the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.
Together these instruments, including the Declaration of 1960, reflect a generalized awareness by the international community that colonialism constitutes a denial of human rights and of fundamental political freedoms. They reflect that awareness in a number of rules, which provide, among other things, that the fate of a territory should be determined by the people who live in that territory, that the resources of a territory are owned and should be controlled by the people of that territory and consequently that the exercise of such control is an essential aspect of the exercise of political sovereignty, and that the pursuit of racial policies to perpetuate political domination is a violation of international law. Our
BH/Í
(Mr. Sinclair, Acting President, United Nations Council for Namibia)
Secretary-General was therefore correct when he stated, in declaring open the 1985 meetings of the Special Committees
"The United Nations is entitled to feel a measure of pride for creating an international consciousness of the 1 iterative of decolonization and for mobilizing moral and political support to dependent peoples in their efforts to realize their right to self-determisiation and independence."
BCT/gt
In so doing, the United Nations system and the Committee on decolonization, as both its conscience and its activator in this regard, have rendered service of inestimable value.
Indeed, no one can argue against the contention that in contemporary international law the pursuit of colonial policies is illegal and that peoples subjected to colonial domination have the right to struggle to free themselves therefrom.
Of course, we cannot forget that some of the colonial Powers, in 1960, withheld their support from resolution 1514 (XV). These attitudes were not surprising at the time; in fact, they have not even yet entirely disappeared. But it is certainly an indication of the manner in which historical attitudes have evolved over the years that these very Powers are now expressing support, however measured, for the objectives of the Declaration.
Yet, as we record this anniversary, let us use this opportunity to rededicate our energies to pursuing aggressively that j^urt of our task whiA is still incomplete - and here our attention must focus first of all on Namibia.
The bases for such action are recognized and unassailable. The General Assembly, the Securty Council and the International Court of Justice, each acting independently of the other two, have proclaimed that South Africa's continued presence in the Territory is illegal and that South Africa is therefore under obligation to withdraw so that the people of Namibia can accede to independence. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) provides the framework for such withdrawal and accession. But, above all these, there is the consideration that the people of Namibia have a fundamental, inalienable right to self-determination. That right was proclaimed in the Declaration on decolonization in 1960. The Council for
Namibia hopes that this commemorative meeting will serve as an additional pressure on South Africa to co-operate in implementing Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and that it will bring home to those States which, by their actions, still give support to South Africa in its continuing occupation of the Territory the urgency of the need for them to respect the principles of international law and of justice where Namibia is concerned.
This need for respect for the principles of justice is most dramatically seen in the case of South Africa, where the oppressed people are daily, with growing courage, defying the apartheid regime in their struggle even for the enjoyment of their right to be treated as human beings. But we are hopeful for the development of that situation, for the process by which people through the ages have freed themselves from alien domination is inexorably at work in South Africa, and the people of that country will be free.
The decolonization agenda also includes a number of Territories with peculiar characteristics of size, geographic location and population which will require innovative approaches by the Special Committee and by the administering Powers concerned. There is a consensus, however, that these factors should not constitute an obstacle to the full implementation of the Declaration in respect of these Territories, and we look forward to the early removal of their names from the agenda of the Committee.
The Council for Namibia hopes that this observance will serve to stimulate a total and active involvement in support of the early and complete eradication of decolonialism from the face of the earth and the establishment of a régime of freedom and justice - not for some but for all peoples.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next speaker is Mr. Dia-Allah El-Fattal of the Syrian Arab Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): I have the honour of speaking today on behalf of the Group of Asian States before the General Assembly, which is commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. This anniversary coincides with the commemoration by the United Nations of the fortieth anniversary of its founding.
The present commemoration is an expression of the solidarity of the States Members of the Organization and their commitment to accelerating the achievement by all countries still subjected to foreign colonialism of their national independence and freedom, without any preconditions. This is a commemoration in which States renew their commitment to the implementation of the objectives and principles of the Declaration, including the principle that all colonized countries must be liberated. These principles were included in the United Nations Charter. Subsequently, the well-known General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) enshrined the principles very clearly and gave new impetus to the process of decolonization, encouraging the struggle of colonized peoples for self-determination and independence.
One need only glance at the list of Members of the United Nations to see clearly that the struggle against colonialism, enshrined in the Declaration, has had a tremendous effect on international life. The Group of Asian States benefited greatly from that struggle, since many Territories from that region have become Members of the international Organization, this body which the peoples of the world regard as embodying the hopes for the attainment of freedom and independence by millions of persons living under foreign colonialist rule.
(Mr. El-Fattai, Syrian Arab Republic)
A mere glance at the list of Members of the United Nations also makes clear the increase in the number of Members. This increase shows that neither oppression nor violence nor killing can stop the historical tide of the freedom movement. It shows that colonial domination over peoples is doomed to failure. It shows too that the aspirations of colonized peoples to independence and freedom cannot be frustrated.
The fate of no colonized Territory can be decided without taking into account the freely expressed aspirations and wishes of the people of that Territory.
It is the will of these heroic peoples and their commitment to continued struggle that, in the final analysis, have enabled and will continue to enable those peoples to overcome the intransigence of colonialism.
But despite the positive, excellent developments we have witnessed, it must be noted - and this is truly sad and regrettable - that today the United Nations is still seeking the means to ensure the fulfilment of the aspirations of millions of persons in about 20 Territories that still do not enjoy self-government, countries that are still subjected to exploitation. More than 4 million persons from Palestine - this Arab country in Asia - continue to be deprived of their legitimate rights in their homeland.
CMg» El-Fattal, Syrian Arab Republic)
More than 20 million Africans in South Africa and Namibia are still being subjected to the worst forms of discrimination, repression and racist military occupation. In their own homelands they are deprived or the right to their own nationality and are subjected to repression and humiliation. The area as a whole continues to be one of the worst examples of traditional colonialism in its most extreme form.
The countries members of the Asian Group are convinced that this commemoration will give new impetus to the Special Committee of 24 which, under the leadership of its Chairman, Mr. Koroma, and with the assistance of its Secretary, Mr. Tanaka, and its officers, is working tirelessly to bring about complete implementation of the Declaration. We are also convinced that that Committee, with the support of the General Assembly, will continue with its excellent work until the last vestiges of colonialism are eradicated from our planet. We hope that that will be achieved in the shortest possible time.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish) s I now call upon His Excellency Mr. Guennadi Oudovenko of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. OUDOVENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): I am grateful to have this opportunity to speak at this commemorative meeting as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States. The twentieth century has been the era of the collapse of colonial empires and the emancipation of dependent countries and peoples from their age-old status of colonial slavery. Among the extremely important stages in the liberation struggle in our century were the great October socialist Revolution, the victory of the peace-loving peoples in the Second World War and, as a result of that great victory, the establishment of the United Nations. The United Nations Charter lists, as one of the Organization's most important tasks, that of saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
of respecting the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and of promoting the observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. Those historic events established conditions favourable to a powerful upsurge in the struggle of oppressed and dependent peoples for national liberation.
The adoption by the United Nations in 1950 of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, on the initiative of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, marked the beginning of a new stage in the process of the liberation of peoples who had been living in the chains of colonial slavery. The Declaration, which proclaimed
"the necessity of bringing to a speedy and unconditional end colonialism in all its forms and manifestations” (General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)) embodies such important principles as the right of all peoples to self-determination and to determine freely their economic, social and cultural development, and the inadmissibility of the subjection of peoples to alien subjugation, domination and exploitation. It also condemns any attempt to disrupt the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country, it states that immediate steps should be taken to grant full independence to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories, and it places upon all States the obligation to observe faithfully and strictly the provisions of the Declaration on the basis of equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of all States and respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples.
The Declaration was a powerful stimulus and lent moral and political support to the struggle of colonial peoples for freedom and independence. In the 25 years since its adoption, great successes have been achieved in implementing its goals. There has been a final collapse of the colonial empires, and from their ruins have arisen dozens of new States. Many peoples of Africa, Asia, America and Oceania have
embarked on the path of independent development and social renewal. During their years of independence they have achieved many successes in solving complicated tasks of State construction and in achieving economic independence.
These new States were welcomed into the international community as full partners on an equal basis. Their international authority is growing, as is their positive contribution to solving world problems. This is a great achievement by the peoples of the world and an important step along the road towards the total elimination of colonialism, which was a scandalous stage in the history of mankind.
We must note, however, that despite the significant successes of national liberation movements throughout the world, colonialism has not been completely eradicated. It continues to poison the international atmosphere and is a dangerous source of tension and conflict. The stubborn resistance of the colonial Powers to full implementation of the Declaration on decolonization has its roots in the very nature of imperialism and in that system's political, economic and military-strategic interests. The existence of colonialism creates conditions highly favourable to the huge profits monopolist capital and transnational corporations are able to gain by stealing the natural resources of peoples and by exploiting the populations of the colonial territories. The unwillingness of the aggressive forces of imperialism to acknowledge wholeheartedly that all States have a right to sovereignty and genuine independence, to free self-determination and development, and the attempts of those forces to impose their will upon peoples and continue their economic exploitation represent today one of the main threats to the peoples of the world and create a threat to international peace and security.
That policy is the main reason why colonialism persists and why the sacred right to self-determination and independence is still only a dream for the peoples of some 20 countries and territories. An extremely important problem when dealing with the matter of the final eradication of colonialism is the liberation of
southern Africa and, primarily, ensuring genuine independence for Namibia. By flouting numerous United Nations decisions, the racist South Africa régime is continuing its occupation of Namibia, exploiting that Territory's natural and human resources and attempting to destroy its national liberation movement under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), which has been recognized by the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, as well as by the countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement, as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people. For many years the Pretoria régime, with the assistance of the United States of America and some other Western countries, has been impeding the implementation of United Nations decisions on granting independence to Nambia. The Socialist countries advocate the immediate exercise by the people of Namibia of their inalienable right to self-determination and independence, on the basis that the unity and territorial integrity of the country, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands, must be maintained. We advocate the immediate and complete withdrawal of the occupation forces and of the colonial administration of South Africa from Namibia, and we advocate the transfer of full power to the people of Namibia as represented by SWAPO. Our countries share the conclusions set forth in General Assembly resolution 39/50 of 12 December 1984, which strongly reiterated that the continuing illegal and colonial occupation of Namibia by South Africa, in defiance of repeated General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, constitutes an act of aggression against the Namibian people and a challenge to the authority of the United Nations, which has direct responsibility for Namibia until independence.
The socialist countries condemn the attempts of the Pretoria authorities to direct the solution of that colonial problem along neo-colonialist lines, through a so-called internal settlement and through the creation of a puppet régime in Namibia. The socialist countries support Security Council resolution 566 (1985) and other United Nations decisions that reject linkage between independence for Namibia and extraneous issues.
The basis for a political solution to the question of Namibia is Security Council resolution 435 (1978), the immediate implementation of which must be undertaken without any changes, any reservations or any prior conditions whatsoever. The entire process of a Namibian settlement should be under the constant and effective cmtrol of the Security Council.
In celebrating today the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, we cannot be silent as regards the question of the inhumane policy of apartheid, which has been extended by the racist regime of South Africa to Namibia. We vigorously condemn that system as a crime against mankind and as a violation of international peace and security. The policy and the practice of apartheid are incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations.
Encountering the unrestrained growth of resistance by the native population of South Africa to the apartheid regime and actually losing control over the situation in the country, the ruling circles of South Africa are attempting to strengthen their position with the help of military adventures. There are more frequent and more intensive acts of aggression by Pretoria against independent African States, whose purpose is simply to perpetuate colonialism in Namibia, to maintain domination in the region cn a neo-colonialist basis and to stifle the aspirations of the African peoples to freedom, independence and social progress.
The will of the African peoples to freedom is, however, insuperable. To attempt to stop their forward movement on the road of progress is a hopeless, doomed cause. We unfailingly stand at the side of the peoples of Africa, who are defending their right independently to determine their own social, economic and political development. We stand in solidarity with the front-line States, who are opposing the neo-colonialist manoeuvres of the imperialists and racists and we decisively support the struggle of the national liberation movements in southern Africa.
The socialist countries advocate an improvement in the entire political atmosphere on the African continent. We also advocate the assurance of reliable security for the young independent States of Africa. The policy of apartheid and the aggressive actions of the Pretoria regime should be halted in the most decisive way. That is the only way we can maintain peace and ensure free and independent development for the peoples in that region.
The United Nations Security Council should have an authoritative say in restoring legality and order to sfthern Africa. The United Nations should strive for the full observance by all States of the embargo established by the Security Council on the delivery of arms and military equipment to the racist régime of South Africa and the embargo against any co-operation with Pretoria in the production and development of nuclear weapons.
The socialist countries support the demand of the African countries and of the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as the appeal of the General Assembly to the Security Council, immediately to impose mandatory comprehensive sanctions against South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
Unswervingly observing all decisions and recommendations of the United Nations intended to isolate and boycott the Pretoria régime, our countries do not maintain any relations of a political, economic, military or other nature with them. We
condemn the policy of a number of Western countries of maintaining and developing co-operation with that régime. We condemn the policy of so-called constructive engagement with South Africa and we condemn the violation by that regime of decisions already adopted by the Security Council and the United Nations.
We cannot fail to condemn the position of those Western countries that verbally denounce apartheid and its crimes but in fact hinder the adoption of effective measures to cœb the racists in South Africa.	.
It is not only in southern Africa that the provisions of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples are not being fulfilled. There remains the unsolved question of the decolonization of a number of so-cal??" small colonial Territories. The point is not that these are Territory' that are small in size and population; in fact, the administering Authorities like to use those reasons to justify their refusal to grant these Territories the right to self-determination and independence. The strategic military position of those Territories and the militaristic plans of the most aggressive circles of imperialism are the real reasons behind the stubborn attempts made by the Administering Authorities to preserve their remaining colonial possessions.
Also of a serious concern is the policy of splitting up and annexing the strategic Trust Territory of the Pacific Islande - Micronesia. For many years now, the islands and the peoples of Micronesia have had inposed upon them a free association status that is neo-colonialist in nature has been imposed upon them. The militarization of Micronesia, and its transformation into a military nuclear base for the United States, runs counter to the aspirations of the States of the area to establish a nuclear-free zone in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean.
In accordance with the United Nations Charter, any change in the status of a strategic Trust Territory - and Micronesia is such a Territory - can be carried out
tHg» Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR) only by decision of the Security Council. The united Nations should continue to bear the responsibility for that Territory until its people have the opportunity to implement their legitimate right to full self-determination and independence without any hindrance.
As we have pointed out, the military activities of the colonial Powers in Territories under their administration or in Trust Territories are of a particularly dangerous nature. Hence the United Nations must, in keeping with decisions already taken, demand decisively that the colonial Powers end all military activities that are incompatible with or run counter to the Charter of the United Nations and the Déclaration on decolonization, including the immediate elimination of all military bases on colonial and dependent Territories.
Our States support the demands of the developing countries that the elimination of colonialism be extended to the economic sphere, as well as the demand that economic relations be restructured on a just and democratic basis and the demand for the establishment of a new international economic order. Those just demands are being blocked by the imperialist Powers, which have decided on a policy of undermining equitable economic co-operation and of using a policy of diktat in international economic relations. That is having a very harmful influence on the development of the non-aligned States and damages all countries in the world.
It is our deep conviction that the year of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples should be celebrated by decisive actions to eliminate colonialism once and for all and to liquidate racism and apartheid.
The socialist countries fully acknowledge the inalienable right of peoples under the oppression of colonialism to struggle by all means available at their disposal, including armed struggle, against those who suppress their legitimate
(Mg. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR) aspirations to liberty, self-determination and independence. In giving then noral, political, economic and other assistance, we wish then further successes in their just struggle against colonialism, racism and apartheid and for gaining and strengthening political and economic independence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish) : I now call on Mr. Alfredo Canales of Chile, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin
American States.
Mr. CANALES (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): The dynamics of history have shown that because of his origins as a social creature man instinctively seeks independence for his community and seeks to earn a livelihood for himself and for the group of which he is a part. That characteristic of human nature has prompted nations, throughout history, to throw off the colonial yoke laid upon them by other peoples and to seek their own identity.
On the long road to the achievement of those goals - goals born with the birth of mankind - peoples had to appeal to the courage and wisdom of their most enlightened sons. That stage was marked by the valour of warriors.
We, the countries of Latin America, are no exception to that rule of history; more than 160 years ago we fought with sacrifice, vigour and dedication to attain our identity. Many of the greatest Latin Americans of the time laid down their lives for this noble cause, and today we proudly venerate and pay a tribute to their courage.
But more often than not, this heroic course was of necessity sown with the seeds of confrontation. Thus, the idea of an international community was gradually developed, along with an awareness that efforts had to be made to ensure that the just aims of peoples did not have to be achieved through war.
When 40 years ago the world emerged from an unprecedented conflict, the survivors pledged to eradicate the scourge of war and to stand together in their determination to build a better world. But it was necessary to understand that there would be no better world and no end to bloodshed unless a civilized, peaceful way were sought for colonial peoples to achieve their independence without recourse to armed struggle. That led to international recognition of the principle of the right to self-determination, and in that framework lie the efforts of the United Nations to make it possible for nations that were once colonies to attain, through the exercise of the right to self-determination, their desired freedom.
Resolution 1514 (XV) is the corner-stone of that peaceful process, and its implementation is without question the finest example of the achievements of the United Nations during its 40 years of existence. Dozens of peoples have attained their identity through the machinery of that resolution, and they are among us today as countries which are proud of the independence they achieved thanks to the Declaration.	*
Resolution 1514 (XV) has helped peoples exercise their right to self-determination in the fullest possible way; in cases where some of them, as nations, have freely and in a sovereign manner expressed their wish not to accede to independence and to exist in a status chosen by the majority, that wish has been respected and recognized. Today we are proud to point to the goals attained through resolution 1514 (XV), in the implementation of which the Special Committee of 24 has played a primary role.
But unfortunately there is work yet to be done. We regret to note that there are peoples denied the opportunity to attain their own identity. The most serious case is that of Namibia, where, despite international resolutions adopted by a wide variety of bodies, an archaic colonial system continues to be imposed upon the people; this is a throw-back to a past which should have disappeared long ago. On behalf of Latin America and the Caribbean, I express our solidarity with those peoples and our wish that they may soon exercise their right to self-determination, freely and in a sovereign manner.
As the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations coincides with the twenty-fifth of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV), I wish on behalf of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean to reiterate our unequivocal condemnation of all forms of colonialism, our sympathy with peoples struggling for self-determination, and our determined support for the complete implementation of resolution 1514 (XV).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next speaker is Mr. Robert McDonagh of Ireland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. McDONAGH (Ireland): It is an honour for me, as current Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other States, to speak at this celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of a historic document which made a significant contribution to the self-government and independence of peoples and Territories under colonial rule.
The essence of the right of peoples to self-determination was, of course, expressed in Article 1 of our Charter, which specifically includes as one of the purposes of the United Nations:
"To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace".
The responsibilities and obligations concerning the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories, which the administering Powers accepted by joining the United Nations, are described as a sacred trust and are outlined in Chapters XI and XII of the Charter.
(Mr. McDonagh, Ireland)
It would seem, therefore, that our founding fathers clearly believed that only equal rights and self-determination for all peoples could help guarantee peace and prosperity for future generations. The Charter leaves no room for doubt that peace and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are inextricably linked. To that extent it could be said that the Charter of the United Nations ushered in the era of decolonization, although it was not until the adoption of the historic resolution 1514 (XV) and, the following day, resolution 1541 (XV), adopted the following day, that specific international documents were adopted in this regard.
In a number of instances, of course, the administering Power had already begun to encourage, or even brought to its conclusion, the process leading to the free exercise of self-determination and eventual independence. Nevertheless, for many years peoples in colonial countries often looked to the United Nations as the guarantor of their national right to freedom and self-determination.
To colonial peoples everywhere, therefore, the adoption of the Declaration without a single negative vote constituted a landmark in the application of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in our Charter, and conveyed the promise of a world order based on those principles.
Today, largely as a result of the ongoing process of decolonization, the United Nations is very much closer to its goal of universality. The Group of Western European and other States welcomes the progress that has been achieved in this field since the adoption of the United Nations Charter and the Declaration, and notes with satisfaction the number of Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories that have attained independence and joined our Organization in the past 25 years.
However, on this twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration we must not limit ourselves simply to reviewing the past and congratulating ourselves on our achievements. The question of Namibia is one of our major
(Mg. McDonagh, Ireland)
preoccupations. It is particularly so in view o£ the special responsibility of the United Nations for that international Territory and its people. There should be no doubt that the United Nations will live up to that responsibility and that the international community will not rest until the Namibian people have freely . exercised those rights proclaimed in the Declaration we are celebrating today.
In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Western European and other States for the month of October, I should like to take the opportunity afforded by this solemn occasion to emphasize the deep commitment of the members of the Group to promoting the ideals embodied in the Charter and reiterated in the Declaration and to seeking the implementation of the principle of equal rights and self-determination among all peoples.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.49 28 October 1985
ENGLISH
Fortieth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-NINTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 24 October 1985, at 3 p.a.
President»	Mr. DE PINIES	(Spain)
-	CoeBeaoration of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations (39) (continued)
-	International Year of Peace: draft resolution (27)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly,
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, Room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
8S-64232/A 4633V (E)
The Meeting warn called to order at 3. 35 p. m. 
AGENDA ITEM 39 (continued)
CtMffiMOBATION OF THE FORTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Representatives are aware that we are celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the implementation of the Charter of the United Nations. I should like all present to listen with care to what Is to be said at this solemn meeting by the Secretary-General, who will be followed by your humble servant. Therefore, in celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations, I call on the Secretary-General, whose constant presence in this Assembly enlightens it and urges all of us to persevere in our efforts to achieve international peace and security. 
The secretary-general (interpretation from Spanish): This is a solemn moment. Leaders of nations are assembled here, and behind them all is the single, collective constituency of the human race. Every such gathering at a historic point involves a report to that constituency - to its vast, silent majority which wants peace with justice and dignity, with freedom from fear and the hope of a better tomorrow. 
The observance of this anniversary has meaning not so much as a symbol but as an opportunity. In its own way, the occasion has set the stage to make a fresh beginning and try to overcome current stalemates on major issues. The commemoration assumed the importance that it did because international relations had reached a critical stage. The time had come to reflect on where a retreat from multilateralism would lead the world. 
The Assembly has had a comprehensive and well — focused general debate. Delegations from all regions have made balanced assessments of both the achievements and the failures of the United Nations. The practical and pressing
question of bow to make the United Nations mote effective has been the running theme of the debate. Answers may differ but there is a common recognition of the value of the United Nations as the most authentic expression of the international community in all its diversity. No single national viewpoint can dominate or exclude others in this forum. The challenge is to hammer out agreements from the differences and to harmonize the actions of nations in the attainment of their common ends. 	
The 40 years of its activities have made the United Nations a unique instrument in the hands of Governments for answering this challenge, with the admission of 108 States in addition to the 51 original signatories, the Organization has vastly greater legitimacy and is far more representative today than it was when its Charter case into force. At the same time it has kept pace with the phenomenal growth of human concerns brought about by progress in science and technology, communications and social awareness. Its agenda now embraces all subjects which affect international peace and human advancement. 
It is paradoxical, therefore, that with greater legitimacy there should be less power and cohesion. The paradox is ironic but it is not inherent. If the sense of solidarity among the membership is strong enough, the instrument can be used with the effectiveness that its nature demands. The world's statesmanship is on test. 
It seems that greater coherence could be achieved and the sense of solidarity strengthened if there were less confrontational postures and also if Member States faced with an issue, paid regard both to the principles and the practical considerations involved. 

Multilateralism as embodied in the united Nations is sustained by an attachment to common ends, and this attachment is born of adherence to principles. It would be a self-stultifying course for the united Nations to sanction any transaction or undertaking which ignores or bypasses the principles of the Charter. But devotion to principles needs to express itself in concrete, workable proposals and not in rhetoric only. If the note of authority in the pronouncements of the United Nations is weakened, if either principles or pragmatic considerations are disregarded, there is a price to pay in terms of mobilizing the support of Governments and the enthusiasm of peoples throughout the globe. 
Humanity cannot afford to pay that price. We are living in a world seething with tensions and racked by violence, unresolved disputes continue to fester. The scourge of terrorism is yet unchecked. Drug abuse has spread like the plague. Crime has been internationalized. Sophisticated arms are within easy access. The only rational response to such a situation is for Governments to co-operate in enforcing a code of behaviour which will restore civility to international life. 
As we are gathered here at this commemorative session, there are popular expectations of a relaxation of tensions, global or regional. International opinion is not as cynical as we sometimes presume but it is harshly intolerant of professions not followed by practice and of hopes that are belied. The affirmations of commitment to the Charter made during this session - and in the designation of 1986 as the Year of Peace - need to be backed up by responsible negotiations towards resolving major disputes and in the key areas of arresting the arms race, overcoming the crisis in development and promoting human rights. If they are not, public opinion will regard the pronouncements made here as mere posturing and exercise of hypocrisy. Acting together, Governments can avert that kind of disillusionment. 

At this critical moment in history, it is important to recall that the very first resolution adopted by the united Nations dealt with the elimination of atomic weapons and the use of atomic power for peaceful purposes. Today, 40 years later, this goal seems remote; the terminal danger posed by the nuclear arms race has grown rather than abated. Meanwhile, the conventional arms race has proceeded apace and exacted a toll in scores of wars and a vast number of dead. 
A world which spends nearly $1 trillion a year for military purposes, and cannot spare a fraction of that for the elimination of poverty, is a world with a grossly distorted sense of priorities. It is also an insecure world, with its insecurity aggravated and made chronic by the accumulation of weapons, nuclear or conventional. Given a consciousness of this fact, there is no reason to regard the arms race as irreversible. The conclusion of some specific agreements on arms limitation over the years shows that compromises are possible and a sense of common interest can prevail over the illusion of unilateral advantages. 
It is this sense of common interest that, I am sure, will inspire bilateral negotiations between the two most powerful states. I welcome the forthcoming meeting between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States. They bear a responsibility not only to their own peoples but also to all humanity and to future generations. There is hope all over the world that their meeting will lead to substantive progress in relieving the dread of nuclear catastrophe. Thie could turn the tide of history. 
The crisis in development, especially as reflected in the external debt situation of developing countries, is an alarming symptom of the disequilibrium in the global economy. It calls for imaginative solutions. The quest for these needs to be imbued with a greater sense of partnership between developed and developing countries. The issues involved, centring on trade and finance, have
such profound political and 
social implications that they need to be dealt with effectively as part of a wider political process. Failure to initiate it can lead to widespread economic decline and social chaos. The industrial countries will not remain untouched as the global economy can now hardly be said to operate in a manner conducive to their own growth and prosperity. 
These problems are not new. Much debate and analysis has already taken place. The next step would be for the political leadership of Member states to provide a vital impulse to working out their solutions. The effort would need to be appropriately carried forward, using to the fullest the mechanisms of this Organisation. 
One of the distinctive features of the ethos created by the United Nations is the international concern with promotion of human rights. While there is need to end violations in a number of societies, there is the unique and universally condemned situation of apartheid, where racial discrimination is organized by the State itself. The situation clearly shows that when human rights are suppressed, resistance erupts, and when resistance is net by violence, the political and economic cost can become unbearable. I believe that pressure exerted by the world community can help resolve this situation. Thia would set a persuasive example of how seriously we take one of the purposes of the United Nations stated in the very first Article of the Charter. 
This is not the moment for me to refer to the various focal points of tension in the world. The political climate today may be bleak but it is capable of being transformed. One act of joint statesmanship, especially by the major Powers, one example of the prevailing of the sense of common interest, whether in a strategic region or on the global level, can have that transforming effect. 

Finally, I would submit that the Charter of the United Nations, whose coning into force we are commemorating today, is a treaty unlike any other. It embodies a pledge given by 159 States not only to one another but to all the peoples of the world. The terms of the pledge were not suggested merely by idéalisa. Chastened by a moat destructive war, the framers of the Charter had a concentrated understanding of the roots of conflict and of the necessities of peace. I believe that if the primary principles of the Charter retain their relevance, as they do, it is because they are not incompatible with hard-headed but far-sighted realism. If we recapture the insights which permeate the Charter, the capacity of the United Nations will be enhanced and its authority renewed. 
The fear of nuclear disaster, the agonies of the victims of conflict, the despair of the poor, the suffering of the persecuted and the uprooted, the rampancy of violence, the derangements which Imperil order and the juxtapositions of peril and promise throughout the human situation - none of these can be removed or overcome by the efforts of any one Government alone. All underline the need to strengthen that structure of international co-operation which is the United Nations. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As President of the General Assembly, I thank the Secretary-General for the important statement he has just made. I believe that the General Assembly will take due note of his very timely comments concerning this commemorative session. 
AN/«d
M0/W. 49 U
Also as President, I should like to sake a statement speaking purely personally and for the contents of which I shall be solely and exclusively responsible. 
Now that we are concluding this solemn commemorative session of the fortieth anniversary of the united Nations, I do not think it useless to offer the General Assembly a brief analysis of what, from this rostrum, I have felt to have been most relevant among the many interesting statements we have heard. I shall begin by recalling one fact which, though repeated often, is no less significant: the large number of dignitaries whose presence has contributed to focusing the attention of the world on what our Organisation represents as a way of overcoming divisions and confrontations in the international community. 
I have already personally conveyed my thanks to the majority of them, but I wish to express them again publicly to all for the very valuable contribution they have made to the commemoration of such an important anniversary. 
Practically no statement failed to condemn the arms race or to appeal, as a first step, to halt it and thus begin the path towards general and complete disarmament. Concern over the rish of nuclear confrontation was unanimous, and it is no surprise that the entire world should be awaiting the forthcoming meeting between the representatives of the two Powers that possess the largest number of nuclear weapons, trusting that the dialogue between the super-Powers will set the stage for a substantial reduction in armaments. 
If concern over armaments is not new, neither was the concern expressed these past few days over conflicts which, unfortunately, have been present on the international stage for many years. 
T shall refer to two of them. Perhaps they have been most often mentioned in the course of our deliberations. The policy of apartheid of the Government of South Africa has been justly and repeatedly condemned. At this solemn occasion the General Assembly has reiterated its disapproval of the persistence of a system of
(The President) government baaed on racial discrimination, which la repugnant to all mankind. The suffering of the majority of the South African population, in its struggle to obtain a system of coexistence based on equality and justice, is something to which the international community cannot remain indifferent.
I am convinced that all necessary pressure must continue to be exerted sc that once end for all we shall manage to eliminate such an odious system.
The other is, obviously, the situation in the Middle Bast, an area of vital importance whose inhabitants for many years have been unable to enjoy the benefits at juit and lasting peace. In this case, too, we have been given an opportunity to hear the views of statesmen from that region and others, who have made constructive proposals which we trust nay lead to that longed-for peace - a peace that must take into account the legitimate interests of all parties concerned and, in particular, offer a solution to the painful problem of the Palestinian people.
There is one subject which in a somewhat new form appears to have dominated both the general debate and the special commemorative session: external debt. We have heard many voices draw attention from the rostrum to the dangers to world stability inherent in a situation that is becoming increasingly hazardous owing to the enormous difficulties experienced by many countries in meeting their external financial commitments, and there are various solutions being proposed. I believe I have detected a convergence of views in the analysis of the question that some bold i. .d imaginative - and I would even say revolutionary - solution has to be found to such a disquieting situation.
It was only natural that speakers at these meetings should have summed up the successes and failures of our Organization in its 40 years of existence. There have been many analyses, but I would indicate three areas where the work of the United Nations can be considered as basically satisfactory. First of all, there is decolonization. That most of the representatives gathered here came from countries
(The President) which in 1945 ware sux¿wring under foreign domination is obvious proof of success in the long struggle for the liberation of peoples.
Coinciding with the special commemorative meetings, the General Assembly at the appropriate time devoted a meeting also to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, however, everything has not been done in this Important field of decolonisation. Suffice it to mention the case of Namibia, as has been done by so many speakers, for our satisfaction at the successes achieved not bring us to forget what remains to be done in this and other cases of decolonization that await a solution.
The second area where the activities of the United Nations can be considered largely positive 1* the protection of human rights. The Universal Declaration has inspired the action of many Governments, perhaps not as many as we would have desired, since the violations of human rights continue, unfortunately, in many regions of the world. But there can be no doubt that the principles are there, clearly and firmly established as a framework accepted by the international community within which States should regulate their conduct.
Finally - and this is the third of the areas in which I can sincerely consider that the activities of the united Nations system has been satisfactory - I come to the numerous activities of the Organization in the economic, technological, educational and developmental fields, in all their aspects which are being carried out by the specialized agencies of the Organization. Criticisms levelled at the Organization frequently focus on the acre glaring and immediate aspects of current political realities, overlooking and forgetting the continued and effective work carried out daily by the various organs. For many individuals all over the world, the United Nations it primarily synonymous with the struggle against hunger, with improving communications, with giving health assistance, and so many other fields in which multilateral co-operation offers benefits in a tangible and direct fashion.
W	V<0/W.<9
.	.	14-15
Quite correctly, many have repeated here that the united Nations has contributed to avoiding, the outbreak of a global conflict, and X am very gratified to stress this ayaelf. But thia should not sake us forget that the world has not enjoyed total peace during these 40 years; quite the contrary, since our Organization was founded, many armed conflicts have occurred that have caused Billions of victims. Suffice it to look at the realities of the world today and the armed conflicts that persist for us not to be complacent. And what of those two plagues threatening humanity, terrorisa and drug trafficking.
HW/T8C
Nations of all regions have suffered from both. I trust that the Organisation ill be able to devote increasing attention to the phenomenon of terrorism and illegal trafficking in drugs.
I should like to conclude with an appeal which is at the same time a challenge: let us endeavour to ensure that this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations produces a solution, or the first steps towards a solution, to sone of the gravest conflicts afflicting the world. But above all, let us achieve the political will to commit ourselves not only to solve existing conflicts, but to prevent new ones from arising.
We have the necessary instruments for this purpose. It would be sufficient to sake full use of the machinery available to us under the United Nations Charter, and if we were to use it we would have taken the first steps - steps which I consider to be of capital importance - towards the revitalization of our organization as a genuine motive force in the maintenance of international peace and security.
AGENDA ITEM 27
INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF PEACE: DRAFT RESOLUTION A/40/L.6/Rev.1
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now turn to item 27, entitled "International Year of Peace".
In this connection, the Assembly has before it draft resolution
A/40/L.6/Rev.1. This draft resolution is the result of the commendable initiative of the Government of Costa Rica, and has been sponsored by another 5i States. Annexed to the draft resolution is the text of the proclamation of the International Year of Peace which reads as follows;
"Whereas the General Assembly has decided unanimously to solemnly proclaim the International Year of Peace on 24 October 1985, the fortieth anniversary of the united Nations,
"Whereas the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations provides a unique opportunity to reaffirm the commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
"Whereas peace constitutes a universal ideal and the promotion of peace is the primary purpose of the united Nations,
"Whereas the promotion of peace and international security requires continuing and positive action by States and peoples aimed at the prevention of war, removal of various threats to peace - including the nuclear threat -respect for the principle of non-use of force, the resolution of conflicts and peaceful settlement of disputes, confidence-building measures, disarmament, maintenance of outer space for peaceful uses, development, the promotion and exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms, decolonization in accordance with the principle of self-determination, elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and apartheid, the enhancement of the quality of life, satisfaction of human needs and protection of the environment,
“Whereas peoples must live together in peace and practise tolerance, and it has been recognized that education, information, science and culture can contribute to that end,
"Whereas the International Year of Peace provides a timely impetus for initiating renewed thought and action for the promotion of peace.
A/40/PV.49 ia
“Whereas the International Year o£ Peace offers an opportunity to Governments, intergovernmental, nongovernmental organisations and others to express the common aspiration of all peoples for peace,
"Whereas the International Year of Peace is not only a celebration or commemoration, but an opportunity to reflect and act creatively and systematically in fulfilling the purposes of the United Nations,
"Now, therefore, the General Assembly solemnly proclaims 1986 to be the International Year of Peace and calls upon all peoples to join with the United Nations in resolute efforts to safeauard peace and the future of humanity." May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution
A/40/L.6/Rev.l without a vote?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/3).
The president (interpretation from Spanish): We have now concluded the commemorative period of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 4,05 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.66
7 November 1985
ENGLISH
Fortieth session
	GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SIXTY-SIXTH MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 7 November 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
President:	Mr. DE PINIES	(Spain)
later:	’	Mr. SARki (Vice-President)	(Senegal)
- Critical economic situation in Africa: report of the Secretary-General [30]
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed ^n the Official Records of the General Assembly.
85-64394/A 5258V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 11. 05 a. m. 
AGENDA ITEM 30
CRITICAL ECONOMIC SITUATION IN AFRICA: REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/40/372 and Add. l and 2)
	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed today at 12 noon If I hear no objection, it will be so decided. It was sc decided. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to put their names on the list as soon as possible. 
I call on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: it is particularly appropriate that the critical economic and social situation in Africa should figure prominently on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly. 	
As representatives are aware, over the past year the United Nations has been engaged in an almost unprecedented effort to mobilize the international community in common action with the African peoples and their Governments to avert the danger of starvation which threatens the lives of more than 100 million men, women and children on the African continent. The task is still incomplete and we must continue these efforts. At the same time, I believe it would be useful now to look back on this experience to see what we have learned as a guide to the future. 
We have learned about the courage of people enduring suffering and hardship; but, even more important, we have learned that the people of the world do care about their fellow human beings. I have been deeply moved by the overwhelming response of voluntary organizations as well as ordinary citizens throughout the world. As we look forward, it is important to engage and draw strength from this sense of common humanity. 



We have learned that Governments are prepared to join in a common effort, and this is an important lesson in these days when multilateralism is being questioned. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) has provided indispensable leadership in mobilizing support on that continent, but countries everywhere have joined in the effort in partnership with the affected countries themselves. The pattern of effective common action which evolved should have significance for our future endeavours. 
Finally we have learned that the United Nations system can play a leading role in mobilizing the international community. Within the united Nations the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa serves as the focal point to facilitate a co-ordinated response by the organizations of the system and by the international community as a whole. It is a team effort which involves the active participation of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme (WFP) the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator (UNDRO), as well as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the World Health Organization (WHO). 
As a part of this process the organizations of the system have demonstrated a capacity to deliver. For example, during 1985 5 million tons of food aid were distributed together with vast amounts of other essential relief supplies. Among other things this involved the realistic assessment of requirements and the identification of those most in need on a country-by-country basis. Even more difficult has been the task of establishing logistic arrangements to ensure the efficient distribution of supplies. I should like to take this opportunity to pay a personal tribute to all those involved at Headquarters and in the field, in particular, Mr. Bradford Morse and his colleagues, Mr. Farah, Mr. Strong and Mr. Adedcji. 	

The net result of all these efforts has been a new alliance between peoples. Governments and the United Nations system, a process of practical consultation and collaboration among all concerned, which saved the lives of millions. It is essential that we maintain this alliance in the future as we deal with both the continuing emergency situation and the equally urgent problems of rehabilitation and development. 
The emergency situation in Africa has not ended. Rains have come to some areas and prospects for those countries have improved, but one season of rain does not mean the end of the famine and we must expect that drought will be a recurring feature of African life. Even now the drought continues in some parts of Africa and too many people still face an immediate threat of starvation and malnutrition. There are urgent non-food emergency requirements which have not been adequately met: agricultural and pastoral inputs, health, water and logistics. Moreover, it will take time to repair the damage caused by the drought and deal with the problem of displaced persons. He must continue our efforts to provide the necessary relief and recovery assistance to all those in need. I urge all Member States to continue their generous support. 
The drought emergency has highlighted the seriousness of the underlying development crises in Africa. Even if the worst of the famine is over, there are serious economic problems which do not stem from the famine. Africa is the only continent where standards of living have declined in the past decade and continue to decline today. 
The international community must attack the fundamental problem of long-term development with the same sense of collective urgency as characterized the response to the drought. Emergency aid, recovery and development cannot be distinguished but are a continuum of required action. Failure to recognize this will inevitably result in a recurring cycle of crisis and will condemn millions of our fellow human beings to lives of poverty and degradation. 

In my recent meetings with Government leaders and in listening to their statements before the Assembly I have been impressed that there is wide agreement on the nature and urgency of the problems confronting Africa. Clearly, the improvement of performance in the agricultural sector, in particular with respect to food crops, must be given highest priority. 
Equally pressing is the need to restore external resources, which must involve relief of debt service payments, increased net financial flows and improved export earnings. In this context, it is significant that at their recent meetings in Seoul, Korea, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank emphasized that adjustments should be centred on growth rather than short-term adjustment and the consequent need for additional resources. 
A high degree of priority is given to the rehabilitation, maintenance and repair of existing industry and infrastructure and to the promotion of non-traditional commodity exports. The purpose of development remains the well-being of people; thus greater attention must be paid to social aspects of development and the mobilization of human resources. 
There also seems to be a growing consensus on what needs to be done. The Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa adopted by the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly provides a comprehensive outline, and the Assembly has before it my report on subsequent developments. The Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, meeting in July of this year, approved both a declaration and a priority programme for economic recovery. These documents and the recent resolution of the Economic and Social Council on the critical economic situation in Africa, as well as the report by the Group of Experts on Aid appointed by the Bonn Economic Summit, have been circulated and I commend them to the attention of the Assembly. 
The Organization of African Unity has proposed the convening of a special session of the General Assembly to deliberate on the issues of the critical economic situation in Africa. A special session could serve to sensitize and mobilize the international community, to bring into effective operation that alliance of peoples, Governments and the United Nations system which worked so well in dealing with the drought-related emergency. The work of the session should
be directed towards achieving practical agreement on action. 
It should be possible to improve upon and apply the experience recently acquired in dealing with the drought emergency. Country-level consultation with the full participation of all concerned, in particular the affected countries, proved to be vital in reaching common agreement on specific needs and co-ordinating action to respond to those needs. 	
There is one final lesson which I hope we have all learned, namely, that delay and procrastination result only in unnecessary human suffering and misery. There were ample warnings of the impending drought-related crises and the failure to respond earlier resulted in an untold number of deaths and the crippling of a young generation. We cannot let that happen again. Let us act now with urgency and with compassion.
Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French): My country, Senegal, has the signal honour of introducing, on behalf of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), of which it is current Chairman, agenda item 30, on the critical economic situation in Africa. 
The concern of the international community over the exacerbation of the tragic situation in African countries affected by the crisis was made particularly clear in December 1984 by the adoption of resolution 39/29, to which the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa is annexed. That resolution of the Assembly contributed notably to what may be considered the awakening of the international community to the serious problems of Africa. I should like to express once more, on behalf of the current Chariman of OAU, the deep gratitude of OAU, and of Africa, to the entire international community, in particular to the United Nations system, its Secretary-General and his assistants and to the many charitable organizations and individuals that have so generously responded to the appeal launched. 
This surge of human solidarity has made it possible, as everybody knows, to save millions of human lives and alleviate the sufferings of many people during the worst famine ever experienced by Africa. We reiterate our appeal to the community of donors to continue to give humanitarian assistance to the peoples of the countries affected. The statement just made by the Secretary-General on the situation in Africa was most eloquent on the subject.
However, even though the alarming emergency situation on our continent did attract the attention and generous sympathy of the international community, the fact remains that structural economic problems could exhaust the economies of African countries seriously affected by the crisis and even result in the emergence of serious crises if the appropriate energetic measures are not very speedily taken. Indeed, the crisis in which the world economy has become bogged down, despite several signs of a relative recovery in some of the developed countries, has had disastrous and alarming consequences for the economies of African . countries, whose prospects of development have never been as dubious as they are at the present time.
Just over two weeks ago, Mr. Abdou Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of OAU, recalled in this Hall that 40 years earlier the founding fathers of the United Nations had committed themselves not only to bringing about peace and international security but also "to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom".
The establishment of a truly peaceful world in which international security would not be seriously threatened depends above all on the elimination in all regions of the world of hunger, misery and despair, because no real prospects for survival, even less of development, have emerged.
Can the world in which we live today remain much longer peaceful if we must remain eternally divided into rich nations and increasingly poorer ones?
Africa, as we are all well aware, is the only continent in which the standard of living has declined during the last decade and unfortunately will continue to decline unless bold measures are taken with urgency. Africa according to all economic indicators and forecasts, holds some sorry world records: the lowest level of development; three quarters of the least-developed and most severely affected countries; the smallest share of world industrial and agricultural production; the most disastrous food situation; the lowest literacy rate; and, finally, the greatest number of refugees. To that collection of negative records must be added, unfortunately, a continuing deterioration in terms of trade, an alarming decline in commodity prices, an unfavourable trade, financial and economic environment, a distinct lack of financial resources, insurmountable protectionist barriers, unrelenting drought and desertification, a crushing burden of foreign debt, a substantial reduction of public assistance for development, considerable fluctuation in rates of exchange, high interest rates and so on.
Our continent is the only region in the world where food and agricultural production has declined in more than 30 countries. One African out of every five today is fed by imports, which consumes one quarter of foreign currency earnings. In 1984 grain production in Africa was for the first time less than 100 kilograms per capita, when the minimum daily ration should be 140 kilograms. In 42 African countries, representing 95 per cent of our continent's population, per capita food production in 1984 did not reach the 1974-1976 level.
Africa is the driest of continents, where only one fifth of the land is cultivable, and according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), every year the encroaching desert takes 60,000 to 70,000 square kilometres of agricultural land. Some countries affected by desertification find their very existence threatened.
The process of industrialization, which has been at a standstill in our continent, has also encountered serious difficulties and has not been capable of giving the necessary dynamism to the structural transformation of African economies. Today, as has been noted in the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Africa is the least industrialized region in the world and must import nearly all capital goods and most modern consumer goods.
In trade, African exports have declined by 7 per cent in volume and 20 per cent in value between 1981 and 1982. According to some forecasts, the year 1985 will doubtless see a new decline in the terms of trade for African countries, and this in conjunction with a revival of protectionism, may well further increase Africa's poverty.
The spectacular growth in Africa's total foreign debt, which in 1983 represented 59 per cent of the gross domestic product, together with the rise in the cost of debt servicing which will have more than doubled between 1981 and 1984 have made our continent a net contributor of funds to the developed countries.
These various external constraints have considerably reduced the anticipated scope of the adjustment and recovery measures, socially and economically very costly which our various Governments have courageously undertaken at the national level.
Given this gloomy and alarming picture which various reports, studies and publications have clearly highlighted, our Heads of State or Government, at their 21st conference held last July in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, undertook with objectivity, calm, lucidity, courage and a spirit of responsibility, a critical analysis of our continent's economic and social situation and its prospects for development, for they are convinced that, as the Secretary-General states in his report, in view of its vast resources Africa has the necessary potential for its economic growth.	-
The recent meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at Seoul last month clearly demonstrated that policies of structural adjustment were not viable without sustained growth.
Mr. Abdou Diouf, President of the Republic of Senegal, speaking from this same rostrum on 21 October of this year in his capacity as the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), gave a most useful analytical summary of the main decisions taken at the inportant summit meeting at Addis Ababa, which we all recognize constituted a decisive turning point for our continent's future.
Indeed, having recognized and solemnly reaffirmed that Africa's economic recovery is first and foremost the responsibility of the African Governments and peoples, the OAU adopted a declaration on the economic situation in Africa and a priority five-year programme which will enable us to lay down a basis for sustained growth and self-reliant and self-sustained development at the national, regional and continental levels. This priority programme is based essentially on the following five measures. The first is accelerated implementation of the Lagos Plan
of Action and the Final Act of Lagos; the second is improvement of the food and agricultural situation in Africa; the third is the lightening of the external debt burden which, because it seriously endangers the recovery of our continent, has led our Heads of State or Government to propose serious and in-depth consultations to lay the best possible grounds, for the holding of an international conference on the foreign debt of the African countties; the fourth point of the priority programme is the working out of a common platform for action at the sub-regional, regional, continental and international levels, and the fifth is action against the effects of South Africa's systematic policy of destablization on the economies of the States of southern Africa, and I would point out here that the current Chairman of the OAU made a formal proposal to the international community that an international conference on sanctions against South Africa should be held in June 1986 under United Nations auspices.
This progtiw* is not intended to deal with the whole problem, nor to come up with a magic formula for resolving the economic and social crisis now gripping our continent. We are aware that it could be improved and supplemented. The magnitude of the crisis requires the international community to support the efforts of African countries to meet the dual challenge of survival and development as it undertook to do in the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa, annexed to General Assembly resolution 39/29.
It is precisely the working out of a platform of joint action at the international level that the OAU is asking the international community to co-operate on.
This is why the current Chairman of our continental organization launched an appeal from this very rostrum on behalf of the Heads of State or Government of the OAU for the convening during the first half of 1986 of a special session of the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. It is fortunate
that the Secretary-General, in the report that he has just presented to the General Assembly, highlighted what we expect of this special session devoted to the economic situation in Africa.
For us Africans this special session should focus on the restoration of our economies, as well as on medium-term and long-term development problems, and lead to specific agreed and co-ordinated measures. Above all, it will enable us to analyse these problems from a comprehensive standpoint, and in relation to each other, to mobilize the international community and financial institutions through an integrated approach in order to contribute effectively and with lasting effect to the economic recovery of Africa.
The success of this special session clearly depends on its preparation. Therefore, we should recall that precise guidelines and clear suggestions were given by our Heads of State or Government, in particular to a steering committee set up within the OAU that has been asked, inter alia, to follow-up the recommendations of the twenty-first summit of the OAU.
Africa does not intend to remain the weakest and most vulnerable link in the interdependence of the world economy. Its wish and duty is to realize fully the role which falls to it. To do that it needs above all the solidarity and sustained and co-ordinated efforts of the international community, for the magnitude of the crisis requires specific and urgent measures.
We should emphasize everything that reinforces international solidarity for the greatest good of mankind. What is at stake here is the credibility of the United Nations before the judgement of our peoples and, above all, of history.
Egoism has never been a force for peace; on the contrary, it always sows
mistrust and tension.
We should pool tue enormous achievements of science and technology; we should engage in serious thinking and be as imaginative as possible in order to promote co-operation and development and to preserve international peace and security with respect for human dignity.
What could be more humiliating for a man than to be in continual need of assistance, even if in the name of human solidarity. What could be more distressing for a country than to be forced to make continual appeals to other countries to meet its people's most basic needs. What could be more frustrating for an entire continent than to be unable fully to play the role incumbent upon it in international co-operation.
In thus introducing the agenda item on the critical economic situation in Africa, I wish, on behalf of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and on behalf of its current Chairman, to reaffirm to the international community, without undue optimism, complacency or, above all, questioning the motives of anyone, Africa's commitment to finding lasting solutions to the dual challenge of survival and development in concert with all nations devoted to peace, freedom and justice and with respect for the choice of each people.
That dual challenge to the conscience of mankind as a whole is today threatening the lives of tens of millions of men, women and children, as well as the very existence of certain African States.
We remain confident that, to meet it, Africa will find at its side all those who wish to join their determined efforts, as President Abdou Diouf stated "into a single blueprint for the future, where the common future of man will prevail over' the individual interests that tear our world asunder today." (A/40/PV.42, p. 27)
In conclusion, I should like to quote further the words of the current Chairman of the OAU. He stated:
"Mankind has in the past given us too many examples of its ability to meet constant challenges for us to have any doubts that it will be able to overcome those that beset it today. To do that, mankind need only be guided by the noble ideals and principles that it established for itself in the United Nations Charter." (A/40/PV.42, p. 15)	.
That is why, given the seriousness of the critical economic situation in Africa, our continent is urging the international community to reorient its effort of solidarity towards a medium- and long-term approach, which is the only dynamic approach that can effectively contribute to the economic recovery and development of our continent. I am sure, speaking on behalf of Africa, that the international community will meet the challenge with generosity and understanding.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank once again the Secretary-General, not only for the eloquent and persuasive report he has submitted to the General Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa, but, above all, for the steps he has taken to cope with that situation. I should also like to thank Mr. Bradford Morse and all who work with him.
Africa invites all those present here to reflect about what I have said.
Mr. PHILIPPE (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of the European Community, Spain and Portugal.
The challenge to international solidarity and to the multilateral system posed by the exceptional gravity of the crisis in Africa is unprecedented, and it has left its mark on the previous session of the General Assembly. At stake is the survival of a continent.
The task, our task, is of course far from completed, as is evident, unfortunately, from the millions of human beings still threatened by the scourge of famine, in sub-Saharan Africa in particular.
Nonetheless, some glimmers of hope seem to be emerging. The most urgent problems created by the famine in Africa seem to be finding a solution.
The early-warning system of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the information provided by other sources seem, in fact, to indicate that, over all, the prospects for the next harvest are more favourable than they were at this time last year. The spectre of famine would appear to be fading, but, since the final forecasts for the harvest are not yet in, we must maintain a cautious attitude.
Even though, since everything calls for caution, the time has certainly not yet come to abandon emergency assistance, in particular in the form of food aid in 1986, it is up to us, the international community and our African partners, to. ensure the future of a continent.
As we have said, emergency assistance must continue, but short-term concerns must be viewed in a broader and long-term perspective. Thus, we must also learn from the past and from the international solidarity effort from which the multilateral United Nations system draws its justification.
Indeed, many donor countries reacted even before the crisis had reached disastrous proportions, and in so doing they were sustained by a spontaneous and highly committed surge of public opinion.
The efforts to increase the awareness of the agencies of the United Nations system, and in particular of the Conference on the Emergency Situation in Africa held last March at Geneva, have also made a major contribution to mobilizing the international community and have given new impetus to a large-scale movement of international solidarity with Africa.
In certain cases, however, there are still certain serious logistic obstacles, such as the back-up at ports, bureaucratic obstacles and land-transit problems, that have considerably hindered the arrival o£ assistance. Further, in some critical sectors needs remained unsatisfied: medicines and other health articles, shelter and means of survival and equipment for water-supply and transport. The European Community has sought to take a longer-term view of these various forms of assistance.	■
The lack of means of agricultural production, in particular seeds and fertilizer, remains a major obstacle, particularly to ensuring transition from an emergency situation to one of recovery and development.
For their part, the European Community and its member States have taken direct action by responding, at the first indications of an approaching crisis, with emergency assistance which, since 1984, has rapidly reached the regions concerned. Since that time, such assistance has been part of longer-term efforts by the African countries and the international community, taking into account the changing needs and experience in the area.
Since 1984 the assistance of the European Community and its member States to sub-Saharan Africa has represented 50 per cent of international assistance.
Our Heads of State and Government, meeting in December 1984 at Dublin in the European Council, launched a plan of action that provided for the delivery to the eight African countries most affected by the crisis of 1,200,000 tons of grain or the equivalent. That plan is coupled with provisions to ensure an effective supply of assistance to the populations concerned. As at 1 October 1985, 87 per cent of the assistance of the European Community to combat the famine had already been provided.
The adjustment of goods and deliveries to the real needs is a basic characteristic of the Dublin plan, as is apparent in the delivery in particular of essential seeds for the next harvest. Moreover, it was agreed to make a particular effort to protect the opportunities for local or regional markets. In that continent afflicted by so many armed conflicts, the European Community has devoted special attention to the problem of refugees and has provided substantial financial assistance for the programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
It may thus be thought that, through these various measures and the commitments undertaken by the various countries, the essential food needs of the 20 African countries most affected by the famine will be covered in the coming months, provided that it will be possible to overcome the immense difficulties involved in the shipping of international assistance to the peoples concerned. Nevertheless, however necessary it might be in ?n emergency, food aid will not be a lasting solution.
The crisis in Africa has clearly highlighted the role the United Nations system has played and can play in emergency situations in promoting and co-ordinating international co-operation. The efforts made by the Secretary-General of the united Nations in this connection attest to the desire for consistency and unity in United Nations activities. In particular we should like to stress the very important role played in this context by the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa established by the Secretary-General in January 1985, to ensure that the competent bodies of the United Nations and other organs of the system can react in an appropriate and co-ordinated manner to emergency situations. The experience gained should be used for the benefit of future emergency situations, particularly as far as co-ordination is concerned.
However, co-ordination is necessary not only in connection with emergency situations. It is just as important in connection with long-term development, where it should play a priority role. This is true, in the field of technical co-operation, for the United Nations Development Programme, which must receive all the necessary support so as to fulfil its role as the co-ordinator of donors, recipient countries and the competent agencies. Generally speaking, it is necessary to study the results of long-term development assistance operations and establish the appropriate links between emergency measures and long-term action.
The transition from emergency relief for ensuring survival to assistance for recovery and development has very important organizational and co-ordination aspects. We attach particular importance to this. The study being carried out by the Food and'Agriculture Organization (FAO) on food production in Africa is part of the same context, as are the special facilities established by the World Bank for the sub-Saharan African countries. The European Community and its member States believe that more than ever it is necessary to avoid duplication of efforts, to act in an integrated manner and to ensure that resources are used in the best possible manner.	■
The post-emergency situation must now be dealt with. In the medium term the economies of the countries which were affected by both famine and drought must literally be rehabilitated and reconstituted. It is necessary to rebuild seed stocks, to deliver agricultural tools and fertilizers, pesticides and all the inputs essential for agriculture and to increase storage facilities, if one is to ensure that the displaced persons or refugees return to their homes and again become productive agents of development.
The Council of Ministers of the European Community has just adopted, on 4 November, a plan for the rehabilitation and recovery of the African countries which have been most affected by the drought. This plan proposes financing to the
(Mr. Philippe, Luxembourg) extent of 100 million ECUs, that is, $85 million, which is available immediately, and additional contributions frcw Member States in an equivalent amount. The plan is aimed at guaranteeing continuity between the Dublin plan, which has almost been executed, and the inpiementation of the third Lomé Convention, which is currently being executed.
In particular, it is necessary to strengthen the capacity of the African countries themselves to deal with disasters by inproving their own ability to organize themselves and to define and implement emergency plans by themselves. The plan also provides for the agricultural recovery of the economies concerned by ensuring the availability of basic input sfor the 1986-1987 agricultural season.
Over and above emergency assistance, effective policies for long-term development must be implemented. Our Governments have stressed the need to establish a global co-ordinated strategy to combat drought. The Heads of State and Government of Africa have recognized the fundamental importance of this approach in the Declaration they adopted at Addis Ababa, which confirms, in this connection, the Lagos Plan of Action and Final Act, which recognize that it is the Governments and people of Africa themselves that have primary responsibility for the development of the continent's economy. We support the policies which they will implement in the areas of food security and the campaign against desertification.
In establishing priorities for recovery, it is also inportant to ensure that the measures envisaged take into account the experience gained in the continent's current economic crisis in this regard. In accordance with the critical areas identified, special attention must be devoted to ensuring well-balanced growth between agriculture and industry and between agricultural products intended for export and those intended for local consumption. In that regard, the African countries have taken an important decision to increase the proportion of investments from 20 to 25 per cent of public expenditures.
In the longer term, it is the whole problem of African agriculture, faced with increasing desertification, that is now being raised. Since 1980 the crisis situation in Africa has accelerated the constant decline in average per capita income recorded since 1973, particularly for the sub-Saharan countries. The effect of the population trend in Africa in this connection has very troubling aspects. Recent studies predict that the African population will double in the next 30 years, although Africa is already the only continent where the production of foodstuffs is below demographic growth. The annual per capita volume of foodstuff production, and in particular grain, has declined by 2 per cent since 1970. In 1984, for the first time, this production was under 100 kilogrammes per capita, whereas the fateful threshold of 140 kilogrammes had already been crossed in 1975.
With regard to the environment, programmes for reforestation deserve special attention. In this connection, we should like to refer in particular to the first Dakar Conference in 1984 on desertification and protection of nature and to the conference to be held this month. Another important objective consists of the preservation of natural resources.
The programming of financial means under the third Lomé Convention, currently in progress, is an effort to respond to this priority. In addition to bilateral assistance from Member States, primarily devoted to African development efforts for the next five years, the sub-Saharan African countries will receive the bulk of the 8.5 billion ECUs, or almost $1.5 billion, per year.
The aim of the European Community's contribution is to support the integrated, freely determined and self-reliant economic, social and cultural development of the countries concerned and to help raise the standard of living of their peoples. The accent is placed on research to find a balance between, on the one hand, the protection of the environment and, on the other, the restoration of the natural equilibrium, the self-sufficiency and the food balance of the peoples concerned, by encouraging the production of foodstuffs and the balanced development of rural areas. In order to avoid any recurrence of the present disasters, it is also planned - and this is particularly important - that assistance action should be designed and implemented on the basis of the agricultural and food policies and strategies defined by the countries concerned.
Another aspect of this dialogue that we intend to pursue and intensify with the countries that will benefit from our assistance relates to programming. To be effective, medium-term and long-term financial and technical assistance must in fact be part of economic and social development plans and programmes, and must be consistent with the goals and priorities set at the national and regional level by the countries concerned. The coherence of these goals are, more than ever before, an indispensable prerequisite for the success of action to assist development. The village communities concerned must be associated as closely as possible with the recovery efforts, the farmers must be motivated and the traditional African structures must be reactivated.
In that approach, it is important to bear in mind the causes of the African agricultural food crisis: the small number of markets, the lack of trading circuits and means of transportation, and the excessive blocking of public or private means of distribution. The too-great rigidity of markets and the insufficient profits earned from agriculture, in addition, result in the devaluation of work on the land and an exodus from rural areas, particularly by the young, which creates urban unemployment.
During the summer session of the Economic and Social Council, we were able to confirm the fact that the European Community and its member States are continuing to support the efforts undertaken or envisaged by the African States to ensure the recovery of the continent and the resumption of development. The Addis Ababa Programme of Action indicates, in this respect, priorities whose full importance we recognize and which could help in the crystallization of policies.
We have in mind in particular the proposal to hold a special session of the United Nations General Assembly on the critical situation in Africa. The role that the General Assembly can play was stressed here by President Abdou Diouf, during the general debate. The European Community and its member States willingly give their support to that initiative, which could confirm the results already achieved through the adoption during the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly of a Declaration on Africa, and through the resolution adopted last January by the Economic and Social Council on the critical economic situation in Africa. We hope that the special session will make it possible to identify longer-term development policies that would take into account both the specific needs indicated by the African countries themselves and the conditions for effective implementation, in which the international community could join.
In that spirit, the European Community and its member States will participate in the preparatory work for the special session, with a view to organizing that important session in the best possible conditions and to establishing its agenda.
Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): I have the honour of expressing on behalf of the Group of 77 its full support for the efforts the African countries have been exerting to overcome the critical economic situation on their continent.
In spite of the encouraging response by the international community to the emergency aspects of the crisis in Africa, the situation has continued to
(Mr. Golob, Yugoslavia) deteriorate. It is exacerbated by famine, drought and desertification. It endangers the lives of millions of people, the social fabric of their societies and their development processes.
This was noted, it will be recalled, by many Heads of State or Government in the course of the general debate in this Hall. It was stressed particularly by the President of the Republic of Senegal, Mr. Abdou Diouf, whose impressive statement left an indelible imprint on the mind of all those present. He reasserted the need for the international community to undertake effective measures to address the structural causes of the current critical economic situation in Africa.
The economic and social crisis in Africa is of such a multidimensional, complex and extensive nature that it is beyond the capacity of African countries to tackle it alone. Governments and peoples of Africa themselves recognize that their development is primarily their own responsibility. However, their efforts cannot be sufficient to overcome the consequences both of natural disasters afflicting the continent and of the negative effects of the adverse external economic environment.
Drought in Africa has ceased to be a short-term and transitory phenomenon. In many countries the drought has virtually destroyed farm land, and the Sahara desert is spreading at an accelerated pace. Serious distortions have occurred in the ecological balance, threatening the lives of the present and future generations.
Food production has been heavily hit and continues to lag behind the rate of population growth. According to data in the report of the Secretary-General, the food needs and the availability of food have been growing at divergent rates, with the gap growing by more than 2 per cent per year in most countries. In the course of the last decade Africa has allocated, on the average, over 20 per cent of its export earnings for food imports.
With respect to external economic conditions, on which countries of Africa have no influence, the situation is equally dramatic. The foreign debt of African countries has tremendously increased. It is expected to exceed $170 billion by the end of 1985. The amount of $20.4 billion which is required for the debt-servicing in the same year is well beyond the resources of the weak economies of African countries. The collapse of commodity prices and declining flows of official development assistance to the region have further dashed the development prospects of Africa.
Many African countries are, moreover, victims of constant aggression by the racist minority regime in South Africa. Atrocities perpetrated against the peoples of South Africa, the illegal occupation of Namibia and the repeated aggression against front-line States by the racist regime of Pretoria, in violation of all norms and principles of international law, constitute shameful pages in the records of the civilized world. The material damage sustained and the growing defence expenditures that the Governments and peoples of these countries have to shoulder because of the South African policy of aggression represent an enormous burden on their economies. Only after the racist regime is eliminated will the people and countries of southern Africa be able to address themselves fully to the pressing problems of economic and social development.
The key problem today is to help Africa embark on the path of development, and this should be borne in mind while discussing this issue. At the 21st conference of the Organization of African Unity the leaders of African States reiterated their determination to take concrete action and measures, individually and collectively, for the achievement of the economic development of their continent.
The food and economic crisis in Africa in general is of s^oh proportions that it is not possible to resolve it without substantial international aid. The Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Mr. E. Saouma, was right when he said recently in his statement in the Second Committee of the General Assembly that Africa is unable to finance its own development.
African countries cannot be expected to increase food production and solve the problem of famine on a lasting basis without the active participation of the international community in emergency food assistance and particularly in the rehabilitation of African agriculture and support for the process of long-term economic development.
It is expected that the solidarity with the people of Africa manifested by food aid in the course of last year and the current year will be continued also in the years to come. It is estimated that the emergency measures, efficiently co-ordinated by the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa under the untiring and able direction of the Administrator of the United Nations r 'elopment Fund (UNDP), Mr. Bradford Morse, which helped Africa alleviate the problem of famine, will have to be extended over the next few years. However, a process of fejoad international co-operation for a long-term and lasting solution of the problem of famine in Africa should be started now. It is necessary to enable Africa to produce alone, drawing on its abundant potential, sufficient quantities of food. Here we should like to express our highest appreciation to the Secretarv-^seral, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his timely and dedicated efforts tv enhance the international community's awareness of the critical economic situation in Africa and to secure international assistance for the countries of that continent.
The Group of 77 considers that the international community should undertake the necessary measures to redress the structural deficiencies in the current critical economic situation in Africa and to prevent their recurrence by assisting in the implementation of the ’ tority five-year programme of action for the economic development of Africa.
The Group of 77 and the Ministerial Conference of Non-aligned Countries in Luanda have given full support to the request of the 21st Assembly of Heads of State or Government of the Organization of African Unity for the convening early next year of a special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations to be devoted to the critical economic situation in Africa. The session, according to the President of Senegal:
A/40/PV.66
33
(Mr. Golob, Yugoslavia) "could offer an opportunity to consider the problems as a whole, as well as their interrelationship, to evaluate what has been achieved and to mobilize all the industrialized countries, the multilateral financial institutions and the entire international community through an integrated approach and co-ordinated action, to make a proper effort to contribute to the continent's economic recovery". (A/40/PV.42, p.24)
The Group of 77 stands firmly behind the proposal of Africa to start preparations for the holding of an international conference on the external debts of African countries with the aim of providing an overall and lasting solution.
With the adoption last year by the General Assembly of resolution 39/29, to which the Declaration on ths Critical Economic Situation in Africa was annexed, the international community expressed its determination to contribute in a concerted and co-ordinated manner to the solving of the problem of the critical economic situation in Africa. As a practical step in that direction, the African countries have submitted a draft resolution entitled "The critical economic situation in Africa." The Group of 77 extends its full support to that draft resolution.
Considering that African countries will also need aid in the coming years, the Group of 77 expects that the spirit of co-operation and international solidarity will continue to be manifested as a test of the resolve of the world community to undertake such measures as would assist the countries of Africa and thereby contribute to the strengthening of peace and international co-operation.
Mr. SUCRE FIGARELLA (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): In this community of nations the delegation of Venezuela carries out no task with a greater sense of duty than that of participating for the second consecutive time in the annual debate in the General Assembly on item 30 of its agenda, which concerns the critical economic situation in Africa.
The fact that adversity unites is one of the most uplifting indications of true solidarity, because it is in tines of difficulty that the connection between understanding and co-operation is put to the test. Whatever nay be said about the differences of opinion at the United Nations, there can be no doubt that at moments of tragedy a higher ideal of civilization and fraternity unites the political will of our States.
There is no better indication of this than the sympathetic attention that has been given to the situation in Africa. We are not here just to utter words; generous sentiments have been expressed, and effective action has been taken.
In particular I believe that in general we have learned a great lesson: over and above philanthropy, good intentions and charity days, it is necessary to make a consistent and determined effort to enable African society to be the instrument of its own development.
On this question of Africa's great suffering we are certainly confronted with factors stemming from the uncontrollable forces of nature. But for other reasons also we are obliged better to prepare human resources and the natural environment with a view to improving the social and economic conditions of life so as to have a sense of permanence and continuity.
It is rightly said in the Declaration on the Economic Situation of Africa, signed by the Heads of State of the Organization of African Unity in Addis Ababa during their meetings between 18 and 20 July last:
"We wish to reiterate that the current struggle to save lives and to reduce the impact of hunger and malnutrition must not be the only objective of international co-operation. Otherwise, the international community would, without wishing to do so, be contributing to turning the emergency into a permanent phenomenon. For our part, we are not only determined to cope effectively with the current emegency and future emergencies but also to go further and deal with the roots of the crisis in agriculture and food in Africa."
In other words, what is happening in Africa enables us to see the situation in greater depth. This is a challenge the scope of which is broader than many have thought. The whole structure of society is at stake: its human resources, its wealth, its economic and social systems, its administration, its effectiveness.
The continent in which hundreds of thousands of human beings are dying from lack of food and inferior subsistence conditions is teaching us that it is necessary to reconsider fundamental problems.
What has happens with its agriculture? What is the level of preparedness of the people? What are the indications for population growth?
Mr. Eduardo Saouma, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), in his recent statement to the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) at its Geneva session in July last, indicated that an immense effort would be necessary to increase Africa's agricultural capacity once the factors of natural adversity had been overcome. Where will the fertilizers come from, and the skilled manpower, the priority plans of certain productive sectors?
In this connection it is very inportant to take into account here the report introduced at this fortieth session on the item under consideration by the Secretary-General. As in any crisis situation, two aspects must be considered: the emergency itself and long-term planning.
The establishment of the Emergency Office in January 1985 has helped co-ordinate and mobilize a great many valuable efforts through the United Nations. Our delegation would like to pay a well deserved tribute to all the relevant organizations of the united Nations system that have responded so responsibly so as to cope with the most urgent needs that have resulted from the crisis. Rightly, it has been said here that:	'
"Some progress has been made in checking the spread of famine, malnutrition, disease and poverty. The Office for Emergency Operations in Africa has proved to be an effective mechanism in providing the necessary framework for com .'r ted international action in response to the crisis." (A/40/372, para. 21)
bh/11
The action taken in this context of emergency will no doubt go down in the history of the United Nations as one of its most brilliant moments that confirmed recognition of the most encouraging values of international ethics.
My country is aware that it is necessary for there to be more decisive action, including structural aspects. The survival of thousands of human beings is at stake, as is a future better society in Africa. As the Secretary-General says in his report:
"The next five years will be crucial for sub-Saharan Africa, faced as it is with the double challenge of economic problems and severe drought. There is clearly a need for more vigorous action to consolidate the response to the emergency situation and to relaunch the development process". (Ibid., para. 28)
From our own experience we know that there are no magic formulas for the solving of such problems. Only the efforts of each country and contributions resulting from international co-operation can gradually bring about the desired results. It stands to reason that immense efforts are required in the case of Africa, in particular all the sub-Saharan countries. At stake is a new vision of man and society. From our position in Latin America in general, and in Venezuela in particular, we know that many of the experiences of Africa are shared by us.
In Venezuela, despite a great deal of progress, agriculture is an economic sector that has been disregarded, and we have arrived at the point where a large percentage of the national diet is imported. In the past we were a basically agricultural society, but, with the arrival of oil and the industrialization of other sectors, the incentive for agriculture was lost, and a large percentage of the farmers moved to the cities, tempted by the dream of abundance in urban life, though they were inadequately prepared for modern life. Although a manufacturing
(ft, Sucre Pigarella, Venezuela) industry began to grow, we did not have the qualified manpower, and the fields lost their traditional farmers.
That has taught us that the process of economic and social change must be balanced and that we must not neglect traditional cultivation, particularly as regards the feeding of the population.
But there are other even more important things that I should like to point out. The major factor of capital that must be used is human capital. Professor Theodore Schultz, the Nobel Prize winner for economics, has in one of his best known books drawn attention to the importance of preparing individuals as a factor of greater productivity. The experience of other countries shows us how decisive a contribution education makes to the tranformation of the living conditions of peoples.	'
When we consider the long-term strategy Africa needs to solve its problem, we attach priority importance to the question of education in its broadest sense, the consolidation of greater knowledge, spiritual preparation for understanding society and as a factor of creativity to make the necessary reforms required in the modernization of a country.	’
There is no doubt that in studying all the measures Africa needs in order to overcome its backwardness and its disasters, the participation of human capital will play a decisive role. No society has prepared a better future without preparing better individuals to deal with the great challenges. Adversity forges and prepares man more completely. It enables him to see his errors, and it gives him strength to continue his struggle. At this tragic time for Africa, whose anguish and material problems are shared by my Government and people, X am certain that this is the most encouraging factor, which promises a more dignified and civilized future for the millions of human beings now living on that continent in
such critical conditions. Thus we have the firm hope that this African energency will Serve as a way of finding swans and solutions for other sore structural and essential problems that nay decide the fate of Africa.*
*Mr. Sarré (Senegal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Mr. H8LENWS (Finland): I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Finland.
The crisis in Africa is one of the greatest and most urgent challenges for the international community. The United Nations has in recent years been a major catalyst in mobilizing international awareness and assistance to alleviate the plight of the Africans. This General Assenbly should, in the view of the Nordic countries, consider new important steps to meet the dual challenge of survival and development in Africa and the particular role of the United Nations in this regard.
A fight for survival in the drought-stricken regions has been the first and most urgent priority. Governments, the United Nations system, other international organizations and a large nusber of voluntary organizations have responded in a commendable manner to the calls for increased emergency aid. More recently, the rains which the African people had been awaiting for such a long time have improved the food situation in a nusber of countries. The crops in 1985-1986 are expected to be 10 per cent higher than in 1981, the last normal year before the recent droughts.
However, this fight is far from being won and there is a risk that in certain regions in sub-Saharan Africa the nutritional situation may again deteriorate, therefore large amounts of emergency assistance are still needed, in particular food aid, agricultural inputs, transportation equipment and medicines. Further measures are also required to ensure that co-ordinated emergency relief reaches those in need.
In this connection the Nordic countries wish to pay tribute to the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa (OEOA) for its remarkable achievements in the assessment of needs and in the co-ordination of relief operations.
It is equally important that emergency aid be linked to the longer-term development objectives of the affected countries. Dependence on disaster relief must not become a permanent feature in Africa. Effective action should therefore be taken especially for the rehabilitation of agricultural production and the creation of a firm basis for future rural development. The Secretary-General approprlately suggests in his report before this Assembly that the provision of relief may be seen as a first step in a continuum of relief-recovery-development. We recognize that the OEOA was set up for relief purposes but we also believe that the experiences gained from the OEOA operations should be fully utilized in the consideration of appropriate United Nations modalities for longer-term efforts.
The Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa, adopted by the General Assembly last year, provides an internationally agreed framework for redressing African economic problems. Resolution 1985/80 of the Economic and Social Council, adopted last July, is another inportant step in the elaboration of policy measures to cope with these problems. Our Governments have also been encouraged by the determination and commitment of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in their declaration of last July to cope more effectively with current and future emergencies but also to get to the root of Africa's food and agricultural crises. Such an approach is indeed indispensable in order to inprove the longer-term outlook of Africa's overall development.
The Nordic countries commend the efforts of the African Governments to restore the internal balances in their economies. They continue to undertake necessary but often painful adjustment measures at high social and political costs. The responsibility for taking appropriate domestic policies rests with the African countries themselves, but their efforts must be supported by the international community.
The Nordic countries must once again emphasize that the restoration and expansion of external financial resources is a matter of urgency for the affected African countries. This calls for positive action on a number of interlinked issues, such as net transfer of resources, debt relief and export earnings.
We welcome the fact that many donor countries have increased their development assistance to sub-Saharan Africa, yet on aggregate there has over the last three years been a reduction in net financial flows to sub-Saharan Africa, mainly as a result of a decline in private capital flows on the one hand and the burden of debt servicing on the other. Concessional aid has not risen enough to fill that gap. The debt problems of many African countries have clearly reached proportions which call for action. The donor community - Governments and international development institutions-alike - should accept the long-term challenge of relaunching development in the same commendable manner as they have done in meeting the most immediate needs of emergency aid. The Nordic countries, which already strongly support development efforts in Africa, are prepcred to meet their share of that challenge.
I should also like to mention that the Nordic countries and the members of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) are at present exploring new ways and means for expanding their mutual economic co-operation and for enabling those countries to become less dependent on South Africa. This initiative is in line with the strengthened Nordic Joint Programme of Action against South Africa, which was adopted by the Nordic Governments three weeks ago.
The African countries, with the support of the Group of 77, have called for the convening of a special session of the General Assembly to consider the critical economic situation in Africa. In the light of the gravity, persistence and urgency of the problems, the Nordic countries, realizing the political importance of such
(Mg. Helenius, Finland) an initiative, can endorse the idea of a special session. We are ready to join the other Member States in consultations with a view to achieving a constructive decision at this session of the General Assembly.
With regard to the nature and objectives of a special session, the Nordic countries would like at this stage to emphasize the following considerations.
First, the special session should be carefully prepared and should aim at action-oriented results which would assist and guide the African Governments and the international community in their efforts to relaunch sustained development.
Secondly; the priorities of the African countries themselves, as reflected in the Declaration of the OAU summit meeting, provide a natural point of departure for the consideration at the special session of long-term development in Africa. In this context we welcome the strong emphasis given to agriculture and rural development. We agree that in other sectors priority should be given to the rehabilitation, maintenance and repair of existing industries and infrastructures.
Thirdly, the deliberations of the special session should focus on a limited number of key issues that are critical for the African economies in transition from emergency to sustained development. In this connection we should pay particular attention to the assessment of the most urgently needed forms of rehabilitation assistance and to the supporting and co-ordinating role of the United Nations.
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait): His Excellency Mr. Abdou Diouf, Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), on 21 October called from this rostrum for the convening of a special session of the General Assembly on the economic situation in Africa. This decision of the Twenty-first Summit of the Organization of African Unity is a timely and welcome one. It is a serious indication of the determination of the African countries to solve the problems confronting them. We hope that the proposed session will receive the unqualified attention and support of all States.
Less than a year ago this Assembly addressed the situation in the African continent, its natural and man-made, as well as internal and external, causes; its immediate and long-term effects; and local and international measures to deal with the situation. Now, a year later, the emergency situation has somewhat abated. Favourable climatic conditions and relief assistance by the international community, combined with efforts by individual countries, were major factors in alleviating human suffering and containing to a degree that dimension of the crisis. But out of the original 20 African countries, 12 remain in a serious emergency situation; and if the daily survival needs of some have been met, their recovery and development needs have yet to be satisfied.
While stressing requirements connected with immediate problems of survival, thought and effort should be concentrated on medium and longer-term problems of recovery and development. In this regard my delegation would like to express its belief that the problem of the infrastructure required in the transport, water, energy and other areas should be addressed seriously and urgently according to
(Mr^?bulhasan, Kuwait) priorities drawn up by the individual countries. Food and agricultural problems should be considered in a comprehensive manner with a view to eradicating hunger and malnutrition and the achievement of self-sufficiency in food production. In view of their importance the rural sector and the role of small farmers should be the subject of concrete policy measures. The financial obligations of developing countries towards developed countries and multilateral institutions should be addressed in an appropriate dialogue jointly to find mutually agreed, equitable and durable solutions. In this respect we should like to emphasize that no solution will be feasible if it adversely affects opportunities for growth and development or the political stability of developing countries.
Kuwait endorses international efforts to address, in an integrated approach, the interrelated problems of survival and development confronting the African continent. Our bilateral commitments had in fact long predated the emergence of the crisis situation. Kuwait's assistance was focused on the development of infrastructure. Kuwaiti loans had been and continue to be of a concessionary nature. Our objective has been neither financial nor political gain.
Kuwait will support international development efforts just as it has supported international efforts for survival. Here again, appalled by the tragic human dimension of the crisis, a Kuwaiti Relief Committee was set up in October 1984 to draw up relief assistance and co-ordinate operations in affected African countries. Relief supplies were airlifted by the Kuwaiti Air Force. Trucks were purchased and camps established to facilitate the distribution of relief material. Kuwaiti boy scouts volunteered to work for the Committee and field volunteers have been and still are considered to be on official mission during their absence from work, in line with a decision of the Government.
Our participation in international efforts will be reflected in a document issued on this item and this sense of sharing will guide our approach to the critical economic situation in Africa.
Mr. JACOB (India): At this time last year when the General Assembly met, millions of African lives hung in precarious balance as a result of drought and famine. The consensus Declaration adopted at the thirty-ninth session of this Assembly represented the concerns of this family of nations over the calamity facing Africa. In the year gone by, through the efforts of the African countries and the international community, mass starvation was averted. A crucial factor contributing to this result was the prompt response of the United Nations system and the spontaneous outpouring of sympathy and fellow feeling from peoples all over the world, an outpouring which led to diverse activities that were as creative and productive as they were heartening. An international consensus was forged to meet the emergency situation. This consensus must not be dissipated; indeed, it must be built on.
The situation facing Africa today is no less daunting even though it may not be as tragically dramatic. The task now is to bring a measure of improvement to those lives that were saved and to the lives of the many millions more who are still haunted by underdevelopment, poverty, malnutrition, disease and a bleak and uncertain future. The past year has been one of respite, not solutions. Portents which could spell growing impoverishment, food scarcity, ecological disaster and financial insolvency have not been dispelled. The world community cannot sit by and watch another tragedy overtake the countries of Africa.
The African crisis which has been building over the years has several dimensions. It does not serve much purpose to debate whether these were largely exogenous or endogenous. A combination of historical legacies, adverse external circumstances, domestic policy directions and population and environmental factors have all led to the present situation, which has rightly been summed up as basically a crisis of development. African leaders and Governments have shown the will and the vision to deal with the situation. They have not hestitated to bring about a reordering of policies and priorities whenever necessary. Clearly, however, many of the problems are beyond the influence of any national policy. What is required, therefore, is not more advice, but supportive action. Ultimately, the struggle for survival and development will be waged through the toil and effort of the African people. The task of the international community is to see that that toil is not in vain. This, in fact, is the essence of the Lagos Plan of Action and *^e Final Act of Lagos, to which all African countries are fully committed.
It is clear that, because of growing populations, environmental degradation and the disruptions of past years, several countries in Africa, despite the onset of rains in some areas, will continue to require food and relief assistance. Such assistance should be timely and assured, and must be delivered in a manner that does not overstrain the fragile transportation and administrative structures of the affected countries. Fortunately, the world as a whole does not lack for food. The irony lies in its overproduction and problems of surplus management, in some quarters, while millions suffer from hunger and malnutrition elsewhere. We hope that such problems can be addressed within the comprehensive concept of food security being developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). It should not be beyond our ingenuity to devise mechanisms which can even up the mismatch of abundance and desperate need.
W14	A/40/PV. 66
52 (Mr. Jacoby India) Relief and food assistance need to be fully integrated into the longer-term development aspects. One way of achieving this is through the food-for-work programme for infrastructure development, which is vitally necessary in many countries to lay the foundations for future growth. We also look forward to learning of the conclusions of the internal task force of the United Nations referred to in the Secretary-General's report in document A/40/372, which is currently addressing such linkages.
Neither food imports, which already absorb more than 30 per cent of Africa's foreign exchange earnings, nor food aid can provide a long-term solution, whereas one places an intolerable burden on declining export earnings, the other perpetuates external dependence by affecting production and shifting demand towards food items which cannot be domestically produced. It is crucially important, therefore, that domestic agriculture production be stepped up. The importance of an appropriate price policy and price incentives has been underlined. Many African countries have taken action along these lines. Appropriate pricing policies, although necessary, are not however sufficient in themselves. More positive measures would be required to promote adaptive research into crops and to develop drought-resistant varieties that can prosper in African conditions. T.'ie results of such research would need to be carried from the lab to the land, which would require assistance for the expansion and effective operation of an extension service network. The determination of the African countries to take such steps is reflected in the decision of the Summit Conference of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to bring about a 20 to 25 per cent increase in the share of public investment in agricultural development. The report of the Secretary-General on the food and agriculture situation in Africa brings out the fact that even at a low level of technology Africa can produce more than enough food for its population. The productivity of labour needs to be stepped up, and that will require the .
(Mr. Jacob, India) provision o£ intermediate inputs such as seeds, irrigation, fertilizer and assistance in the management of credit and marketing institutions.
I mention these aspects at some length because there are many prophets of doom who believe that the cause of African development is irrevocably lost. But similar problems have been faced by many other developing countries about which similar prophesies were also made, including my own not too long ago. They have been overcome by the successful implementation of concrete measures, and the food and agricultural situation has been transformed. The co-operation extended by the international community can be of critical importance. With this intention - and in order to identify the gaps where it can make a contribution - the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement adopted a Plan of Action for Africa focused on the food and agricultural sector. Based on the requirements of the African countries, the Plan attempts to focus on the skills and capabilities available in other countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement where action will have a . supplemental value in enhancing the effectiveness of the totality of the international co-operation effort. Many countries of the Non-Aligned Movement are implementing programmes identified in the Plan of Action. In co-operation with FAO, India has taken up eight such projects for implementation. As the focal point for the Non-Aligned Plan of Action, India will shortly be sending a technical team to discuss further implementation of the Plan with African countries. The Plan of Action is a concrete manifestation of the principle of collective self-reliance and the promotion of economic co-operation among developing countries to which the Non-Aligned Movement has been committed from its very inception.
While emphasizing the need for action and support at the country level and the sectoral level, one cannot lose sight of the over-all adverse external environment which confronts Africa and the developing countries. The impact of the accumulated problems of the international monetary, financial and trading systems, of declining
commodity prices, high interest rates, exchange-rate fluctuations and increasing protectionism have had a devastating impact on growth and development prospects. It is therefore ironical that, at the time of greatest need, a reverse transfer of financial resources is taking place from Africa. Adjustment efforts carried out under such unhelpful circumstances necessarily extract an unacceptably heavy toll in social and economic costs.
A very disturbing feature of the current African crisis is that, given the external constraints, many African countries may simply not be in a position to finance their development. The facts regarding the precipitous deterioration in the terms of trade of developing countries, the decline in resource flows and the mounting burden of indebtedness of African countries are well known and do not need any repetition. Appropriate international policy measures to deal with the interrelated problems of money, finance, debt and trade are vitally necessary to bring about an external environment which would support African development efforts. At the same time, specific measures to deal with the problem of resource flows and debt are urgently required. The Non-Aligned Movement has always felt a close affinity with the countries of Africa, which form its largest constituent part.	'
The Economic Declaration of the seventh Summit Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement held at New Delhi in March 1983 expressed grave concern at the extremely slow and in some cases negative rate of growth of countries in sub-Saharan Africa and stressed the need for urgent corrective measures. The Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement held in Angola in June 1985 supported the call of the eighteenth Summit Conference of the OAU for an international conference on African indebtedness and for a special session of the United Nations General Assembly.
It is urgently necessary to increase the flow of concessional resources to the low-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa. We attach importance to the special
(Mr. Jacob, India) facility created by the World Bank, and we hope its resources will not be overburdened by undue conditionality which hinders quick disbursement. It is also necessary urgently to improve the resource position of the World Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and other multilateral financial institutions.
< j.
People in poverty, wherever they may be, need support and assistance. Despite India's very great needs, out of our solidarity with the people of Africa the Government of India has decided to refrain from its entitlement under the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Trust Fund reflows from 1985 to 1991, as well as some other special facilities being considered in the World Bank and the IMF. The Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund called this decision "one of the important decisions of the Seoul meetings”.
Within the constraint of its resources, India has also attempted to contribute to the fullest extent towards meeting the critical economic situation in Africa. In addition to gifting 100,000 tonnes of wheat valued at over $20 million in 1984, India has announced a contribution of $10 million to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Special Fund, which can be used for the purchase of wheat and cereals. India was the first country outside Africa to announce such a contribution.
While these measures have been taken in the context of the emergency situation in Africa, India has a long history of involvement with development efforts in that continent. We have been contributing through our technical co-operation programmes as well to infrastructural development by implementation of numerous projects.
Under our education and training schemes, more than 900 African trainees are provided with fully funded Government of India scholarships every year. In addition a large number of African students are pursuing higher studies in Indian technical and academic institutions which are heavily subsidized by the Government. Many bilateral and multilateral donor agencies are making use of Indian training facilities for training African nominees, particularly in fields such as forestry, soil conservation, irrigation and water management, and agricultural research and extension.
Under the Indian economic and technical co-operation programme more than 80 Indian experts are working in various African countries. A large number of feasibility studies and consultancies have been conducted with Indian funding in
the past year, and in several cases equipment and materials have been provided. India currently has 48 joint venture enterprises in Africa, which are geared towards assisting in Africa’s industrial development.
At the multilateral level, India is providing $US 1.5-million-worth of assistance to the Economic Commission for Africa for specific projects. India has also offered 50 training slots annually for nominees of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) and the Southern Africa Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC). Similar arrangements have been entered into with the African Development Bank.
India's efforts of co-operation with the African countries are guided by the noble motto of the paddy-field:
"Lighter is the burden of labour
When each bends his back with his neighbour."
We fully intend to continue to do our utmost in Africa, our neighbour across the sea.
Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): I have the honour, in my capacity as Chairman of the Asian Group for the month of November, to make the following statement on behalf of the members of the Group of Asian States.
The Member States of the Asian Group would like to express their deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on the critical economic situation in Africa, (A/40/372 and Add.l and 2). We also recall with profound appreciation the memorable statement made in this Hall by the President of Senegal in his capacity as Chairman of the Organization of African Unity. We wish also to welcome the proposal that the General Assembly convene a special session on this very imporant matter.
The member States of the Asian Group fully appreciate the urgency and gravity of the multifaceted problems facing Africa today and the clearly felt need to bring durable solutions to them. While the international community has moved quickly to contribute to the speedy alleviation of the plight of the African people, the
difficulties they are facing, ranging from famine, desertification, starvation and mounting debt burdens to a bleak prospect for long-term economic and social development, demand a wide-ranging and more comprehensive solution.
Beyond the emergency assistance that the various parties concerned have directed to the African continent, therefore, lies the urgent need to formulate a longer-term approach. We, the peoples of via, are of the view that a viable solution to a problem of such magnitude requires both international co-operation and self-reliance. While foreign assistance represents an effective means of mitigating the immediate difficulties of critical proportions and helps restore the morale of those who need it most, another dimension of international co-operation should be directed towards reactivating the economic and social development of the African countries. The establishment of viable common economic programmes which could serve the dual purpose of achieving individual national goals and generating regional co-operation is perhaps another possible approach. These economic programmes should also function in co-ordination with international or bilateral aid programmes. We support the view that a lasting solution of the present crisis in Africa definitely requires infrastructure development and timely industrialization within the African continent. We should also take into account various factors such as the rehabilitation of the agricultural sector, the restoration of the external resources to a level sufficient to meet the real need and a more effective system of mobilizing and developing human resources.
The member States of the Asian Group would like to take this opportunity to express their sincere appreciation to various sectors within the United Nations, other international organizations and the donor countries for their kind and generous contributions in response to the urgent needs of the African people. These humanitarian undertakings deserve high praise, particularly if they ensure follow-up actions and an element of continuity.
Wap
We members of the Asian Group earnestly hope that the item before us today will continue to be accorded highest priority and that a longer-term remedy for the African problem will with the necessary urgency eventually be formulated. The members of the Asian Group will continue to render assistance and co-operation to the best of the ability of each of usr in solidarity with the African countries.
Speaking now as representative of Thailand, I wish to pledge Thailand's continued support, within the limits of our capabilities, for the international efforts to help alleviate the plight of our African brothers at this critical juncture.
Mr. SEEREEKISSOON (Mauritius): It is a great honour for me to speak as Chairman of the African Group, on the occasion of this debate on the critical economic situation in Africa.
One year ago the General Assembly adopted by consensus a Declaration on Africa which provides the needed framework for concerted international action in favour of our continent. Since the adoption of that Declaration, African Heads of State and Government have had the opportunity at the summit conference of the Organization of African Unity held in Addis Ababa in July 1985 to indicate clearly where in their view the priorities for action lie - action both by them and by the international community. As evidenced by the recent debate on Africa during the second regular session of the Economic and Social Council, there has already been a commencement of action, especially to deal with the most immediate problems and life-threatening situations. The time has now come to agree on further action to halt the economic decline of the whole African continent.
The economic and social situation Sf the African continent is deteriorating rapidly. Africa is the only continent in which the standard of living declined in the last decade, is at present declining and is expected to decline up to the year 2000, according to present trends. I need not say what these bleak prospects represent in terms of social misery, unemployment, malnutrition, famine and even death for millions of people.	r
There are several crises going on at the same time on the continent. I am sure Member States are all aware of the tragedy of the drought-induced emergency in large parts of the continent, and of the valiant efforts of African Governments to save human lives and restore basic economic activity. In this connection, I should like to indicate our gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the initiatives he has taken to assist concerned African Governments to deal with this emergency - in particular the establishment of the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, which has functioned in a very effective manner.
Quite distinct from the drought-induced emergency, there is also a short-term economic crisis gripping many African countries. This is particularly the result of the world economic recession of the last few years, which had a severe impact on many countries of the continent, especially those which did not have the necessary flexibility in their economies to adjust to the situation. Reduced export earnings, growing external indebtedness, the adverse effect of the rise in value of the dollar combined to create an almost unsustainable situation for many Governments. They have been forced to take drastic measures to redress the situation, which has resulted in a drop in the already very low standards of living in the continent. We are gratified to note that the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) decided at the recent Seoul meeting of the Development Committee to strengthen their assistance to African countries in their eforts to ensure economic recovery and rehabilitation.
There is also another, longer-term aspect of the African crisis; it relates to structural problems. Africa has got the potential for growth, and its soil is rich with minerals. But only 19 per cent of its land is suitable for agricultural use; it is also the driest of all continents. Eleven out of the 21 land-locked countries of the world are in Africa, and one country out of .two in the continent is classified as least developed. Above all, Africa is a continent of young nations: there were only two independent African States when the United Nations was founded 40 years ago. It is also a continent which has inherited from the colonial Powers a structure of production and trade which was designed to be dependent on the industrial centres of the world. It is against that background that political, social and economic changes are now in the making in Africa. The international community at large must provide the necessary assistance to concerned countries so that these processes lead, as they are meant to, to the improvement of the condition of living of the African population.
The causes for the present crises in Africa have been reviewed in many international forums and are documented in many reports, including the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations which we now have before us and which we find very useful. What is needed now is to turn our attention to the future and to create a will to undertake, in common, the necessary action that would help to reverse the negative trends forecast for the future, and help make of Africa an area of hope and peace.
There are several priority areas for concerted action. Our continent must first be in a position to feed itself. The development of agricultural production, especially food production, is being given a high priority. That is not a new objective for us Africans. It is inscribed in the Lagos Plan of Action and in almost every official document of the Organization' of African Unity. Recently, our Heads of State and Government have pledged their commitment to increase the share allotted to food and agriculture in their national budgets to at least 20 per cent of those budgets.
But, rather than helping the African economies, an increase in agricultural production may contribute to creating further economic problems if no action is taken to facilitate the trade of export commodities and to stabilize their prices. African countries will not be better off if they produce economically competitive commodities which cannot find external markets as a result either of trade protectionist policies in industrialized countries or of farm subsidies which artificially lower producer prices in these same countries. My country, which is the largest African exporter of sugar, with the exception of South Africa, knows from first-hand experience that the facilitation of commodity trade would go a long way towards easing Africa's economic difficulties.
•	-	(Mr. Seereekissoon, Mauritius)
Also, the priority given to agricultural production may seem meaningless if it is not backed by appropriate technology and appropriate research. In these fields, the support of industrialized countries for African efforts has not always been at the necessary level. African countries, as well as other developing nations, have not always been able to get the necessary access, for example, to genetic research on seeds. We therefore hope that the forthcoming Food and Agriculture Organization Conference, which, inter alia, will examine problems related to seed research, will result in increased access to such research for developing countries.
Apart from agriculture, the Priority Programme of Economic Recovery adopted by our Heads of State and Governments at Addis Ababa also contains many other areas for urgent action, both in the economic and social fields. The Ambassador of Senegal, speaking on behalf of the Organization of African Unity, has already referred to them, as have a number of other representatives. As he has indicated, the repair, maintenance and development of the transport and communications infrastructure are of vital importance to Africa, just as is the need for the promotion of industrialization, particularly for the transformation of agricultural production.
I should like to stress in particular the importance of concerted action in the field of financial resources for development. Without an adequate level of such resources, our countries will not be able to make the necessary investments to ensure growth and development. Most African countries have taken steps to mobilize to the greatest possible extent their domestic savings and would welcome further financial and technical support through South-South co-operation or from the donor community to progress further in this field. But internal resources will not be at a sufficient level to finance the needed investments. At present, in most countries
AP/ah	A/40/PV.66
67
....	(Mg Seereekissoon, Mauritius)
in Africa, there is an acute need for a sustained level of net financial flows from outside to support the development process. Official development assistance, which has stagnated in recent years, must be stepped up. Adequate measures «re also needed to reduce the debt burden of African countries. The debt-servicing burden of the sub-Saharan countries alone has practically doubled,, from $5.7 billion in 1983 to an estimated $11.1 billion in 1985. That is equivalent to more than 25 per j®t of the value of exports. That is truly an' unbearable situation which is seriously constraining the vital process of rehabilitation and development in sub-Saharan Africa. It is high time to realize that many African countries simply cannot repay their debts as scheduled, and that they must obtain new arrangements fro their creditors.
There are two major constraints on the development of Africa which wist also be borne in mind.
Firstly, the African continent will not be in a position to tackle the problem of development fully as long as it is threatened by drought-induced emergencies such as the one we have just experienced. African countries, with the assistance of the international community) including the United Nations system, must take the necessary measures to free themselves from the scourge of drought and famine, in order to be able to focus their action fully on problems of development.
The second major constraint is of a political nature. No African will ever lead a free life so long as the inhumane regime of apartheid is maintained in South Africa. It is high time that all industrialized nations take the necessary measures to facilitate and speed up the dismantling of the racist policies in South Africa. The question is no more whether apartheid will disappear; the question is when will it disappear. The earlier the better.
Ia closing, I should like to recall that we recognize that the main responsibility for solving the present crisis indeed rests with our own Governments on our own shoulders. But our efforts will not yield the expected results if the whole international community does not provide us with the required support. In the interdependent world in which we live, it is indeed in the interest of the industrialized nations themselves to have a prosperous African continent which would be not just a producer of commodities, but also a strong trading partner. In the present circumstances a common endeavour of the African countries and their main trading partners for the development of the continent therefore stands to benefit both sides.
It is precisely with such thoughts in mind that the African Heads of State and Government are requesting that a special session of the General Assembly be convened to discuss the economic problems of Africa, and to agree on specific action to solve them. Such a session would help to fashion a new alliance between Governments of rich and poor countries, and between peoples of all continents, to sustain the development efforts of the whole African continent. It is important that such a session takes place as proposed, and agrees on specific international action. The future of 500 million people is at stake.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.75
LJ November 1985
ENGLISH
Fortieth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 13 November 1985, at 3 p.m.
President:	Mr. DE PINIES	(Spain)
later;	Mr. OYOUE (Vice-President) •	(Gabon)
United Nations World Conference for the International Youth Year plenary meetings devoted to policies and programmes relating to youth in accordance with resolution 39/22 of 23 November 1984)	'
-	International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace: report of the Third Committee [89]
-	Policies and programmes relating to youth: report of the Third Committee [95]
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
85-64448/A 5582V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE FOR THE INTERNATIONAL YOUTH YEAR (PLENARY MEETINGS DEVOTED TO POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES RELATING TO YOUTH IN ACCORDANCE WITH RESOLUTION 39/22 OF 23 NOVEMBER 1984) AGENDA ITEMS 89 AND 95 INTERNATIONAL YOUTH YEAR: PARTICIPATION, DEVELOPMENT, PEACE: REPORT OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE (A/40/855) POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES RELATING TO YOUTH: REPORT OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE (A/40/856)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As representatives will recall, the Assembly decided at its 3rd plenary meeting, held on 20 September 1985, that this series of plenary meetings should be designated as the United Nations World Conference for the International Youth Year. In that connection, I wish to note that the Assembly decided at its 53rd plenary meeting, held on 30 October 1985, that in view of the great number of speakers wishing to address the Assembly on this item, morning plenary meetings should start at 10 a.m. instead of 10.30 a.m.
As President of the General Assembly at its fortieth session, it is my pleasure to delcare open the United Nations K:;rld Conference for the International Youth Year. I wish now to make a brief statement on this solemn occasion.
There is no doubt that 1985 is a memorable year in the history of the United Nations, for it is the year of both the International Youth Year and the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Both events give us the opportunity once again to rededicate ourselves to the ideals of miltilateralism and international co-operation in a world at peace, to reiterate our commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, and to stress again our recognition of the valuable role that youth can play in the task of forging the future of mankind.
(The President) and an important opportunity to improve the situation of young people throughout the world. It is reassuring to note that the international community - States Members, the United Nations system, non-governmental organizations and youth organizations - has made a positive collective response to this challenge and has taken a series of initiatives aimed at finding the most effective possible solutions.	•
Questions relating to youth are at present of concern to the international community. There has been a global awakening to the problems faced by young People. In the framework of the preparation for and observation of the International Youth Year, the world community has adopted many initiatives and carried out numerous activities. This has succeeded in rallying public interest and general support. The great variety of national, regional and international activities carried out throughout the world in connection with the International Youth Year shows the universal will to improve the situation of youth and to enable it to play the important role that falls to it in the modern world and in the world's advance on the road of progress.
The International Year has shown us a new way of approaching the question of youth. It has helped us see young people not as a problem social group, but as creative, aware members of society, contributing to its workings. Let us take this opportunity to infuse ourselves with the magic of youth and the rich potential it displays in its breadth of vision, its healthy capacity for calling into question accepted norms and values, and its energy and will to carry out positive transformations throughout the world.
The commemoration of the International Year have certainly contributed to strengthening the cause of the well-being of youth. But in addition, the International Youth Year has given us the opportunity to undertake more concerted
tThs President) programmes of action in favour of youth. This has been a year of implementing specific projects, programmes and policies, which should long continue.
Meeting here today, we may contemplate with satisfaction the achievements of the International Youth Year. As we review the vast experience accumlated during the International Year, we note that there has been consensus on a joint world strategy on youth. Member States appear to evince the firm political will and determination to do more for young people. We have seen the establishment of national committes for the International Year; these have been active in the planning, implementation and co-ordination of activities relevant to youth. We welcome that plethora of information, understanding and dedication to the questions and aspirations of youth. That abundance makes us richer today than we were at the beginning of the International Youth Year. That augurs well for the future.
Finally, we should be proud that the international community has recognized that the questions placed in the foreground by this International Year are of . universal scope, and that their solution will depend upon even closer co-operation and collective action aimed at ensuring genuine participation, development and peace.
While considerable progress has been made, much remains to be done. How much is achieved, of course, will ultimately depend on activities on the national level. But even so, there remains a broad scope for international action as well. The United Nations system should continue to strive for effective participation in development by young people. It should continue to work actively to improve the lines of communication between the United Nations, young people, and youth organizations. It should renew its resolve to work to achieve a lasting improvement in the situation of young people throughout the world. To that end, the United Nations system should initiate action to support the activities already undertaken on the regional and national level.
EMS/4
While the commemorative activities of the International Youth Year are drawing to a close, the spirit and strategy of the Year remain, and should be maintained. Let us support that noble cause; let us consolidate our fruitful efforts and increase our commitment; let us show future generations that we were equal to our obligations; let us bequeath to youth the foundations for a future of hope and satisfied aspirations: because sometimes we are too concerned in our countries about the abundance or scarcity of material resources, forgetting that the main resource for the future of our peoples is actually youth. 
I call now upon the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): Just a few weeks ago, in this Hall, we celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. It is, I believe, not a mere coincidence that the same year which marked that event is also International Youth Year. The anniversary provided an occasion to survey the world's immediate past and present from the vantage point of experience. The Youth Year has offered an opportunity to focus attention on the aspirations which should shape the world's future. The two perspectives complement each other. 

The youth situation around the world embraces a whole spectrum of our current concerns, political or economic, social or ethical. The purpose of designating a year the International Youth Year was to generate a widespread awareness of this situation. It was based on the conviction that the young cannot be regarded as a peripheral element in human society. As it is they who will inherit the world, there is no major issue, whether it be of peace, of development or of human rights, in which they are not directly involved. 
The observance of the Year has set in motion a much-needed global review of the actions that are required at all levels to enhance the status of young women and men and to ensure their active participation in the efforts to strengthen peace, promote justice- and accelerate progress around the globe, (spoke in English)
It is only natural that the review should have brought out the diversity in the needs of young people corresponding to the differences of economic level between countries. In developing countries the outlook of youth as a whole is inevitably conditioned by the sombre fact that one out of four human beings is trapped in absolute poverty. Far too many of their generation perish prematurely, have inadequate educational opportunities or face the prospect of endless migration in search of jobs that do not exist. They come to cities with hope and live there in despair. 
Unemployment remains a crucial concern of youth in most developing countries. The severity of financial constraints in many of these countries has reduced investment in health and education to below the levels of earlier years and there is doubt whether economic growth will be adequate to stabilize per capita income in the years ahead. 

The youth situation in these countries is, therefore, mainly an aspect of underdevelopment and the principal issues it raises are central to the larger problem of eliminating poverty. However, it certainly emphasizes the need for greater attention to the human dimension of development through new policy approaches at the national, regional and international levels. Job opportunities for young people, for example, should be such as not to stunt their growth and self—fulfilment. 
Other major concerns of youth are not necessarily confined to the disadvantaged areas of global society. It is a cause of anxiety for the young that the policies of today might severely limit the opportunities for tomorrow. The structures of production and consumption in the world of the future are being shaped to an appreciable extent by present decisions to allocate to military uses resources which could better have been invested in building the human and physical capital. Moreover, in the perception of the young, their education does not prepare them as well as it should for full participation in the development of their societies. As a result, not enough use is made of their energies and enthusiasm in the search for solutions to social problems, including the problem of adjustment to rapid technological change. 
One of the most alarming problems in the world today in both developed and developing countries is that of illicit trafficking in, and abuse of, drugs. In my view, it presents as destructive a threat to present and coming generations as the plague which swept many parts of the world in earlier ages. Unless it is controlled, its effect will be even more insidious and devastating. It is particularly tragic that a great proportion of those most seriously affected by this scourge are young people. The range and depth of the problem is a sad commentary on modern society. I have suggested that the time has come to undertake

a bold offensive against this menace. The observance of International Youth Year should lend further urgency to this suggestion. 
Over and above all these concerns is the universal character of the aspirations of youth, which is apparent from assessments made during the Year. As the young themselves have voiced their anxieties and hopes, the point emerges with the utmost emphasis that peace and the future of young people are inseparable. The young are often the group that pays the highest price for international conflicts. They are the ones who, more than other sections of society, bear the most consequences of war. Even in the present conditions of peace the relentless arms race takes its toll and in too many instances results in the curtailing of vital programmes needed for the effective integration of youth in society, (continued in French)
We would be well advised to reflect on the results of the research and activities undertaken in connection with the Year. The very fact of their number, which may be over 1 billion at the end of the century, entitles young people to be heard when they express their views on the great problems of society. At the present critical juncture the civilized world is striving to deal with the widespread poverty and social injustice that prevail in vast regions of the globe, with the succession of regional conflicts, with the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the stockpiling of conventional weapons, with the spreading pollution of our environment and with drug addiction. This may, therefore, be the first time in history that the need to enlist the open minded ness of youth in the service of reform and positive changes has been so keenly felt. 
For young people can question everything, and they have the courage to say no when that is necessary. They are more receptive to new ideas, more sensitive to human suffering, more respectful of nature and more tolerant of national and

cultural peculiarities. They are, or ought to be, relatively free of the prejudices and phobias of the past. They have played a key role in stimulating world awareness of major problems, such as those of racial discrimination, and the danger that mankind may destroy itself by nuclear warfare. They must therefore participate fully in the action taken to solve these problems. 
International Youth Year has been a truly collective enterprise which has made the whole world share the same outlooks and the same ideas. Its foundation was the specific programme of measures and activities to be undertaken prior to and during the International Youth Year prepared in 1981 by the Advisory Committee. The Governments of Member States have helped to work towards the objectives of the Year by organizing various events and activities and, in particular, by formulating policies and programmes for youth. 
In this connection, I wish to pay a tribute to the national co-ordinating committees for the Year, which were established in 158 countries and whose co-operation has been extremely valuable. Our thanks also goes to the non-governmental organizations throughout the world which have made a decisive contribution to the Year's success. 
The organizations of the United Nations system, for their part, have worked together in order to ensure that the targets which the Year set for itself were adhered to. Finally, and above all, mention must be made of the important role played by the young people themselves in mobilizing public opinion and Governments in furtherance of the objectives of the Year. 
We are all very gratified, I am sure, to note the presence of many young people among the various delegations participating in this Conference. As young people throughout the world have emphasized, in the many messages and letters they have sent me, International Youth Year must be regarded as only a beginning. Accordingly, while this World Conference marks the end of the celebration, it is the start of the first stage of a long-term process. The activities in this field can be continued on the basis of a the wise suggestions offered in the "Guidelines for further planning and suitable follow-up in the field of youth", prepared by the Advisory Committee at its last session. 
Our capacity to mobilize the solidarity required for ending the scourge of war and promoting development depends, for much of its success, on the involvement of youth in this enterprise. Youth is, in fact, both the essential link for bringing about international understanding and the cornerstone of a more promising future. During the Year, the young people have demonstrated their eagerness to participate in pursuing the ideals of the United Nations, while the older people have shown that they are in favour of their participation. 
We must try to do our utmost to bridge the generation gap in order to spare society any break or interruption and to make sure that we are not betraying the young people and that they themselves are not betraying their predecessors. With the principles established by our Charter and by the institutions for international

co-operation forming part of the United Nations system, we shall pass on to the young people the foundations of peace and human progress. They will have to continue with the building of the edifice and we must facilitate their task. That is a great message that is brought to us by the International Youth Year. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to suggest that the list of speakers in the debate be closed tomorrow at 12 noon. I hear no objection. 	
It was so decided. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I would therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names on the list of speakers as soon as possible. 
Mr. CEAUSESCU (Romania) (spoke in Romanian; English text furnished by the delegation): It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you, the participants in the United Nations World Conference for International Youth Year, which is clear proof of the concern and interest shown by the world forum for the younger generation. By a happy coincidence, the year dedicated to the younger generation, and in particular this Conference, are being held in the context of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, thus illustrating the close link between the major political issues on the United Nations agenda and specific youth issues. 
The major event we are attending is a profound expression of the will of the Member States of the United Nations, committed - at present and in the future - to approach in a realistic and responsible manner the complex problems concerning youth and their adequate solution.
International Youth Year, which was successfully prepared and observed throughout the world at the governmental and non-governmental levels, has fully demonstrated the great timeliness and relevance of its motto: "Participation, Development, Peace", decided upon by consensus by the General Assembly in 1979.
By its creative enthusiasm and capacity, by resisting anachronisms, and by showing receptivity to new values, youth has demonstrated, especially in the past few decades, that it is not only an important fund of "demographic capital", but also an important factor for social action, which can and must join in the efforts of nations to build a better and more just world. The motto of International Youth Year highlights this active vocation of the younger generation, in relation not only to the development of nations and the eradication of economic, social and cultural anachronistic situations, but also to the maintenance and consolidation of peace, the achievement of disarmament, and above all nuclear disarmament, and the creation of a climate of international security, understanding and co-operation.
Bearing in mind that youth is - and will always be - an active subject of history, it is natural that the younger generation should want to have a say and become directly involved in the efforts of nations to shape the future of mankind, as well as its own future.	•
Such a requirement is ever more vital, as it is true that contemporary youth is starting life in a highly complex age, in which its own fundamental right - the right to peaceful life and existence - is questioned.
The fundamental problem of our age is how to achieve disarmament, nuclear disarmament above all, how to remove the danger of a wovid conflagration which threatens to destroy human civilization as a whole. It is well known that, because of the unprecedented level it has reached, both as regards the amount of military expenditures as well as the destructive power of the weapons produced, the arms race deeply affects the life of peoples, including that of the younger generation, being a permanent source of tension and instability throughout the world.
At the same time, the negative effects of the world economic crisis are felt by all national economies and, particularly by those of the developing countries.
In the circumstances, it is essential to establish a new international economic order by doing away with the anachronistic phenomenon of underdevelopment and the great gaps between the rich and poor countries, and by securing the right of each nation to free and independent economic development.
There is no doubt that the issues specific to young people in the 1980s, as well as those that will characterize the social status of future generations, cannot be separated from the issues we have mentioned.. As a matter of fact, youth is the first to feel the impact of all these processes, both nationally and internationally, in a variety of ways.
We should also mention that, in numerous countries of the world, young people face unemployment, illiteracy, delinquency, violence and terrorism, marginality, drug abuse and other situations of "moral pollution" - serious phenomena which greatly reduce their capacity for constructive action for the benefit of and in harmony with the objective trends of society's development.
That is why political decision-makers at the most varied levels - local, national, regional and global - have the task of taking effective action to eliminate all these phenomena from the life of young people, to enable the younger generation to play an increasing role ij taking over and enriching the material and spiritual values produced by mankind.
In the context of the preparations for International Youth Year, a lot has been said in various circles about the meaning and purpose of this event.
In ouï opinion, the defining element in this respect has been the fact that International Youth Year has asserted itself not only as a year about youth, but, in the first place, as a year for youth. Today, after years of intense preparations, as well as during the observance of the Year itself, one can say that this important event has emphasized the concerns of all those with responsibilities in the field of youth to take a realistic and thorough approach to the problems confronting the younger generation in various social and demographic contexts, as well as at the world level. This has clearly brought out the need to establish youth-oriented programmes designed to bring about the free promotion and implementation of the fundamental rights of young people to education, work, culture and information, and to participate in decision-making. At the same time, International Youth Year has demonstrated the existence of the necessary resources to open future prospects aimed at substantially enhancing the contribution of the younger generation to the efforts made by people for their national development, for adequately examining and settling the vital issues of international life, for the halting of the arms race and the adoption of firm measures of disarmament, for the maintenance and strengthening of world peace, the democratization of relations among States and the establishment of a new international economic and political order.
In this context, it should be recognized that both the preparations for and the observance of International Youth Year have formed a stimulating framework for the concerns of a large number of bodies and organizations, first of all of those with direct decision-making responsibility, in view of an ever-deeper knowledge and evaluation of the'global situation of youth and of adopting, on this basis, medium and long-term strategies.
The establishment of national committees or similar bodies for preparing for and observing International Youth Year in practically all States of the world
(Mr. Ceausescu, Romania) has been a prime prerequisite for dealing with the issues of the younger generation, from the specific perspective and conditions of each country, and for identifying the most suitable practical solutions capable of improving the economic, social and cultural status of youth.
At this time in history, we should also point out the important role played, through their practical orientation, by the five meetings held in 1983 for Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Europe, Latin America and West Asia, in obtaining a regional view of issues related to youth in order to promote the objectives of International Youth Year, namely, participation, development and peace. At the international level, I should like to highlight the activity carried out, in a spirit of full understanding and co-operation, by the united Nations Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year. The results of its four.sessions contributed to furthering the preparations for International Youth Year and to benefiting from and furthering an exchange of information and experience between various bodies, institutions and organizations with responsibilities in the field of youth.
The United Nations programme of measures and activities for the preparation for and observance of the International Youth Year, adopted by the General Assembly four years ago, proved to be, as a result of its recommendations and guidelines, a stimulating programme of initiatives and a relevant source of inspiration for Governments and numerous other factors involved. At the same time, this is a reference document which guided all actions carried out in connection with the Year. It is quite natural that the programme has been enriched by the very fact that the preparations for and observance of the Year are taking place and by the new efforts and initiatives undertaken at national and international levels.
One can rightfully say that, throughout this process, the younger generation
(Mr. Ceausescu, Romania) has not only been the object of International Youth Year, but it has also asserted itself, by its potential, as an important subject, by joining in an original and creative manner the efforts and initiatives taken by Governments, by the United Nations system and its specialized agencies.
The Socialist Republic of Romania, which, as is known, has been the initiator of Int.ernational Youth Year, welc< ^ed with great interest the decision of the United Nations to proclaim this major event.
Romanian youth has become responsibly involved in preparing for and promoting the objectives of International Youth Year, benefiting from its original view of the role and place of the younger generation in Romanian society and from the constant attention and concern shown by both the Party and State.
Romania's younger generation possesses the necessary conditions for receiving multilateral training and for the free enjoyment of the right to work, to education and to culture. Likewise, youth and its organizations take a direct part in the collective organization and management of society and in decision-making in the most varied activities, such as in the economic, social, cultural and educational fields.
As in the Romanian nation as a whole, youth has participated actively, under the leadership of the Party, in implementing the programmes for the multilateral economic and social development of our country. At the international level, Romanian youth has continuously developed contacts and relations of co-operation with young people in numerous countries of the world and has joined the energetic actions of the younger generation for peace and disarmament and for building a peaceful and prosperous future for all the nations of the world.
Under the auspices of the Romanian National Committee for international Youth Year, set up in 1981 as a broadly representative governmental body which brings
together youth, student and children's organizations and a number of ministries and central institutions with concerns in the field of youth, various activities have been undertaken at both national and international levels devoted to the subjects of International Youth Year. In the same way, the preparations for and observance of this Year have generated a more intense and effective co-operation between various factors on the basis of a unified approach to the many economic, social, political, cultural and educational aspects which relate to the active role and status of the younger generation in Romanian society. Activities of scientific research and documentation on youth issues have also been developed.
Among the number of international events held in Romania, I should like to mention the round-table "Youth in the 1980s”, organized in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; the European regional meeting for International Youth Year; the international seminar on "Youth and Development"; as well as the world Conference of National Committees for International Youth Year on "Youth of the Year 2000 - Participation, Development, Peace", which took place in September this year in Romania's capital. I should merely like to say in this connection that the joint statement adopted by -consensus by the participants at the Bucharest Conference was a heart-felt appeal for growing concern about youth matters, taking into account the valuable experience and initiatives accumulated throughout the preparations for and observance of International Youth Year.
The Conference that we are now attending offers me the pleasant opportunity of extending sincere thanks to all those who at various times have expressed their appreciation for the initiatives and efforts made by my country, the Socialist Republic of Romania, with respect to preparing for and observing International Youth Year and for promoting issues of the younger generation world-wide.
(Mr. Ceausescu, Romania)
In the future, Romania will continue to act vigorously, both within the United Nations and within other international institutions and events, towards promoting a thorough approach to arriving at an appropriate solution of the issues concerning youth and for its increasingly active involvement in the life of nations and in international life.
By virtue of its character and effectiveness, and its thorough preparation, the International Youth Year has gone beyond the framework of a celebration, and has asserted itself as a large-scale and original event with a direct resonance in the life and concerns of the younger generation everywhere.
The current United Nations World Conference for the International Youth Year is part of the same perspective; it intends to examine and endorse an important document designed to secure the continuity of efforts at various levels concerning the younger generation. These .will be guidelines for further planning and suitable follow-up in the field of youth. In my opinion, the above-mentioned document offers new and substantial scope for action over the long term, in accordance with a generally recognized truth, that no matter how well prepared and observed, International Youth Year could not solve all the complex problems confronting the younger generation in the various countries of the world.
Once endorsed, the guidelines are to be transmitted by the Secretary-General to all Governments, to all United Nations bodies, and to other international organizations concerned, for implementation. An important and significant role will fall to the national committees and other co-ordination machinery for-the International Youth Year that have been set up in 158 countries. The success of the implementation of the guidelines will depend to a large extent on those committees continuing to function. Thus, on the basis of the experience of those committees, and in the light of the opinions expressed at various international events and gatherings centred on International Youth Year, we believe that ensuring the continuity of the national committees for the International Youth Year after 1985 would be of great practical utility. In view of the specific nature of those committees, and also the particular situation in each country, they could
(Mr. Ceausescu, Romania) undoubtedly function after 1985 as national committees for youth affaigs, develoment and peace.
At the same time, in the United Nations it is cegtainly necessagy to find new ways and means to ensuge that the problems of the young people continue to benefit from the increased attention generated by the International Youth Year. The recommendations made by the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to strengthen the role and authority of the United Nations Commission for Social Development deserve to be studied with all seriousness. The absence of a United Nations body dealing directly with youth issues makes it more necessary than ever to make full use of all the existing machinery and structures within the United Nations system with competence in the field of youth. This requires persistent efforts both from Member States and from the United Nations Secretariat. We believe that the United Nations Vienna Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs should organize its activity in such a way as to be able to fulfil faithfully the mandate entrusted to it for the implementation of the guidelines for further planning for the study of the field of youth and suitable follow-up activity.
One must also realize the undoubted fact that the problems of tomorrow's youth will not be the same as those of today's youth. This fact justifies permanent efforts and continuing concern geared to the specific dynamics of the younger generation.
The full commitment of youth to the efforts to fulfil the noble ideals of mankind is an important field of concern for Governments, and for governmental and non-governmental organizations at the national, regional and international levels, efforts which must obviously continue beyond the calendar limits of the year 1985. One first and fitting occasion, in this respect, is provided by the International Year of Peace, 1986, recently proclaimed by the United Nations, particularly since
(Mr. Ceausescu, Romania) the fundamental significance of this year takes up one of the three basic themes of International Youth Year - Peace.
At the end of this century and millennium, the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace will remain in the awareness of mankind as an event with broad and mobilizing effects. This is the direct result of the specific character of the subject to which the International Youth Year is devoted. It is quite understandable that the younger generation hopes that the year currently being observed world-wide will.not remain on the united Nations agenda as a mere celebration. The younger generation hopes that the International Youth Year will open new and ample ways of inproving the economic, social and cultural status of youth, and of involving young people in a more active and effective way in the study and solution of the major problems of the contemporary world.
Mr. PHILIPPE (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the European community and its 10 member States, as well as Spain and Portugal. Those States have taken an active part in the observance of International Youth Year. They will inform the Assembly about the activities they have conducted and experience they have gained during this year of national activities. The purpose of my statement is to express the interest that the European community has shown in the aims of this International Year.
While the participation of the young people in political and cultural life falls essentially within the authority of individual Governments, the Community, as such, contributes to ensuring their broader participation in the economic and social spheres, as well as in the development of their countries and of the European Community. We do not conceal that one of the major problems that we must face is that of youth unemployment. It is evident that activities in that area
(Hr Philippe, Luxembourg) must necessarily be part of a long-term effort. The European community, for its part, has in recent years developed a policy designed to inprove young people's access to employment. I shall, however, limit myself to citing some of the activities or events that the European Community has sponsored in 1985, which are designed to support efforts already under way and to provide a new impetus.
Young people are at the centre of the economic and social policies of the European Community, and 75 per cent of the European Social Fund is spent on activities for the benefit o£ people under 25.
Xn 1984, the European Community launched a programme of action to stimulate job creation for young people, laying particular emphasis on programmes of vocational training, which constitute a means of preparing young people for a working life. In July of this year a memorandum was adopted under the heading "International Youth Year" which focuses on employment, education and training for young people, issues on the basis of which we shall be able to ensure that young people, through the full development of their individual personalities, participate in areas that affect their working lives at the local, national and regional levels.
The measures adopted in this context will attach great priority to training in the new technologies. A new Community programme of education and training in technology will begin early next year for a duration of seven years. The measures it includes are all designed to promote equal opportunity and to facilitate the often difficult transition from education to a working life, particularly by improving co-operation between schools and sectors of the working world. In this new programme the Community is certainly not neglecting those who are most disadvantaged, and thus special measures for disabled young people and young migrant workers have been adopted.
This passage to adult life can also be greatly facilitated through adequate information, it is in that context that, in less than a week, a major conference on information and participation by youth will be held in Luxembourg. This is a contribution of the European Community to the International Year resulting from a joint initiative of the Luxembourg presidency of the Council of Ministers and of the European Commission. It will address the participation of young persons in the organization and dissemination of information used during their transition from school to adult professional life to make choices, face new situations and take action with confidence in a world of growing complexity and economic uncertainty.
The objective will be to seek means of implementing a more participative and more effective youth policy to assist young persons in developing their capacity to communicate and their initiatives in this area of information for youth. The kind of information sought varies from one generation to the next. Young people who best know their own needs should therefore participate in the preparation and dissemination of this information. The conclusions of that conference will obviously be taken into consideration in the preparation of new proposals for future community activities..
The International Youth Year will be followed by the International Year of Peace. Peace was also one of the topics of International Youth Year. That link is not fortuitous, for we have the heavy responsibility of providing future generations with a life of peace combined with respect for the dignity of the human person.
Unfortunately, only hypocrisy can prevent us from asking ourselves how many young people died during this year in bloody wars and, indeed, how many youngsters in the age group that we call youth were sent onto the battlefield.
Having drawn the lessons from their history, the nations for which I am speaking today are endeavouring to provide youth with an education that will be an apprenticeship for peace. Education should not only promote the development of the individual personality but should also lead to absolute respect for human dignity and values, as well as respect for equality of rights among all nations. The education of young people is one of our best guarantees of peaceful coexistence among all the nations of the international community. But have all the States which will speak in this debate taken advantage of this Year to ensure that their school curricula lay the foundations for harmonious life among nations? Have the hate-filled references in the school books of too many countries deliberately creating enemy images been eliminated?
Peace at the international level presupposes tolerance, mutual understanding and recognition of the rights of others. Peace within frontiers can exist only in justice and freedom.	.
The Ten, as well as Spain and Portugal, share the view expressed by the World Youth Congress, held in July in Barcelona, at which participants voiced the hope that "the dynamic process of communication and exchange engendered by the International Youth Year will not be exhausted at the end of 1985". The momentum that has been created must be maintained, because there are too many objectives of International Youth* Year that still remain to be attained.
Youth symbolizes the future, and there is no wiser investment than in that future in the hope that future generations will finally realize the eternal ideals of mankind - ideals which, for us, have all too often remained mere dreams.
Mr. MISHIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The motto of International Youth Year - "Participation, Development, Peace" - is a concentrated expression of the vital aspirations of mankind's younger generation. At the same time, it reflects the essential objective needs of all mankind, since youth is not only its future but also its present.
The noble goals of International Youth Year were met with wholehearted support in the Soviet Union, where concern for the welfare and comprehensive development of young people is part and parcel of government policy. In our country the United Nations initiative for the observance of International Youth Year is regarded as extremely important and timely.
Representatives of the Soviet Union and of Soviet youth organizations participated with great interest in the activities of the United Nations and its specialized agencies to identify the aims of International Youth Year and to draft relevant documents.
The collective efforts of the representatives of over 90 Member States and about 30 non-governmental organizations resulted in the adoption of guidelines for further planning and follow-up activities relating to youth set out in document A/40/256. That document reflects in a balanced way specific recommendations aimed at resolving youth problems at the national, regional and international levels.
We regard as of fundamental importance that part of the document which emphasizes the need for expanding the active participation of young people themselves and their organizations in the life of society and, in particular, in ensuring and achieving peace and development.
As a result of the efforts of the United Nations, its organs and specialized agencies, and of the interest and goodwill demonstrated by a majority of States Members of the United Nations, International Youth Year has produced some positive
<Mr Mishin, USSR) results. It should be noted in this connection that International Youth Year has undoubtedly helped to strengthen the desire of world youth for peace, mutual understanding and co-operation for the benefit of development, social progress and social justice.
However, while we note such positive steps, we should not exaggerate their scope and results. In many countries of the world youth continues to be the most vulnerable socio-demographic group. The intensifying arms race, which devours colossal resources, brings about a deterioration in the socio-economic status of young people. It is no secret that in the developed capitalist countries young people face, inter alia, serious violations of their social, economic and political rights.
We have in mind above all unemployment, which has reached catastrophic proportions, discrimination against youth in enployment and remuneration, and lack of equal access to education, medical services and participation in social and . political life. In the developed capitalist countries, young people aged 25 or less account for 44 per cent of the 32 m'lion unemployed. According to United Nations data, there are in the developing countries 600 million unemployed, 900 million illiterate, 500 million undernourished, and 1 billion persons living in poverty, most of whom are young people.
In countries ruled by dictatorships or fascist regimes, young people, in addition to being deprived of any real rights, also face formal restrictions on their most important rights and freedoms, which are in effect totally denied them and flouted in practice.
Therefore, in reviewing the results of International Youth Year and in talcing note of the positive steps taken in the course of its preparation and observance, the Conference' should, we are convinced, focus on still unresolved youth problems.
The key to all the global problems of our time lies in the solution of the central issue, that of ensuring lasting peace, achieving real disarmament and preventan arms race in outer space.	-
Four decades have passed since the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War, to which the Soviet Union made a decisive contribution. The harsh lessons of the War must not be forgotten. They require that the present younger generation, which shoulders a great deal of responsibility for the destinies of the world today and tomorrow, should engage in a resolute struggle against war ev^n before it has broken out.
In present conditions it is the duty of all States Members of the United Nations, while strictly observing the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter, to make resolute efforts to create a healthier international environment, to prevent the threat of a nuclear catastrophe, to strengthen international peace and security, to prevent the militarization of outer space, to put an end to the arms race, to achieve general and complete disarmament, and thus to ensure the primary human right, the most import t right of young people, namely, the right to live in conditions of peace and freedom.
As the international community is aware, the Soviet Union has been working consistently and with perseverance for a lasting peace and a tranquil and normal international environment. It has favoured halting and reversing the arms race. Explaining the essence of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev, stated, daring his meeting with member of the French Parliament on on 3 October:
"We believe that the validity of one’s ideology and the advantages of a system chosen by a nation of its own volition should be proven, not by force of arms, but only and exclusively by force of example. Such is our unshakeable conviction."
This conviction is corroborated by the specific peace initiatives taken offered by the USSR, such as the unilateral moratorium on all nuclear explosions; the proposal addressed to the Government of the United States for a mutual renunciation of space strike weapons and their complete prohibition accompanied with a truly radical 50 per cent reduction in the nuclear arms maintained within range of each other's territory; a moratorium on the deployment of medium-range missiles in Europe which began some time ago in response to the deployment of new United States medium-range systems in the territory of several West European countries; and the proposals regarding the main directions and principles of wide-ranging international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and utilization of outer space submitted for the consideration of the current session of the General Assembly.
We are convinced that International Youth Year and its concluding event, the World Conference for the International Youth Year, will make a substantial contribution to the process of improving the international environment and help to consolidate the forces of peace and progress, which are to launch a new offensive in 1986, the year that has been proclaimed by the United Nations as the International Year of Peace.
Since the United Nations adopted the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 25 years have passed; however, up to now, the aims of that Declaration have not been completely implemented. We emphasize once again that the policy of colonialism in any form or manifestation, including racism and apartheid, cannot be reconciled with the United Nations Charter and the Declaration on decolonization. We reiterate our support for those peoples fighting for their legitimate right to freedom, independence and self-determination.
We believe that the present Conference is not entitled to ignore the struggle waged by the people of south Africa against the system of apartheid. The Soviet delegation shares the outrage and indignation of world public opinion in connection with the brutalities visited on the indigenous population of South Africa by the racist régime. Not a day goes by without the world shuddering at new crimes committed by the racists, whose victims are young people, young women, children and old people.	.
The Soviet people are solidly behind the struggle of the peoples of South Africa, who are in the front ranks of those who are opposing apartheid. We fully share the recommendations of the public hearings on the activities of transnational corporations in southern Africa and their co-operation with the racist régime in South Africa, which were held in New York from 16 to 18 September this year.
We wholeheartedly support the struggle of the people of Namibia for their country's freedom and the struggle of the front-line States in southern Africa against the continuing aggressive activities of South Africa and its hirelings.
The Conference cannot fail to pay attention to the situation in the Near and Middle East, where the inalienable rights of the Arab people are being flouted, as well as the question of the situation in Central America, where the people of Nicaragua, with arms in their hands, have been obliged to defend their independence against the criminal contras.
There can be no doubt that the maintenance of the apartheid régime, the aggressive acts of South Africa and Israel and the bloodshed in Central America are made possible only by the massive support provided by the forces of reaction, racism and expansionism by world imperialism.
The Conference should resolutely condemn the system of unequal economic relations which has been created by imperialism, the exploitation of the developing countries and the pillaging of their natural resources by transnational
corporations, and the strangling of the economies of the developing countries by debt.
We support the demands of the developing countries for the establishment of a new international economic order on a just and democratic basis in accordance with the decisions previously adopted by the United Nations, as well as their calls for an end to "cultural”, "information" and other forms of neo-colonialism. The continued existence of colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism and apartheid and of all forms of exploitation, oppression and inequality is intolerable. This constitutes the main obstacle to the achievment of a real improvement in the status of youth and the elimination of poverty, hunger, disease and illiteracy.
The years since the Second world War have provided convincing proof that youth and its organizations - and in particular democratic youth and student and non-governmental groups - are making a serious contribution to the solution of many problems facing mankind. They are doing a great deal to make the voice of young people, their problems and aspirations heard at thè United Nations. Our delegation believes that the international community is duty bound to support in every way the activities of Governments aimed at solving the problems of young people, improving their status and enhancing their role in the life of society. That is why we stand for a further expansion of co-operation between the United Nations and democratic youth organizations' and for improving the channels of communication between them,’ and regard the informal meetings in Geneva as the principal channels of this kind.
We are strongly against any attempts by imperialism to use International Youth Year for the organiztion of measures that run counter to the aims and purposes of the Year and are directed at undermining the democratic youth movement. We are against attempts to block co-operation among young people having different political orientations. We believe that the priority goal today is the unification and co-operation of youth to achieve lasting peace and genuine development.
The Twelfth World Festival of Youth and Students, held earlier this year in Moscow, was a vivid demonstration of the aspirations of youth for peace, mutual understanding, co-operation and friendship. The Festival was the major event of the Year in the international youth movement. As representative of the host country, I wish to express our appreciation for the assessment of that event in the reports of the Secretary-General.	'
An important feature of the Festival, which predetermined its success, was the fact that it became a concrete.contribution of young people themselves to the implementation of the aims and purposes of the Year and a manifestation of the enormous creative potential and organizational abilities of young men and women from all parts of our planet. This highlighted another feature of the Festival, namely, its unprecedented representative character-and political scope. More than 20,000 delegates from 157 countries of the world and from West Berlin took part in the Festival, as well as respresentatives of 86 international and regional youth organizations, the United Nations and its bodies. The delegations represented more than 3,000 youth, student, trade-union, women's, anti-war, environmentalist and other organizations.	*
Preparations for the Festival and the event itself opened up broad possibilities for constructive dialogue between young people of various political, philosophical and religious convictions. The exchange of views among them was highly productive. It will make it possible for youth from different countries to realize that the most diverse problems confronting youth have common basic roots: the dcwiination and arbitrary excesses of monopolies, the arms race and the build-up of tensions. The realization of that fact should be recognized as one of the most important results of the Festival. Another significant outcome of the Festival was its participants' awareness of the need to unite in order to wage a successful struggle for social, economic and political rights of young people.
It is also noteworthy that questions of co-operation between youth and student organizations and the United Nations, of the role of young people and students in the promotion of the principles and purposes of the United Nations system and of the historical experience of co-operation among peoples within the framework of the United Nations, which were the subject of profound and comprehensive discussion at the Centre for the International Youth Year, occupied a central place among the Festival’s 15 specific topics. In the appeal to youth and students of the world, which has been issued as an official document of the United Nations, participants stressed the importance of International Youth Year and reaffirmed their commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
I am happy to be able to inform the Assembly today about the inpiementation in the USSR of the aims and purposes of International Youth Year. It should be emphasized in the first place that it is only natural that the Soviet Government and by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union should have given continuous attention to the younger generation, since under socialism the interests of young men and women coincide with the interests of other social groups and of society as a whole. Most of the recommendations contained in the programme of measures and events for the Year have already been implemented in our country or are in the process of being successfully carried out in the course of the development of our society. The socialist system has freed young people from exploitation and inequality. It guarantees in practice a broad spectrum of social and political rights for young people, ensures unimpeded access to creative work, education, culture and sports, and provides a secure future for young people.
There has been no unemployment in the USSR for more than half a century. Our youth, like all other Soviet people, are guaranteed the right to work, including the right to choose a profession and employment in accordance with personal preferences and with abilities, skills and training. We believe that the time has
(Mr. Mishin, USSR) come to have the fundamental right of youth to work reflected in the decisions of the United Nations.
Like all other soviet people, Soviet young men and woaen enjoy and exercise the right to leisure, housing, free medical services and access to the achievements of culture, as well as a number of other rights and freedoms. Compulsory general secondary education has been introduced in the Soviet Union. Today, practically all young people in the USSR possess a secondary, specialized secondary or higher education, or are studying in schools or specialized secondary or higher educational establishments. Some 5.3 million young men and women are studying in approximately 900 higher educational establishments, and 4.5 million are studying in over 4,000 specialized secondary schools. I would recall that the system of education in the USSR is known for its general accessibility, that it is free at all levels, and that students receive government scholarships and substantial material benefits. There is also another imporant point: half of the students in Soviet colleges and 74 per cent of the students in specialized secondary schools come from the families of workers or peasants.
Youth in the USSR participates actively in government. For instance,' one out of five members of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, and one out of three members of local governing bodies are under 30 years of age. The Leninist Komsomol, which is a broad-based autonomous non-governmental organization comprising about 42 million young men and women, makes active use of the right granted to it under the Constitution of the USSR to undertake legislative initiatives, and participates in the preparation and implementation of the most important national programmes.
This, and the other rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution of the USSR, in conjunction with the peaceful foreign policy of the Soviet Union, create overall conditions indispensible to the attainment of the three interrelated aims of International Youth Year: participation, development and peace.
It should be stressed in particular that the inplementation in the USSR of the aims and purposes of Youth Year is a logical extension and an organic and integral part of the policy pursued by the Soviet State with regard to youth. A high-level commission for the observance of International Youth Year has been established in the USSR under the chairmanship of Geidar A. Aliyev, member of the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR. That commission has drawn up and is successfully implementing a wide-ranging set of measures with a view to promoting the participation of young Soviet men and women in the country's political, social, economic and cultural affairs, further improving conditions for Soviet youth in employment, education, everyday life and leisure, and strengthening co-operation with progressive national, regional and international youth organizations.
In 1985, schools providing a general education are to be built to accommodate 951,000 students. A long-term comprehensive programme for the period 1984 to 1990, entitled "Healthy students", is being successfully implemented. - To improve conditions for sports activities and physical training, 20,000 sports facilities of various kinds are to be constructed; many of them are already in operation. Ninety sports schools for boys and girls will also be opened shortly. Substantial amounts of money have been appropriated for the construction of new student hostels. Measures have been taken to provide young families more rapidly with comfortable housing. Major appropriations have been made to implement reforms in the general secondary and vocational schools.
I wish to emphasize that the Youth Year programmes, in combination with other social and economic measures taken by the Soviet Government, cover virtually all aspects of the lives of Soviet young people. They are directed towards expanding
(Mr. Mishin, USSR) possibilities for the participation of young men and women in the political,social, economic, cultural and scientific affairs of the country.
It is noteworthy that issues relating to youth have been comprehensively reflected in the recently published new draft programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Soviet communists regard the upbringing of young people as a most important party, State and national concern. The draft of the new party programme stresses that it is necessary to give much closer attention to the social problems of young people, striving above all to satisfy more fully their needs in the spheres of work and everyday life, education, culture, professional and career opportunities, and the sensible use of free time.
The Government of my country, consistently carrying out the Helsinki agreements and United Nations decisions in this field, promotes and encourages in every way the development of contacts and co-operation between the youth organizations of the Soviet Union and those of other countries. Suffice it to say that the USSR Committee of Youth Organizations maintains fruitful working relations with almost 2,000 youth organizations in more than 150 countries. What must be noted in particular is the breadth of the political spectrum of co-operation and the diversity of the forms it takes.
International youth contacts are regarded in our country as an important element of the overall process of international co-operation and as an integral component in the process of relaxing international tension. Detente in turn is the prerequisite for the development of co-operation in humanitarian fields. An easing of confrontation leads to an increase in the number of exchanges in the fields of culture, information, education and tourism. That is why it is important to work consistently to eliminate political and psychological factors contributing to the threat of war, and to strengthen mutual trust in world politics.
We believe that questions relating to the status of youth should be given substantial attention at the inter-governmental level as well. They must remain on
the agendas of existing United Nations bodies such as the Third Gown ittee of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Comission for Social Development, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Human Rights, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International Labour Organisation.
In his welcoming address to participants in the twelfth World Festival of Youth and Students, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Sergeiyevich Gorbachev, said that
"The problems of life affect and concern young people no less intensely than the older generations. With the inherent enthusiasm of youth, they mobilize themselves to struggle for social justice and genuine freedom, for making the benefits of life and the benefits of civilization accessible to all, and for banishing violence and racism, inequality and oppression, militarism and aggression fro® the life of man and all mankind."
An ancient dictum has it that healthy youth makes a people ionortal. That is true both for mankind as a whole and for each and every nation individually.
Energy and enthusiasm, an interest in what is new and progressive, an active rejection of injustice and a striving for friendship: all those qualities inherent in youth must be fully utilized for the benefit of mankind and in the interest of progress and peace.
Let me express my confidence that the United Nations World Conference for the International Youth Year will help increase the contribution of the United Nations to the mobilization of efforts of States genuinely to improve the status of youth and to preserve and develop, in the interest of peace and social progress, the positive changes in policies related to youth that have been achieved in the course of the preparations for and observance of International Youth Year.
Mr. IAÜTEMSCHLAGER (Federal Republic o£ Germany): The representative of Luxembourg spoke earlier in our debate on behalf of the European Community and its member States. I should like to associate myself fully with his statement and add a few short remarks. Like the representative of Luxembourg I shall deal with the real subject of our discussions, namely, questions concerning youth, its problems and aspirations.	.
The motto of International Youth Year, 1985, is "Participation, Developeiunt, Peace". The participation of youth in the life of a society extends in particular, in our view, to three areas: the economic, the cultural and the political.
The goal of economic participation implies that every new generation has to be integrated into the safeguarding of the material basis of subsistence of the society to which it belongs, as well as of its fellow human beings in other societies. That goal can be attained through the capacity of youth for work and through the motivation of concern, based on solidarity, for the well-being of all.
The goal of cultural participation implies that eve<;y new generation must be enabled to engage in give-and-take participation the culture of its own country; That in turn implies the passing on of the cultural heritage of the past to the young generation of today and enabling the young generation to put that heritage to creative use and to develop it further.
The goal of political participation implies active integration into the democratic process of discussion and decision. All who are committed to that goal will welcome it when youth has its say and makes itself heard in political life. Even the protest which is often voiced nowadays by youth is a legitimate means of democratic discussion and particiption in the political life of any society. It is hard to believe that in societies where nothing is heard about the problems of youth those problems do not exist; rather one must assume that youth has a particularly hard lot in such societies.
(Mr. Lautenschlager, Federal Republic of Germany)
With its decision to declare 1985 International Youth Year the United Nations made an important contribution towards giving improved and greater chances of acceptance of the will of youth to participate, and of giving effect to that will towards giving youth shared responsibility for shaping the future.
In the Federal Republic of Germany we have published, on behalf of the National Commission on the International Youth Year, all available data on the situation of youth in our country. Youth research in the Federal Republic of Germany has been able to achieve significant results and findings in the International Youth Year. The German Youth Institute enjoys intensive international co-operation in the field of youth research and is prepared to expand further such co-operation. On the occasion of International Youth Year it has published a handbook on the situation of youth in the Federal Republic of Germany. Among other things that handbook documents the historical development of the situation of youth in our country.
However, not only on the special occasion of International Youth Year but for a long time before this we have been making particular efforts to further the interests of youth on its way to economic, cultural and political participation. That commitment has also been at the root of our co-operation in the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year. Promoting international co-operation by the youth of our country with the youth of other countries is and remains an important objective of the Federal Government. This also applies to the promotion of federations of youth in associations which are autonomous and independent of the Government. We lend our particular support to co-operation by our youth with youth associations of other countries.
However, we shall be able to achieve international understanding among youth only if the youth of other countries also is granted the option of choosing
.	(Mr. Lautenschlager, Federal Republic of Germany)
partners in understanding and co-operation across borders and of visiting such partners.
The motto of International Youth Year also comprises, besides the notion of participation, the notions of development and peace. The youth of the world is thus called upon to orient its commitment in all fields to enhancing freedom and justice everywhere, for only where freedom and justice are furthered may we really talk of a development doing justice to the interests of the people. The youth of the Federal Republic of Germany, because of experience from the past, is particularly sensitive to trends jeopardizing such enhancement of freedom and justice and it takes the initiative in making itself heard in all appropriate ways in the public discussion at large. Participation in the development of one's own country but also in the development of the international community as a whole calls for peace as its basis. This conforms not only with the conviction of my Government but also with that of the young generation in my country. Peace presupposes that there can be discussion and understanding on conflicts, differences of opinion and philosophies. Only where understanding is possible will international co-operation lead to the solution and elimination of conflicts.
As never before in the history of our country, the youth of the Federal Republic of Germany is open to international understanding, international co-operation and international solidarity. International Youth Year has opened new vistas and chances for that solidarity. The youth of the Federal Republic of Germany is prepared to make its own contribution so that these chances may be used and these options realized. To the best of its ability the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will lend its support to those endeavours.
Mg. OTHMAN ABDUL (Malaysia): There is special significance in the fact that this year we are celebrating both the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations and International Youth Year. On the one hand we are seeking to strengthen and revitalize the United Nations so that it will better serve the needs of generations yet to come; on the other we are seeking to inspire and galvanize the youth of today so that they in turn will be better able to serve the needs of the United Nations in the difficult and challenging years ahead. The observance of International Youth Year therefore, like our recent commemorative celebrations, should not merely manifest itself in festivals, speeches, resolutions and so on but rather aim at achieving tangible results, to instil in youth a spirit of leadership, self-reliance and discipline so that they will always be conscious of their responsibility to their community, society and nation and to the wider world beyond.
The adoption of resolution 36/28 by the General Assembly in 1981 and the proclamation of 1985 as International Youth Year is a recognition of the significant role that youth can play in the task of fostering a just and progressive order at both the national and the int@rnational level. For us all, our youth is the basic foundation of our respective national societies and will guarantee our independence, national identity and continued progress and development, particularly in a country such as Malaysia where a large proportion of the population - 76 per cent to be precise - is under 35 years of age. We take pride in this knowledge as young people are undoubtedly our resources for the present and the future. National development requires the utilization of human resources and in this regard young people represent our most precious resources.
Participation and development are two of the interrelated and interdependent themes of International Youth Year. The direct participation of our youth - be it in the political, economic or social field, in nation building or in national development - has long been emphasized by my Government. Young people, as we know, are active agents of social change and progress. They are a voice which must be heard and a living force which must be properly channelled.
To implement resolution 36/28, Malaysia has organized various programmes and activities at the national, regional and international levels in collaboration with several agencies, such as the Asia Youth Council, the Committee for Youth Co-operation of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the Malaysian Youth Council, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Volunteers, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the International Labour Organisation, CYP and various other governmental and non-governmental organizations.
Projects such as an international youth course on youth entrepreneurship development, the training of trainers in youth work, an essay competition, an international youth work camp, and an international youth rally were held during the year and received a tremendous response from countries within and outside the region. Such response is indicative of the fact that given the proper guidance and opportunities, young people, irrespective of belief and culture, can be a positive force that can contribute towards national development and the realization of world peace in line with the spirit of the theme for International Youth Year.
Based on our firm commitment, Malaysia will continue to play an active role in promoting active youth participation in development through a variety of programmes involving young people of all nations.
Steps which have already been undertaken to establish an International Youth Centre, an International Islamic Youth Camp and other facilities are specific indications of the seriousness of my country in fulfilling its commitment to ’ promote youth development in the region, particularly among the developing countries, as well as throughout the world.	'
Malaysia notes with grave concern the problems faced by youth in the world, which, if not given proper attention, will hamper the international community's efforts to mobilize young people for constructive activities. Such problems as youth unemployment," moral decadence and drug abuse are among the major problems that must be given immediate attention.
The problem of drug abuse, particularly by the youth of my country has been an area of specific concern to Malaysia. Malaysia is facing a very sericus problem of drug abuse and has taken every necessary step to combat this menace. Malaysia has mobilized every means within its power to eradicate this problem to ensure that the majority of its young people are free from the pernicious effects of drug abuse and
(Me. Othman Abdul, Malaysia) to enable them to concentrate on and involve themselves meaningfully in development activities. Being a small country with a small population, Malaysia needs the active participation of its youth in all its endeavours.
Of the three themes enunciated, peace is indeed the most elusive ideal of all. Malaysia continues to inculcate in its youth a sense of international solidarity and co-operation through its educational curricula, foreign student exchange programmes, and the involvement of its youth delegations in international activities and forums. As part of our contribution to International Youth Year, an international youth centre is currently being built in Malaysia. Once completed, it will provide facilities for youth training and serve as a focal point of activities involving various international youth organizations. The interaction of young people from different countries would be mutually beneficial, as not only are knowledge and experience exchanged but new friends are cultivated.
Young people are our hopes for the future. With them, properly nurtured, cultivated and disciplined, lies the destiny of mankind. The young have their vision of the kind of world in which they would like to live, and such a world will be very different from that of ours today. The challenges before them are immense. It is our responsibility to provide them with the necessary tools -intellectual, physical and spiritual - to meet these challenges. International Youth Year is dedicated to that task and, speaking for Malaysia, I pledge our commitment to play our part.
Mr. KOOIMAN (Netherlands): I am pleased to see so many young people sitting here, although still not enough, in my opinion. However, last year's recommendation to include youth representatives in the national delegations has clearly had a positive effect. I am sure that this is the first time that so many young representatives have assembled in this Hall. At the same time I cannot
(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands) help wondering what the number of youth representatives will be next year. In general - and perhaps I am now touching on a sensitive spot - I wonder if the near future will show any tangible results as a follow-up of the observance of International Youth Year, 1985. It is after all the practical impact of the Year that will count.
Many young people tend to lose faith in the future: uncertainties about getting a job, doubts about the purpose of education and vocational training and the awareness of living in a world full of constraints and capable of destroying itself many times over. These kind of things do not make life easy for young people. A feeling of uselessness, alienation, reluctance to take any responsibility, vandalism, aggression and escapes from reality such as drug addiction and religious fanaticism can all be considered expressions of discontent with their situation.
Nevertheless, most young people do not lose heart. In spite of the attitudes and behaviour I have just mentioned, which touch young people especially, vulnerable as they are, the United Nations should get rid of the dominant image of unhappy, unmotivated young people. For this overlooks the many ideas and initiatives of young people. Young people are at a stage in their lives at which they are looking for their own identity, at which they experiment with their role in society. Their creative potential is therefore often shaped in an alternative way, a way that deviates from the traditional culture. In many cases, however, traditional culture is still so dominant that it leaves hardly any room for the innovation and reform pursued by youth.
Mr. President, did you ever ask a young person what the United Nations means to him or her? Well, I can tell you what I have heard. Being a youth representative, not a young diplomat but someone who tries to bring the United Nations closer to people of my age, I have spoken to many of them. In many of
(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands) their answers I heard that the United Nations has little appeal to them; they see it as something powerless that has no special relevance to them. However, if they are asked about International Youth Year the answers are a lot more positive.
A typical feature of the observance of International Youth Year in the Netherlands has been that young people and their organizations have been able to take initiatives of their own. This has been apparent in the organizational structure for the Year in my country, in which two national committees co-operated, one of the youth organizations and the other at the inter-ministerial level. The National Youth Year Working Group included 150 youth organizations. Its activities have been based on the recommendations of the United Nations and on the principle of achieving the goals of International Youth Year as much as possible through and for young people themselves.
(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands)
The Working Group selected the following themes as priorities for action during the Year in the Netherlands: youth unemployment, young people from cultural and ethnic minorities, the status of minors, youth culture and peace and development.
On these themes a plan of action has been developed. The Netherlands Government allocated about JUS 1.3 million to support the realization of projects pursuant to this plan as well as C:ose developed by individual organizations and young people themselves. Also, considerable funds were donated for this purpose by local and regional authorities. Many of the projects financed were successful. In the Netherlands we have all learnt from the International Youth Year and I believe that our experience can be most useful for the follow-up of this Year at the national, but also at the regional and international, level.
In adopting the recommendations of the Third Committee during this United Nations World Conference for the International Youth Year we shall take a strong commitment on our shoulders. By endorsing the guidelines for further planning and suitable follow-up in the field of youth, prepared during the fourth session of the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year, we are committing ourselves to doing our utmost to ensure their most appropriate implementation. The guidelines reflect both a balanced synthesis of the experiences gained and a realistic assessment of the aspirations, needs and problems of young people. Moreover, they provide a conceptual framework for a long-term strategy.
With the help of the guidelines, it is now up to us to secure the strengthening of youth-related policies and programmes after the International Youth Year. In line with the basic philosophy and strategy for the International Youth Year, emphasis should be laid on activities at the national and local levels.
This, however, does not mean that action on the international level is less necessary. Rather, it is now up to Governments, in co-operation with the United
(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands) Nations bodies and agencies, as well as to other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, especially youth organizations, to undertake the necessary measures to narrow the focus on youth policies and programmes. Young people and their organizations should be involved as much as possible in the planning, preparation, implementation and evaluation of youth-related aspects in policies and programmes.'
Governments, United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, bilateral aid agencies and multilateral financial institutions should increase financial and other contributions for developing and implementing youth related policies and programmes. Since it is not likely that substantial new funds will become available, existing programmes should be improved. This can be done by' strengthening the technical co-operation activities and by integrating youth-related elements in overall United Nations programmes. In these programmes, attention should be paid to a limited set of priority themes, such as communication, housing, culture, employment and education, which have a direct effect on the improvement of the situation of young people. These activities should be budgeted according to the priority they deserve. After 1985,	*
co-ordination in the field of these youth-related activities should be actively pursued by the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs. By increased attention to youth elements every specialized agency, for example, can take up in its programme one or, preferably, more youth-related projects. As another example, the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme can strengthen the role of that organization at the field level with a view to promoting the incorporation of youth-related projects in the preparation and implementation of country programmes.
What I am saying is that we should find tangible results in next year's report of the Secretary-General when we discuss the evaluation of International Youth Year.
.	(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands)
For years now the United Nations has been discussing the use of channels of communication between the United Nations system and youth and youth organizations. This item is often treated separately from the preparation and implementation of policies and programmes relating to youth. But of course this item is not a distinct one. Especially in the preparation and implementation of youth-related projects, use should be made of the willingness to participate and of what I have just called the creative potential of young people. Therefore, the utilization of channels of communication should be an integral part of the planning, preparation, implementation and evaluation of youth policies and programmes.
Let young people come forward with their own ideas and projects. Let the appropriate existing United Nations bodies and agencies, together with young people, form task forces on such projects. These task forces enable young people to implement their projects. One can talk about youth, think about youth, decide about youth and do a lot for youth, but this tends to happen only after it is recognized that young people constitute a problem to society or have problems themselves. The draft resolution on channels of communication only strengthens this impression, and express our regret on this point.
The main aim of channels of communication is to bring the United Nations and young people closer to each other. The best way to do that is to involve the United Nations and young people in each other’s work. After all, is participation not one of the main themes of the International Youth Year? And does participation not imply that young people take an active part in decision-making processes and activities, in short, get involved, not as the object but as the subject of policies and programmes? All this is in recognition of the fact that young people form a significant part of today's society, are involved in it and have the
(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands} willingness to contribute to it, if it concerns them. Channels of communication are a tool for encouraging youth involvement. Therefore, we should not miss the opportunity to utilize them and, where possible, to improve them.
The United Nations itself should also adopt a more active attitude towards youth-related activities. During the Barcelona Conference on Youth, a document was circulated in which an account was given of the yot A-related activities carried out by the United Nations system. In that document it was mentioned, for example, that one of the youth-related activities was the appointment of a young employee. I am terribly impressed.
Furthermore, I notice that sometimes there is a lack.of co-ordination. In requesting the Secretary-General to keep youth-related activities under review, I hope that he will continue to take an active attitude on two main aspects: first, encouragement of specific action for the benefit of youth and, secondly, efforts to secure the proper integration of youth-related activities in existing policies and programmes and the overall co-ordination of activities within the system. When an evaluation report on International Youth Year is prepared by the Secretary-General next year, he should not forget those important aspects of the follow-up of the Year.
In conclusion, by endorsing the .guidelines for further planning and suitable follow-up the United Nations and all its Member States take upon themselves a commitment to secure action in the field of youth as an integral part of social and economic development. I hope that authorities will be amenable to taking account of the ideas and initiatives of young people. Youth activities should aim on the one hand at fostering initiatives of, by and for young people, and on the other at promoting youth participation within existing structures. Even where the alternatives and reforms which are brought forward by young people may seem a
(Mr. Kooiman, Netherlands) threat to traditional values, I am firmly convinced that these alternatives and reforms are an expression of an active and positive attitude towards society, a sense of responsibility for contributing to the advancement and enrichment of society. Young and old should work together on this. The International Youth Year has created a momentum and a situation in which it is possible to join hands. Do not wait for the future, but act now. I must admit that, if next year's report does not show any positive results, I shall be forced to admit that young people are right in considering the United Nations to be too powerless to do anything of relevance for them.
Mr. PANDEY (Nepal)? At the very outset, allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to commend the decision to hold a plenary debate on policies and programmes relating to youth. Apart from underlying the great importance which this Organization has rightly accorded to them during International Youth Year, we consider it particularly auspicious that this meeting should take place at the very same venue where world leaders, just weeks ago, reiterated their collective faith in the United Nations, and in the future in such ringing terms. This we find entirely appropriate because the future, very clearly, belongs to the youth.
Before going any further, I should also like to express my delegation's appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General, contained in documents A/40/64, A/40/256 and A/40/701. They not only provide an excellent overview of the general situation of the world's youth in the 1980s, but also contain valuable guidelines for further planning and follow-up in the field of youth by national Governments and international organizations committed to this timely cause. In particular, my delegation whole-heartedly endorses the Secretary-General's recommendation, contained in paragraph 71 of document A/40/64, that the momentum generated during International Youth Year should be kept up and that Governments continue their efforts to develop integrated youth policies.
This, in fact, brings me to the observance of International Youth Year in Nepal, a direct outcome of which has precisely been the decision to continue a number of specially tailored youth programmes for International Youth Year even after 1985. Of the twenty-two separate programmes launched in Nepal in the context of International Youth Year are the following: the setting up of a youth service fund to assist youth who show promise in different fields of endeavour; the organization of youth camps; instituting a youth volunteer programme; and the establishment of primary schools with local youth participation covering 50 of the Kingdom's 75 districts.
AP/gp	A/40/PV.75
57
(Mr. Pandey Nepal)
Indeed, in keeping with the theses of International Youth Year, that is, participation, development and peace, youth volunteers since the beginning of 1985 have been actively associated with not only briefing village folk about our national rural development plans but have also been explaining to them how best to exploit benefits for themselves from such developmental activity. Similarly, and consistent with the triad of themes for International Youth Year, youth camps in Nepal throughout 1985 have successfully carried out various construction work in the transportation, irrigation and health fields, among others. Under International Youth Year programmes in my country, and with the active participation of youth volunteers, 100 new primary schools have been established. Similarly, a four-day youth camp on afforestation resulted in the planting of 100,000 new saplings. A number of national-level seminars on population, skill development and unemployment have also been organized in past months under the International Youth Year banner. A consciousness-raising international seminar on drug dependence among youth was also successfully organized in Katmandu. A more long-term project also dedicated to the cause of Nepali youth, is continuing, in-depth study on the status of youth in Nepal, an endeavour that, on completion, should provide invaluable guidance for policy-making in all matters relating to youth in the future.
While these and other similar youth-related activities have immeasurably contributed to enhancing public awareness of the situation of youth, and particularly of their special needs and aspirations, they have had the welcome net effect of expanding the base of youth participation to the district or grass roots stage from the central level. This has been possible, in the main, by Royal patronage of and guidance to the International Youth Year National Committee, constituted by His Majesty King Birendra, under the Chairmanship of His Royal Highness Prince Dhirendra.
At this juncture, I am happy to disclose in this Assembly that attention to the role and potential of youth in Nepal is by no means something new. Youth, -defined in our country to include all adults below 40 years of age, have in fact been granted a pre-eminent role in the national affairs by our Constitution itself, through the establishment of a National Youth Organization composed of youth, elected by and responsible to youth.
That body, one of six class organizations within the structure of our national polity, has indeed been particularly successful in developing political leadership among youth, leadership that naturally evolves through their active and purposeful participation in the whole gamut of activities that embraces national socio-economic development.
If our national party-less polity is thus itself institutionally geared towards tapping the potential of youth energy, idealism-and skills, careful thought has also been given to ensure that there is no conflict between the generations, especially to ensure that, while it is important to go ahead with change and development, this is not achieved by sacrificing any of our country’s rich and ancient cultural heritage and traditions which provide us emotional sustenance while safeguarding the country's distinctive personality and identity.
This brings me to the theme of peace, the last, but by no means, the least important of the troika of admirable objectives spelt out for International Year of Youth. While I need hardly remind this Assembly of Nepal's unwavering support to the cause of international peace and security, our quest for peace within our borders has been inspired by our staunch belief that there can be no development without peace, nor any peace without development.
It is this that is the motive force of Nepal's zone of peace proposal that has generated such an emotional response among the Nepalese people, and, more so, among its youth which has been so actively participating in national development, both
within and outside the context of International Youth Year. If the importance which we in Nepal have been giving to youth flows, to a great extent, from our Constitution itself, it is only natural in a country which, though ancient, really opened its doors to the outside world, and thus to the winds of the modern concepts of planned development and change, less than four decades ago. Youth, and especially its educated segment in newly developing countries such as ours, have, therefore, a far greater role in nation-building than nay be true elsewhere. It is also for such a reason that we can so completely associate ourselves with the basic thrust of International Youth Year based as it very realistically is, on the realization by the international community to make youth partners, rather than mere beneficiaries, of national development plans.
We welcome the trend, as reflected in today's evolving world leadership pattern, of giving a greater share of responsibilities to younger people. Apart from the fact that a more even distribution of power among different generations makes for a more stable and socially equitable society, we believe it also contributes to peace. Given the dynamics of social, economic and political transformation across the world, today's problems may not be resolved by yesterday's means.

To the extent that youth must be prepared to grasp firmly the torch passed on to it by older generations, the increased awareness of this which has occurred as a . result of the world-wide observance of the International Youth Year is most noteworthy and laudable. Given the truism that aimless, frustrated or uncaring youth can easily trigger social and political upheavals, my delegation commends this Organization's farsightedness in thus focusing on the importance of youth's participatory role in harnessing the forces of development and chatmelling them towards the goals of social progress and peace.
Finally, my delegation wishes to assure the Assembly that Nepal will never be found wanting in responding, within its limited means, to.any call beyond 1985 for further advancing the cause of the world's youth, led as we are by an enlightened, progressive monarch who not only is committed to the noble ideals of participation, development and peace but also has done so much to give .Nepalese youth a sense of mission and ample opportunities to be useful to their communities and country.
Mr. RIERA (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): As other delegations have done, I should like at the outset to express the Spanish delegation's satisfaction at the celebration of this World Conference of the United Nations for the International Youth Year. The fact that the General Assembly is devoting plenary meetings to policies and programmes relating to youth is the most significant proof of the universal recognition of the decisive role played by youth in the great issues affecting the present and future of mankind.
In addressing the problems of youth we are not talking only of a quantitatively very important group. We must also ask ourselves what kind of world we wish to build in future decades - a world which is undergoing and will continue to undergo great changes that especially affect young people, who too often are the victims rather than the protagonists in this process.
My delegation endorses the content of the statement made this afternoon by the representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the European Community, of which my country will soon be a member, but I should like to emphasize certain points in connection with International Youth Year on which my country would like to place special emphasis.
The Government of Spain, in conformity with united Nations recommendations and through a broad-based representative Committee for the International Year, has set itself two basic objectives for the Year.
We proposed, first, to examine and evaluate the situation of young people in our country. That has led to the report on youth in Spain, submitted last June, and the publication of a series of studies relating to sectoral aspects of young people in Spain.
From the report on youth in Spain I wish to emphasize the two conclusions that we find especially relevant. First, today Spanish youth are facing serious difficulties in becoming involved in the productive activity that should enable them to achieve economic self-sufficiency and family independence. The personal and social consequences of this forced extension of their juvenile status are, of course, a source of concern. Secondly, however - and this is the most relevant conclusion - we cannot continue to refer to the problems of youth as though they were an isolated matter; rather we must talk about the problems of society. Too often more attention is paid to the most spectacular and obvious effects of the problems of youth than to their true causes, which do not lie with young people themselves but in the society of which they are a part.
That is why the policy for youth must be designed to ensure that all Government action gives priority and importance to it and that it is allocated to and co-ordinated between the different departments w j skill and dynamism to remain in contact with the feelings and realities of young people.
That conviction has led the Government of Spain and the Committee for the International Youth Year to work on the second major objective, namely, the promotion of youth programmes and policies as an integral part of social and economic development. Throughout this year specific programmes have been prepared in which almost all the various departments of our Ministries have participated. X should like to emphasize the plan for training young people and finding them jobs and the national plan to deal with drugs. At a forthcoming meeting of the Committee for the International Youth Year we shall present the programmes established in my country, which will be expanded for next year.
However, the youth policy will not be viable without the real and active participation of young people themselves. The direct promotion of young people's participation in all aspects of the life of our society, its forums and associations and especially its youth councils is a great responsibility for the administration. Such participation is not fictitious or imposed. Participation should be conceived as a real, freely exercised possibility for young people to contribute to the definition of objectives and the adoption of measures both in areas that directly affect them and in the taking of more general decisions in political, social, economic and cultural spheres of the community.
The motto of International Youth Year is "Participation, Development, Peace". Today no one believes that we can pursue those objectives without international collaboration and co-operation. Our world is experiencing an irreversible and continuous process of economic, political and cultural interrelationship. The problems of youth, which are problems of society, are not peculiar to any one country. They are questions of a general character, although naturally they take their own form in each place and under specific national policies.
(Mg. Riera, Spain)
Only through dialogue, mutual confidence and new North-South relations will it become possible to open up new and better horizons for young people. This is where the young people should be in the forefront, because they are the ones best qualified to break the infernal and irrational cycle of tension and confrontation in the world. Young people throughout the world have many things in common, but one thing in particular - the struggle for peace, a peace which cannot be reduced merely to the absence of war but involves full respect for human rights and the full sovereignty of all peoples.
Our country and specifically the city of Barcelona, was the site of one of the most important activities of the International Youth Year - the World Youth Congress, organized by. the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in which 608 young persons participated, as well as experts and high-ranking authorities on youth at the governmental level and from non-governmental youth organizations. That Congress corroborated what I have just said: that there is a need for dialogue and co-operation, through open, representative bodies, to confront with good sense and imagination, the problems that affect young people throughout the world.
The Spanish Government is firmly convinced that the International Youth Year should serve, inter alia, to strengthen the role of the United Nations as a forum for meeting, debate, study, co-operation and exchanges among Governments, experts and non-governmental youth organizations.
We cannot disappoint the expectation that has been created nor can we end International Youth Year on 31 December as though it were a kind of temporary phenomenon. This Year should be a point of departure for the programmes and activities set in motion to be amplified and consolidated in future years.
That is why we feel that this Conference, along the lines of the resolutions submitted, should commit all the organs of the United Nations system to the inclusion in their programmes of projects related to youth, to an increase in the funds made available to support programmes in the least developed countries, to the establishment of better and broader channels of communication with youth and to greater emphasis on the role of regional organizations' as the most appropriate context for co-ordination and exchanges in their respective countries.
The Government of Spain, the Committee on International Youth Year, the Council of Youth of Spain and all of the non-governmental organizations in my country are prepared to provide their full co-operation and support for these objectives, because in the final analysis we all share one great responsibility: to build a freer, more just and more united world in which young people will feel themselves to be, and will in fact be, the protagonists.*
Mr, PAZ AGUIRRE (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): In the framework of the provisions of resolution 33/22 of 23 November 1984, which decided to devote a sufficient number of plenary meetings at this fortieth session of the General Assembly to policies and programmes relating to youth and to designate this the United Nations World Conference for the International Youth Year, my delegation wishes to express its support for this observance and our satisfaction at the achievements already attained in the preparation and observance of International Youth Year under the slogan "Participation, Development, Peace". This has helped to mobilize efforts at the local, national, regional and international levels in order to promote the best possible living conditions for young people and conditions for human and professional self-fulfilment as well as to ensure their
*
Mr. oyoue (Gabon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Paz Aguirre, Uruguay) active participation in the general development of the society of which they are a part in conformity with its features and the priorities of each country.
Accordingly, the delegation of Uruguay welcomes this opportunity to thank Mrs. Leticia Shahani, the United Nations Assistant Secretary-General for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, for her comprehensive presentation in the Third Committee of the complex of items relating to youth and especially the item relating to International Youth Year.
Similarly, my delegation expresses its appreciation to Romania for the role it played in the preparation of this observance. My country has been closely linked to these activities, as may be seen from the Secretary-General's report in document A/40/701 of 11 October 1985.
Moreover, Montevideo was the city that hosted the Second Latin American and Caribbean Regional Meeting for International Youth Year held from 26 to 29 August of this year. The Meeting which played an important role in the preparation and celebration of International Youth Year was attended by representatives of 23 States Members, of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), an associated State, the Secretary-General, several of the specialized agencies and other bodies of the Organization, intergovernmental organizations and numerous non-governmental organizations.
The Government of Uruguay gave its fullest support to the initiative and was represented at the inaugural meeting by the Minister of Education and Culture, Mrs. Adela Reta, who made an important statement. Mr. Norberto Gonzalez, the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, also spoke and a message was read from the President of Colombia, President Belisario Betancur.
The meeting requested the representative of Uruguay to introduce the corresponding report with its annexes at the fortieth session of the General
Assembly through the Permanent Mission at the united Nations. Accordingly, document A/40/706 was circulated as an official document of the General Assembly.
In relation to this mandate, my délégation wishes to make some general comments with respect to the debates that took place at the Second Regional Meeting and the final report that was adopted.
The presentations given by countries and organizations coincided in their concern about the effects of the shortcomings of the development model and of the present crisis in youth, especially as regards low levels of education and their inability to keep up with the major changes, especially scientific and technological, that are taking place in the present world.
The subject of education is thus one of the key issues within the sphere of the problems of youth. As was rightly said by Mrs*. Adela Reta, Minister of Education and Culture of Uruguay, "a policy for youth is basically a policy for education." indeed, restricted access to education and the consequent lack of vocational training not only perpetuates the cycle of poverty but also prevents the participation of young people in the development process.
The thematic framework of International Youth Year focuses on three categories that are interdependent: participation, development and peace. In societies in the process of change, as is the case with Latin American countries, the question of participation by youth takes on great importance. The construction of a democratic, free and united society cannot be achieved unless youth is one of the actors in social transformation and an active agent in political affairs. Young people cannot be relegated to the position of simple spectators of these processes. There is nothing more harmful to bringing about democratic coexistence and the strengthening and the development of democratic institutions than the estrangement of youth, either through limitations in the existing system or through
(Mr* ?az Aguirre, Uruguay) attitudes of apathy, indifference or rejection by young people themselves, especially due to the insufficiencies of the development model, the effects of a crisis extending beyond the economic sphere and undermining the moral basis of society, leading to despair, scepticism or rebellion among youth.
Full participation of youth in the political, social and cultural life of society then becomes a challenge that has to be met by all of society, including, above all, by young people themselves.
The subject of participation is thus closely linked with development as one of the basic aims of our societies. And if development is the new name for peace, there is a clear interdependence among the three factors. Our region is seeking development in a framework of peace. As was pointed out at the Meeting, without peace there can be no development and without development peace is precarious.
Unfortunately, our region, made up of peoples deeply linked by historical, cultural and spiritual roots, has not succeeded in consolidating the inestimable blessing of peace. Breaches of the peace are increasingly affecting our countries and particularly our youth.
Consequently, a common effort among all social strata, with the active participation of youth, to achieve peace is essential.
Hence, the relevance of this threefold objective set for International Youth Year. How can it be reached? The regional plan of action formulated a series of proposals to which hava been added, as part of the Second Regional Meeting at Montevideo, complementary actions, especially actions to arouse public opinion, and in particular, the awareness of social communicators and educators so that centres of teaching at all levels and communication media can become the transmitting bodies for education, justice, solidarity and fraternity, for liberty, education and peace and for national understanding.
The educational activities are also aimed at forming an awareness among youth about their social responsibilities, about the intrinsic dignity of each human being, about the value of work, be it physical or intellectual, and the co-operation that each one can lend as a subject and not as an object of the relations of production, about the great iimportance of the commitment of personal service to the society in which one lives in conformity'with the talents one has received, as an indispensable condition for the building of an authentically democratic and participating society.
To this end it is necessary to increase the awareness of young people that the construction of such a society implies respect for the diversity that comes about when we admit of different religions, ways of thinking, and political and social ideas, which should coexist in harmony in a pluralist society. That respect is reflected in relations between peoples and States as a true basis for peace and a necessary condition for the development of nations.
In that context, young people must also be made aware of regional problems, in our case specifically those of Latin America. They must be presented with the alternative of integration into a plan for restructuring our societies by which inequality will give way to justice, obsolescence to modernity, marginalization to free and responsible involvement.
Those measures to increase awareness, are combined with substantive action in the legislative, administrative and financial spheres, aimed at establishing ongoing policies for the education and training of young people and for promoting their participation in society, and a comprehensive approach to the problems of youth, which should be integrated into the nation's general policies and development plans, so that overall objectives, specific goals and operational modes applicable to youth can be integrated into each such relevant sector.
Of course, these measures will vary according to the situation in each country and to national priorities, but certain types of national action can be identified as needing to play an imporant role in overall policies and programmes for youth in the countries of the region, such as the promotion of the practices of democratic organization, with the alm of training young people and making it possible for them to participate, as the case may be, in the management of social and educational institutions. Other vital areas include the following: education in human rights matters; incentives to develop youth projects related to specific national tasks in order to forge a sense of social responsibility and participation as a creative
(Mr. Paz Aguirre, Uruguay) force for the development of the community; promotion of action by committed young people in joint social projects, especially in the area of rehabilitation of delinquent or disadvantaged young people, prevention of the abuse of harmful substances, particularly drugs and alcohol and of other forms of escape and self-destruction, and in any other kind of action which responds concretely to the effects of the crisis in our countries, such as malnutrition, school-leaving, high youth unemployment, and other acute social problems. •
It is particularly on that area that we can focus much of our collective responsibility regarding the future of young people in many parts of the world. Developing countries are experiencing a chronic economic crisis resulting in a lack of opportunity for vast sectors of their populations, and are in no position to offer suitable expectations for young people, who have only one option: to live in poverty, deprived of culture and unemployed. For this reason they loose their bearings and feel that there is no future for them, whereas they should be offered appropriate ways of using their incipient abilities for the benefit of their societies.
An enormous social responsibility is therefore involved. Public action by States and Governments should take the form of programmes to increase the means of spreading education, which should be sufficiently up-to-date in order to provide the student with intellectual preparation in keeping with the needs of a rapidly advancing world society, especially in the area of new technology. But we must emphasize that all these programmes are closely linked with the social prospects and real opportunities for young people in the economy; and their success depends on those opportunities providing hope and expectations sufficient to prevent the exodus of young persons, to allow them to settle down in their own countries, and to enable them to use the culture they acquire as a means of leading a decent
(Mr. Faz Aguirre, Uruguay) life. That in turn must become the principal driving force of a just and generous society, free from hatred and frustration.
Thus we must give high priority to concerns about problems regarding education at all levels, vocational training, the teaching of arts and trades, and the development of employment programmes.
Finally, a programme of action at the regional level has been proposed, intended principally to support national activities and to permit exchanges and co-operation among countries, including horizontal co-operation, in which an important role is assigned to international organizations.
Those are my delegation's general views on the second Latin American and Caribbean regional meeting for International Youth Year, over which it was Uruguay's honour to preside. That meeting constituted a significant contribution to the achievement of the goals of International Youth Year. We shall continue to support the Year with the greatest of interest; it has served well the cause of. promoting, spiritually and materially, the young people of our region.
Mr. BEIN (Israel): Israel is a young country. Only 37 years ago it regained its independence, yet it has a rich history and a tradition of 3,000 years. The Jewish tradition brought to the world the then revolutionary idea that all men are created equal. The Jews introduced the concept that justice for all should be the law of the land, and that wisdom and acquired knowledge are the only real and worthwhile properties of man.
All through the history of the Jewish people, a person's standing in society was measured by his wisdom and knowledge, and not by his riches and physical strength. The focal point for every individual, therefore, was always the attainment of know-how and learning, and the education of the young.
The State of Israel has, on the basis of those ideas, always concentrated its attention on the education of youth as well as on providing continuing education for adults. In that way the younger generation can develop its own personality and be prepared actively to participate in the development and rebuilding of their country - their State - their home. Special attention has always been given to co-operation between and the integration of different cultural traditions, while at the same time allowing them to retain their uniqueness..
A variety of programmes have been designed to bring together young people of different cultural and social backgrounds. Israel has organized a youth network. There are regular meetings between urgan youth and youth from rural settlements and kibbutzim - communal settlements. Jewish, Arab and Druse youth from the distressed areas and development towns meet regular? ' to promote better understanding. Religiously observant young people meet those who are not observant, and they also learn to understand each other better. These projects help, with comparative success, to build bridges of good will and mutual understanding between young people from different cultural backgrounds, environments and social strata. They often get together in seminars, summer camps and arts festivals and at sports events.
Major resources and special attention are devoted to the problems and needs of school drop-outs. The programmes help those youths who have not been absorbed into the work force and who are in danger of becoming delinquents. A variety of projects now serve that marginal element of the youth community, seeking to restore such people to society through a special combination of study and vocational training.
(Mr. Bein, Israel)
These programmes put an emphasis on equality and individual dignity and help those teenagers by enabling them to live and study in specially established youth villages. In those specially organized communities, deprived young people can enjoy an overall encouraging environment for their course of rehabilitation, which prepares them for eventual integration into society. Israel is ready and eager to co-operate in parallel efforts by other United Nations Member nations and to share with them our successful experience in this field.
The purpose of the United Nations in declaring the year 1985 International Youth Year was to remind all nations of their dual responsibility towards their youth, to provide each young person with the best education, to try and help to develop their personalities and social responsibilities and to ensure for them a life of peace, freedom, honour and comfort.
After the United Nations declared 1985 as International Youth Year, an Israeli national committee was set up to develop a comprehensive plan to mark it, focus.ing on the problems and needs of young people. The committee includes representatives of all institutions, public organizations and youth organizations involved with the young people of Israel. It drew up a coraprehensive plan to mark the International Youth Year which focused on the problems and needs of young people. Existing programmes and activities were examined, and the involvement and co-operation of young people in community activities was encouraged.
Special attention was given to programmes which increased contacts and understanding among the young. Current youth projects were therefore intensified and new ones initiated. In the implementation of the International Youth Year programme, conventions and study days on the subject of youth were held, material on young people’s rights and duties was published, joint festivals of various
(Me. Bein, Israel) youth groups were held and meetings were organized in joint youth camps for young people froi! Israel to meet the young people from other countries.
We in Israel are eager to promote such meetings. We want to give our youth the opportunity to meet with youth from each and every country. Unfortunately, Jewish youth of the Soviet Union could not participate in these projects because under tha current policies of the Soviet Government they are not free. They cannot leave their country? they cannot study their ancestral .language, Hebrew; they are not allowed to develop their Jewish cultural heritage. If they do, they face the danger of harassment from the authorities. They are not free to meet their brethren, the youth of Israel, in building bridges of international understanding.
International Youth Year in Israel was inaugurated by each local authority through youth conventions to discuss the problems and needs of young people. Volunteer programmes were formulated for young people to serve tne needs of their local communities. Educators in secondary schools held special sessions on the Year, i.dng special materials distributed by the Ministry of Education and Culture.
Another international Youth Year programme, with the slogan "Peace, Involvement, Brotherly Love" is one that enables young people from all parts of Israel to work and serve voluntarily in towns and communities in need of such assistance. Those volunteers have helped school pupils with their homework, and acted as youth leaders in afternoon and evening youth centres, clubs and youth organizations, and on sports fields. They have helped ambulance crews in emergencies and the traffic police in teaching drivers and pedestrians roxd laws and safety regulations. These young volunteers have helped the aged and disabled in their homes and the sick and injured in hospitals.
All those activities have been planned and carried out parallel to International Youth Year projects around .he world.
‘	Be^n* Israel)
A highlight of the Year's programme, emphasizing international good will and co-operation, was an International .Youth Camp held in the National Forest from 11 to 15 August. Israel commemorated International Youth Year by issuing an International Youth Year stamp in July. A special poster on International Youth Year was published and distributed in advance to all secondary school classes, as well a? to organizations involved in the planning of the Year's activities.
In July this year an international symposium on youth and disability was organized in Jerusalem. This month an international seminar on working youth and developing countries will be held, further emphasizing this international bridge-building aspect of the Year.
The commemoration of International Youth Year in Israel will conclude with a special week of activities culminating in national youth conventions, where special awards will be given to individuals and youth groups who distinguish themselves in the different fields of volunteer work in their communities.	.
Zt is my Government's hope that International Youth Year activities in Israel will help to summarize and evaluate a host of programmes for the youth of Israel that had been started previously while serving as a catalyst and a springboard for new plans and challenges to be taken up in the future.
"Participation, Development and Peace" as defined by the United Nations when it launched this important programme are the hallmarks of Israel's activities this year and will be in the years to come. There can be no real development without the widespread participation and involvement of the nation's youth, and there can be no real development without peace. Let us all unite to further those goals. Let us all, especially the young, share in further development towards peace in the Middle East and throughout the world.
Mr, HVITVED (Denmark): On behalf of rhe Danish Government I have the honour to address the Assembly on the occasion of International Youth Year. My Government has made it possible for representatives of Danish youth to participate as members of the Danish delegation to sessions of the General Assembly, and thus made it possible for me to make this speech on behalf of the Danish Government.
To us it is very important that youth be included in decision-making everywhere and at all levels. That, of course, requires that young people are respected and taken seriously, but at the same time, of course, they must also have the capacity to involve themselves. Danish youth do involve themselves daily in the society surrounding them. Decisions on our daily life and future are to be made not only for us, but with us and by us. So far, young people Uive not achieved their full influence, but we are willing to help obtain it in a
constructive way.
The year 1985 was declared International Youth Year with the main themes of "participation, development and peace”. In Denmark the activities of the Year have been based locally, participation being the main theme. During International Youth Year some 120 local youth committees have been working on the themes of the Year, and thus many young people have actively involved themselves. By means c^ campaigns, meetings and pamphlets; the Secretariat of International Youth Year has informed young people about what opportunities for their participation do or do not exist.
Local youth councils have been created in several places in Denmark, and both a press centre for children and youth questions and a media centre have been set up on the occasion of International Youth Year. Through a special Youth Parliament, young representatives from the political youth organizations have been given the opportunity to discuss their wishes on youth policy.
Denmark stressed the theme "development" by means of a debate, and a subscription campaign for young people in Chile, itolivia and Zimbabwe, and the Danish Government set up an international exchange centre in Copenhagen. Denmark's International Youth Year activities have been carried out both locally and centrally with such important themes as environment, leisure time, education and influence.
Young people today are facing a very difficult situation. The economic situation has resulted in a great number of unemployed people. The unemployed young lose their link with the surrounding society and their confidence. The high rate of youth unemployment may create an increase of conflicts in society and weaken young people's hope of a good future. Unemployment is a problem of special concern to young women. Traditionally, more women than men are unemployed and remain so for a longer period of time. This poses a risk to the progress towards equality made during the past decade.
These problems will only be solved if the whole of the society is prepared to do so and if we are willing to take initiatives throughout the society. Furthermore, it is a prerequisite that'everybody be ready to accept a distribution which will benefit the less privileged. The Danish Government has created more training opportunities in order that young people may have a chance to learn a profession.	'
It is equally important that those who show initiative in creating new jobs for young people be given the necessary support by society.
"Participation" is another of the themes of International Youth Year. It is essential to the development of our society that young people participate in decision making at all levels. It is question of our future: if it is built up without our participation, then the'basis of future conflicts is already laid. Thus it is very important that a dialogue should exist between the decision-makers and youth. This dialogue is inportant because young people have new ways of expression and new norms differing from those valid for other parts of society.
Problems concerning education, employment and the acceptance of new norms may seem of minor importance in a world where a large number of young people Live in developing countries. Those young people in the developing countries also need jobs, education and acceptance.
Of course, it would be a misunderstanding to believe that these problems are the only ones which the younger generation is concerned about. But if we do not pay attention to these conditions, we risk having young people behaving aggressively and perhaps being violent, and this is a threat to society. We have already seen examples of this tendency when young people find themselves in a desperate situation.
In the United Nations too, it is very inportant that attention be paid to youth and that young people be taken seriously. Ever since the twenty-fifth
(Mr. Hvitved, Denmark) session of the General Assembly, representatives of youth have been included in the Danish delegation. The prerequisite for young people taking an active part in United Nations work is the existence of effective channels for information between young people, youth organizations and the United Nations.
Positive steps have already been taken, but something more can still be done. To us, International Youth Year is also an opportunity of improving the channels of communication. To us the Geneva Informal Meetings are such a mechanism. There seem to have been some misunderstandings concerning those Meetings and their role. It is very important to stress that the Geneva Informal Meetings are those of a broad organization which reflects all tendencies within its framework. In spite of the fact that several Governments have given those meetings political and financial support, there is no single or predominant political tendency at those meetings.
At the same time, it should be noted that those Geneva Informal Meetings represent the only broadly based forum linking the United Nations, youth organizations, and young people. Hence the United Nations should use International Youth Year as an opportunity to recognize those Meetings as the main channel of communication between youth and the United Nations. Furthermore, the Organization should give the Geneva Informal Meetings an opportunity of fulfilling its tasks as a world-wide channel of communication between young people and the United Nations, and should further the opportunities of having participants from developing countries at those sessions.
"Development" is another theme of International Youth Year. During 1985 there have been several activities designed to increasing solidarity between young people all over the world. The purpose of those activities has been to create an understanding of the situation of millions of young people and other underprivileged groups in the developing countries fighting against hunger and distress, and for economic independence, social justice and material progress. Those underprivileged groups are the main target of Danish development aid.
The large amounts of money collected in the United States of America, Great Britain, Denmark and other countries through rock concerts this summer have shown that young people understand the need for a redistribution of resources. But they are also aware that music and concerts are not enough, that a redistribution of the world's resources must take place if there is to be a fair distribution between developed and developing countries. Such a redistribution is the only way to create the right conditions for the world to move towards social justice and an equal distribution of wealth through just economic relations on a basis of equality.
"Peace" is the third theme of International Youth Year. To us it seems that efforts to ensure that people have a peaceful and harmonious life can never be too extensive. Opportunities to create peace, and thud the prerequisite for participation and development are gravely threatened in pur world of oppression, armed conflicts and an enormous arms race.
In our opinion the immense amounts which are spent on the arms race - both conventional and nuclear - could be used in a more constructive way to obtain peace by devoting them to development and civilian employment. We therefore support those United Nations reports on the connection between disarmament and development, and on conventional weapons.	.
In my part of the world we have lived in peace for 40 years, but young people still fear war and many of us are engaged in movements and organizations working for peace and disarmament. Young people today are worried about the arms race and the current development of new and even more destructive types of arms.
EMS/4
Youth should be given every possibility of exchange with young people from other countries and continents, of travel to all parts of the world and to all nations, and of acquiring information on conditions elsewhere. At the same time all nations should inclement the proposals on international education made by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the special assemblies. These efforts will contribute to increased international understanding in a world where the young generation finds it hard to believe that mutual threats are the best guarantee of peace.
I have talked about the three main aspects of international Youth Year -peace, development and participation - as these themes and their meaning do engage Danish youth.
We are concerned that in many countries young people have no possibility of enjoying the most basic human rights. To us it is important that everyone enjoy his human rights. Hence, we have to support the oppressed people fighting for freedom. In particular developments in South Africa worry Danish youth. To us it is essential that concerted efforts be made to eliminate the apartheid system in South Africa.
It is important to have broad national follow-up on the International Youth Year in order that results gained during the Year are maintained and developed.
Attention should also be paid to the international results. In the United Nations, follow-up should ensure that there is insistence on youth aspects in all aspects of United Nations work. It is important that youth itself should profit from final recognition of the Geneva Informal Meetings.
Even though next year will not be an international youth year, I hope that young people will be included in the development of society. Only by ensuring peace, development and participation for youth will it be possible to create a future which is created not only for youth but by and with youth.
Mr. BARTLETT (Jamaica): This year, when we are celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, it is quite fitting that youth, which accounts.for nearly one third of the world population and 60 per cent of the population of developing countries, should be given special consideration.
The designation of 1985 as the International Year of Youth, on the initiative of Romania, is undoubtedly a most valuable contribution by the united Nations has made to the world. It has given the opportunity for the global community to focus on the substance of its raw material as it builds the foundations of the future. Equally it has offered the young forums for self-examination and analysis, in which to discuss their role in the process of human development and to advance their own ideas as to how that process should be structured.
Under the theme of "Participation. Development, Peace”, youth of all persuasions, colours, classes and ideological inclinations have found new dimensions for themselves, sought new solutions to their problems and offered concrete proposals for the improvement of their conditions.
Through these conferences, festivals, symposiums, competitions, projects and debates, the message of human rights, peace, fundamental freedoms, social justice and human solidarity has been transmitted.	■
Indeed, the Year has essentially been a good and necessary one, but not sufficient - not sufficient because the multiple problems unearthed during the Year and the various solutions offered cannot be dealt with during any given calendar period or, indeed, within a decade. But a decade is a measurable time within which a determined focus on youth could provide trends and clues, as well as results, for securing meaningful improvement in the conditions of youth globally. My delegation, therefore, in supporting the draft resolutions before us, wishes specifically to make reference to the need for the United Nations to declare the
(Hr, Bartlett, Jamaica) period 1985 to 1994 the decade of youth and to establish immediately within the Commission on Social and Humanitarian Affairs the infrastructure to facilitate arrival at a meaningful agenda for that period.
The problems and ills which beset youth run the gamut of the ills which beset humanity, the most critical of which is unenployment, which robs the society of meaningful participation in its development by a large portion of its citizens. Equally it is a burden on the society. But the solution is not uniform in all nations. The developed countries provide a picture in sharp contrast to that of the developing countries. It is projected that the youth population of developed countries will decline to about 176 million by the end of this decade and remain at the same level for the following three decades. As a consequence, the number of young workers, at present at a peak level of 110 million, will decrease and will continue to shrink to about 88 million by the year 2020. This means that the pressure on jobs for young people will ease off considerably over the present decade and that the trend will continue well into the next century.
On the other hand, it has been pointed out that for developing countries the prospects are alarming. The youth population, which is 625 million today, is expected to continue this upward spiral and to number about 1,115 million by the year 2020. As a consequence, the youth labour force in developing countries is expected to increase by 70 million by the year 2000 and by another 50 million by the year 2020. The developing countries are faced, therefore, with the task of creati c fell over 100 million jobs in the next two decades in order to absorb the projected 70 million increase in the youth labour force and the existing 35 million shortfall in employment opportunities for jobless youth.
In essence, in developing countries there are three young applicants for every job that is available. These young people are forced to be idle and to drift to the cities. This condition breeds hopelessness and despair and leads to crime, political instability and a host of other social ills. Another major result of
BSS/gp
/40/W.75
89-90
(Mr. Bartlett, Jamaica)
unemployment is the growing problem of teenage pregnancy. This problem further restricts the opportunities available to the young female within the population and is a major constraint on individual and societal development.
The latest scourge that has affected the youth of our societies is the growing menace of drug abuse. Jamaica has not been immune from this problem. For our part, however, we have resolved to eliminate this evil from our midst and have developed a vigorous programme of public education and .legal sanctions to ensure maximum results.
In Jamaica the rate of unemployment among young people aged between 14 to 29 is 45 per cent. Of this group the rate among women is about 60 per cent. Jamaica today, like most third world countries, is saddled with a debt crisis, faces an adverse balance of trade owing to changing market conditions and the rapid rate of technological change and an energy crisis, and is unable to find economic sources of alternate energy. Traditional exports have been undermined by new market demands and protectionist policies in some markets. All those factors together have made it necessary to devise new and innovative policies and programmes to deal with youth, we embarked on a structural adjustment programme which has the objective of transforming the economy. Its details require the adoption of a new approach to production and significant changes in the type of products generated in agriculture, industry and commerce. It further requires significant adjustments in the standard of living of our people and challenges our ability to achieve meaningful economic growth through self-reliance. In this context an integrated youth programme which is geared to the development of a new type of youth, responsive to the goals and reflecting the aspirations of the new imperatives is vital.
At the present time, 35,000 young people in our country enter the labour market annually. The Government has sought to deal with them through this programme which is designed to orient youth away from the traditional solution of seeking employment and to encourage them to become self-employed through the establishment of small enterprises. The programme involves three approaches: First, training. This involves advanced skill training, craft training, agricultural skill training and also a school-leavers programme under which young persons are placed with private firms, and others are streamed-off to tertiary instkations.
Second, the stimulation of income-generating activities. Under this heading we have developed a self-start fund which will provide credit for youth who have received prescribed training. In addition, there is the solidarity programme which provides assistance in identifying viable projects and offers technical support in the management of these projects.
Third, personal and community development. This is a multi-faceted and multi-pronged programme which seeks to improve all aspects of physical conditions, particularly those of youth within the inner-city areas, while addressing the social, cultural and spiritual needs of the youths who inhabit areas around the inner-city areas.
The problems I have outlined are not unique to Jamaica and the solutions we offer reflect only one approach. However, it is clear that programmes such as these will have limited success in developing countries which are buffeted by the harsh economic winds of our time. My Government sees, therefore, the need for a shift of resources in international institutions and a reordering of priorities so that programmes designed to alleviate the growing problems in developing countries may receive greater assistance and support.
This to my mind is essential if the growing consciousness and hopes generated by the celebration of International Youth Year are not to be frustrated but converted into practical measures to meet the genuine needs of our youth.
It is essential not to lose momentum. In order to ensure that principles and ideas bear fruit, there is a need to devise a system of institutions which will enable projects and programmes concerning youth to be made concrete and realizable. It calls for more than mere co-ordination of efforts of national committees or national institutions. It calls for more than the monitoring of activities. Instead, it suggests the need for a flow of funds properly directed to or through an appropriate organization to provide, where necessary, funding for
(Me. Bartlett, Jamaica) national machinery and specif? projects, particularly in respect of youth unemployment. Although none of the draft resolutions before us deals specifically with that issue, all to some degree or other require follow-up action. We are all of the opinion that, in most cases, follow-up action will be inpossible without resources.
During April of this year the Jamaica Organizing Committee held the International Youth Conference and World Youth Festival of Arts in Kingston. The latter was designed to bring together young people from various parts of the world in joyous celebrations and to kindle a spirit of brotherly love among the youth of the world. The Youth Conference was designed to stimulate serious discussion of problems affecting youths of the world.
I wish again to commend to the world community the Kingston Declaration of Principles, which represents the essence of the International Youth Conference. The full document has already been put to the United Nations, and >as been ■ distributed for Member countries to read. In that Declaration, over 1,000 democratic youth leaders representing 300 delegations from 100 countries re-affirmed their adherence to freedom and justice and to the democratic way of life which finds expression in the cardinal principles of free speech, free and fair elections, access to information and freedom of movement and of dissent. Similarly, these youths have declared their opposition to racism and apartheid, to totalitarianism and authoritarianism, to régimes which seek to oppress young people and the peoples of those countries wherever they may be and, of whatever orientation; they also expressed their opposition to exploitation and economic injustice and to the arras race. The Kingston Declaration of Principles is yet another call to the present leaders of the world to restore sanity and decency to human affairs and to reduce the misery and suffering which are fast becoming the rule rather than the exception in human existence. That Declaration is also a
EMS/4
(Mr. Bartlett, Jamaica) message of hope, indicating that youth has a clear understanding of the problems and can offer some solutions. Therein lies a measure of hope for the future.
In concluding, we wish to express our firm solidarity with the youth of Namibia and South Africa, suffering under the apartheid régime and struggling to destroy that hateful system, and with youth everywhere who, in the face of tyranny, despotism and authoritarianism, strive in the name of justice and freedom to build a better world.	.
Mr. GALINDO QUINONES (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): The International Youth Year has led to a keen awareness of what the new generations are and what they represent now and for the future. It has brought about a vast mobilization of young people and of Governments everywhere, and has demonstrated the power of the United Nations to act as a centre in this respect as well as the nobility and universality of these three major goals: Participation, Development and Peace.
The young are the most sensitive part of the social fabric of mankind. Many of the people in the world are less than 24 years of age and are the most receptive segment of our society. At present there are 921 million young people in the world. Their thinking and action are the oxygen which gives life to nations and to international debates.
Many of the resolutions which emanated from the General Assembly, and all the struggles for justice and liberation which the peoples have been waging, have found in youth throughout the ages their main advocate and protagonist.
Pros the many forums of discussion and debate in all parts of the world repeated demands are heard in connection with such things as the struggle for world peace and against the arras build-up and war; respect for huraan rights throughout the world; the defence of sovereignty; non-interference in internal affairs; the self-determination of peoples; the peaceful solution of disputes; support for the peace negotiations of the Contadora Group in Central America; condemnation of all forms of racial segregation, such as apartheid; the promotion of truly democratic and pluralistic policies for the benefit of youth in all countries; the quest for new mechanisms to facilitate access by the young to decision-making bodies; a minimum of well-being; establishment of a new international economic order; opposition to all forms of subjugation and individual and collective repression; and action to combat illiteracy and against anything that festers drug addiction, alcohol abuse or any other form of social degradation.
One of the major forums in which these concerns were voiced was the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Congress in Barcelona.
The youth of the world demand full respect for their dignity, complete justice, unlimited freedom, increasing participation, full development and genuine and lasting peace.
We trust that/ on the basis of this major mobilization, new seeds will emerge and bear fruit so that at the end of the millenium the whole world will be able to count on the will, the determination and the support of societies and Governments in fostering full development for the young within society as a whole. We hope that there will always be policies, programmes, structures and resources to benefit yuth and help them develop better in all are^s of human endeavour and that the struggle will continue to achieve better forms of organization and more effective
mechanisms for participation that will bridge the generation gap and prevent conflict and guarantee continuity and changea that lead to improvement and progress.
In Mexico, the Government has been drawing up, establishing and giving effect to a youth policy along those very lines. We are bent on achieving the complete development of the new generation, fostering their training, Organization and democratic, pluralistic, united participation, in a spirit of revolutionary awareness.	•	.
In my country the State and the society know that in youth there is aa active, action-oriented element of the highest value, a very rich reserve for the present and future. One fourth of our population of almost 80 million is made up of young people between the ages of 14 and 24 living in rural and urban areas. Most are educated, and today they are being trained and their level of education is being improved.
The State has allocated most of its annual budget for the young to training the skilled personnel needed by the Government to confront the existing challenges of development, improving standards of living and eradicating whatever alienation and problems still exist. In this connection, we encourage social mobilization and support political mobility and interaction in a system involving a mixed economy which promotes private, social and public investment.
To carry out the various activities relating to International Youth Year we havs established a national co-ordinating body led by our Head of State and made up of civil servants and youth leaders from the various political parties. Thus the varied ideological spectrum of our country is represented and fosters the concerted, pluralistic participation of youth and their leaders, as well as the promotion of those activities, which is unprecedented in Mexico.
In our country *he theme chosen by the United Nations was understood in the following way. Participation was conceived in tern-, of giving greater democratic
^^ Galindo Quiñones, Mexico) channels of participation in the tasks of the nation to youth; development as the promotion of education, culture, health, employment, housing, sports and recreation for the young; and peace as the ability of the young to struggle to uphold peaceful coexistence, human values and solidarity among all members of our society and with our brothers and sisters throughout the world.
TO achieve those major objectives, national consultation forums were established for debate and discussion on matters and problems of interest to youth. From the national consultation that was conducted in the various capitals of the states of the Republic of toxico recommendations and proposals emerged for the State, society and the youth organizations themselves. We should like to emphasize those that deal with employment, the situation of indigenous rural youth, health, ecology and the environment, education, culture, recreation, alienation, the social and political participation of youth, vocation, and urban youth, among others.	'
The President of Mexico recently designated 13 December of this year National Youth Day; it is a date that reminds us of the struggle of Mexican youth in 1847 to defend our sovereignty. On that day the National Congress of Mexican Youth and the corresponding national festival were inaugurated.
Because this is International Youth Year, special regular time slots have been alloted by radio, television and press for young people to express their viewpoints o:, various national and international problems. Periodicals and newspapers have been published, and many radio, television and film programmes prepared; various posters, leaflets, pamphlets and other means of communication have been printed. The idea was that the State and the society should be made more aware and should combine their efforts to have better and greater attention paid to youth. But,
(Me* Galindo Quifiones, Mexico) first and foremost, the idea was to mobilize the young people themselves to solve their own problems, setting aside paternalism of any kind.
In support of the United Nations initiative, the Mexican co-ordinating body, the Government and in particular the young themselves have been carrying out various activities involving such things as: a national congress; cultural and sports competitions throughout the country; the promotion of youth employment and programmes of economic development; various mass publications; the establishment of social solidarity brigades; demands for the young to vote in the 1985 elections; festivals in all the states of the Republic and in the capital; the establishment and development of a philharmonic orchestra; the establishment of clubs, committees and workshops for the development of youth, legal, labour, educational and health-related activities; and so on.	'
We have issued a postage stamp that has already been catalogued throughout the world; we have issued commemorative coins and printed two youth yearbooks for 1984 and 1985. In schools, universities, neighbourhoods, trade unions, parties and churches, other important programmes were carried out and young people gathered to participate in these various activities. In this regard I have made a detailed report which will be made available to all of you.
In additon, I should like to say that, in Mexico, we have a political constitution which fosters peaceful coexistence and ensures rights for all our people. We have a national development plan and a programme whose main priorities are to make sure that the young, that is, the majority of our population, are the beneficiaries of our programmes. In accordance with 1980 figures, we have 15.5 million young people between the ages of 14 and 24. Out of a total of 34 million citizens of voting age, 9 million, or approximately 39 per cent, are between the ages of 18 and 24.
Our national educational system has 135,500 schools, which provide education to almost 25 millio' students from the lowest to the highest levels, and in which almost 1 million teachers are enployed.
The goals of national renewal and revolutionary modernization called for by the President of Mexico, Miguel de la Madrid, specify that young persons and children in Mexico are the main beneficiaries of these programmes, and will become their strongest allies and promoters. We are today, therefore, carrying out activities to expand the legal framework necessary further to encourage and stimulate these sectors of our society.
Clearly, my country is doing a great deal for the new generation. It fosters humanism and the values of democracy, justice, freedom, independence and
solidarity. At the same time ay country promotes and disseminates the many cultures which are part of our national heritage. We are far from, being a perfect nation, but we are doing our best to move ahead by democratic means and to break out of the crisis which besets us.
We have been promoting education, health, employment, housing, culture, recreation, sports and participation on many fronts, for these are vital for a nation on the move, such as Mexico.
We are striving to make a.proper assessment of the energy, creativity and needs of the young, whom we encourage and in whose hands we place the future of our country.
We respect freedom and we are extending rights; we promote social solidarity and plurality. We have no censorship, nor repression, and we call for participation in the decision-making process. New horizons are constantly opening up for its development. We have established new forms of social organization which improve each and every community and which offer opportunities despite many difficulties.
Mexican youth are imbued with a great sense of humanity and an extraordinary dedication to the defence of the homeland, liberty, justice, independence and solidarity. They know full well how to distinguish between what is good and useful for the country and what is harmful to it. They are non-conformists; but they are positive human beings and seek transformation and progressive social change. They reject repression, interference and manipulation, as well as any form of intervention or intrusion by outside forces. Mexican youth is profoundly concerned with peace and the mobilization of the people, which helps to bring about the changes our society requires; they reject all kinds of oppression and find manipulative forms of capitalism repugnant. They strive to achieve a new, more
just and egalitarian society. They are happy, friendly and sensitive to the pain of others. Recently, for instance, they gave an extraordinary demonstration of nobility when they helped their cornpatriots stricken by the recent earthquakes which affected Mexico City and other areas of the country.
Hundreds of thousands of young people from all social and cultural walks of life came out to give of their best and to help. They acted with great firmness & j will to save lives, with great talent and an enormous compassion. They acted from altruism, without expecting any compensation, following the earthquakes, which gave them greater courage to achieve the tasks of reconstruction and which will become the starting-point for a new era, which Mexicans intend to turn into a brighter future. They acted with renewed strength, to turn sorrow and need, made worse by the economic crisis, into stronger bonds of brotherhood.
This lesson of greatness which they gave to the world is rooted in the involvement of Mexican youth in another era, in social movements struggling for national independence and the establishment and consolidation of the Republic during the last century. Furthermore, it stems from their great deeds at the time of the Mexican Revolution, the seventy-fifth anniversary of which we will be commemorating on 20 November, representing a great achievement, arid which is now an institutional process, a process of renewal under whose protection our leaders and our people, particularly our youth continue to work hard on the many tasks which still lie ahead to help the poor of our country.
These are the values underlying policies for Mexican youth. The State applies these policies through various public bodies in support of the efforts of promotion, co-ordination and inpiementation carried out by our National Council of Resources for Youth, which works at the national level with the support of the Federal, state
(Mr. Galindo Quiñones, Mexico) and municipal Governments and calls upon society to ensure that all these actions are carried out on a growing scale to cover an increasing number o£ young people.
We agree to a large extent with the proposed recommendations oí the intergovernmental Advisory Committee which are being discussed at this meeting.
For example, we believe it is important to support the establishment of institutional structures to help the youth of those countries that do not have such structures. These bodies must have a very high participation from young people and work on the basis of concerted-efforts. The United Nations as well as its agencies can make a valuable technical contribution for this purpose. In this connection, many countries, including Mexico, can co-operate by offering their own experience.
Bearing in mind the fact that this year has helped to sensitize public opinion and governments but also that it is a very short period of time in which to help youth achieve its full development potential, we believe that it is necessary to declare an international decade for youth from 1985 to 1995 so that, in that period of time, the Organization, as well as Governments and youth movements themselves may achieve the meaningful goals which they require for youth and its development.
Thus we can perhaps lessen the adverse effects of having only 12 months devoted to problems of such major importance. We know that education of the future generations in the spirit of participation, development and peace is vital for the world.
From a social standpoint, the development of the world is in the hands of the young, and that is why it is so important to give them priority attention in all areas. With this in view, in order to better co-ordinate and apply the resources of the United Nations and its specialized agencies devoted to youth, and seeking to establish and institutional framework in which these programmes may be organized on a continuing basis beyond the international year or decade, we believe that we must do more and give greater support, because we cannot afford to waste time.
We believe that all countries want more concerted efforts for youth throughout the world. Rich and poor alike, we all have «any young people to take care of, 187 million of whom live in developed countries and 734 million in developing countries.
Finally, Mexico salutes the youth of the world, and we call upon the young not to give up in their struggle. We know that where there is peace that peace must be preserved on the basis of respect, justice and freedom, and where peace does not exist it is of the utmost importance to struggle to achieve that peace, as is indeed done today by the youth of Central America, Africa and the Middle East.
We are convinced that youth provides us with the best seedbed for peace and fraternity. Hence we believe that Governments and social agencies must receive the support of youth increasingly to carry out the tasks ahead. Nothing can be achieved well without youth. Policy-makers must remember that dignity is to the human person what autonomy is to social organizations, what independence is to peoples and nations and what sovereignty is to States.
V40/PV.75 1C7
Mr. MBORNOZ (Ecuador) (interpretation from Spanish): Ecuador is participating in this World Conference for the International Youth Year with the vitality of a young country where 62 per cent of the national population is composed of people under 24 years of age and where 2 million young people between the ages of 15 and 24 form the bulk of our electorate, thus keeping alive our national democratic system.
In connection with that World Conference, my Government has sent the following message to the Secretary-General of the United Nations:
"On behalf of the Government of Ecuador, I wish to convey a message of peace and friendship to all the young people of the world on the occasion of International Youth Year. The National Government has accepted the recommendation of the United Nations and has made arrangements for International Youth Year to be celebrated in the form of a number of co-ordinated cultural, scientific, artistic, sporting and social events, with a view to ensuring that the young people of Ecuador play a positive role in shaping the future of our country.	.
"The National Government is aware of the great importance of this topic and will continue to support all efforts made at the international level to ensure the active involvement of youth in the process of the economic and social development of peoples in a climate of peace friendship and understanding among all nations.” (A/40/864)
In a significant coinciding of functions and aims, the same high-level committee in Ecuador which deals with International Youth Year does the sane for the International Year of Peace. It is composed of the Ministers of Social Welfare, External Relations, Education, Culture, Sports, Agriculture and Defence and the representatives of our National Institute for Children and the Family. This committee undertook the task entrusted to it by the President of the Republic, Leon Febres Cordero, for a period to include next year, which would involve the carrying out of cultural, scientific, artistic, social and sport programmes, as well as research and consultations on the needs of Ecuadorian youth in order to ensure their full participation in the future of our country.
Regarding the goals and purposes established by the United Nations for this year and its slogan, "Participation, Development, Peace", we must point out in particular the importance which Ecuador attaches to the concept of development, which is considered to be the primary objective for our national and international activities, because it involves justice in both areas and the aim of achieving a better economic, social and economic life for individuals and peoples. Thus in the United Nations the lofty objectives of peace, disarmament and collective security constitute factors conducive to development, to the transfer of resources, to bridging the existing gap between the rich and the poor countries and, with the co-operation of youth throughout the world, to the overcoming of these problems on the basis of co-operation towards the reduction of tension, the peaceful settlement of disputes, the defence of the environment and true international co-operation.
The young people of Ecuador have responded to the call of the United Nations with great energy and hope, demonstrating their readiness to act responsibly for development without any distinction as to race, sex or social origin.
In support of this process we have found to be very useful the documerAs issued by the Secretary-General, in particular those for the preparation and observance of the International Youth Year, "Participation, Development, Peace" (A/40/701), the report of the Advisory Committee submitted by the Secretary-General (A/40/256) and the report on social development entitled "Situation of youth in the 1980s" (V40/64).
In this context, the activities in Ecuador have been conducted not only with regard to participation, in development and the maintenance of social peace, but also in terms of the establishment and organization of cultural activities of historical and artistic nature, school festivals, round table conferences, and research based on broad co-operation on the part of our youth. We have also conducted campaigns for the prevention of drug addiction and various forms of social pathology, as well as various school competitions in sport, literature, science and other activities, youth encounters, involving youth from rural and urban areas, and various tree-planting campaigns and arts and crafts exhibitions.
A private organization, the 4-F National Foundation, which is concerned with the social and public interest and devoid of any political, religious or racial criteria, at the request of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock undertook, in connexion with the International 2outh Year, the promotion and organization of young rural Ecuadorians through the network of 4-F clubs with a view to developing civic values, Loyalty to the community and responsibility in carrying out creative work in farming, arts and craft and community improvement projects, under the guidance of volunteer leaders and experts in various spheres of rural activity.
Various internaticnal meetings have been organized with technology and sports as themes, as well as cultural contacts in various intellectual spheres promoted by the State, the House of Culture and private entities.
Activities planned for 1985 and 1986 with youth participation in programmes between representatives of various regions of our country on subjects such as specific solutions required for the building of a world based on peace are . proceeding apace.
The role of youth in national development is contemplated and fostered in the formulation of the National Development Plan, which has just been established by the National Government, in accordance with a formula devised by the National Development Council for the 1984-1988 period, with yearly goals on a global and sectoral scale for the economy, plans and programmes for investment and public services with the full participation of youth in the various aspects of promoting national growth in food production, the building of housing generating employment, as well as programmes for urban and rural development, agrarian reform and the setting up of rural settlements, the protection of the environment by means of programmes such as aforestation and the preservation of water resources, as well as mountaineering, travel for social awareness and working towards the full utilization of human resources in general.
Ecuador's best resource is its youth. With our youth we propose to have the country make progress towards the third millennium, in keeping with the ideals of the United Nations, to involve our youth in the crucial decisions for its future as a people upholding the objectives of participaton, development and peace of this International Youth Year.
I should like to express the gratitude of the delegation of Ecuador for the fine work done by the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year, whose recommendations we hope will be endorsed by the General Assembly. Similarly, we are grateful to the Secretariat for its activities in ensuring the success of this Conference.
Mr. DIALLO (Mali) (interpretation from French): The General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session designated the year 1985 as International Youth Year.
The reports of the Secretary-General in documents A/40/64 and A/40/265 have provided in-depth and precise information on the programme of activities for the Year, on the situation of youth in the 1980s and on the extremely important role youth can play in the search for solutions to the problems of society and the community of nations. .
The holding of a World Conference for the International Youth Year in this year of the fortieth anniversary of our Organization is, in our view, of particular importance. This is an exceptional event which enables us to consider problems pertaining to youth, as well as the opportunities for youth to take a direct part in the dawning of a better world.
As the energy and the hope of a nation, youth has always had pride of place in society. When we consider their numerical importance, the high level of their awareness with regard to national questions and world issues, and its impatience in wishing to take part in decision making, we are faced with the fact that today nothing constructive or worthy can be done without its participation.
Indeed, 20 per cent of the world's population is between the ages of 15 and 25 - in other words, 800 million individuals 75 per cent of whom are in the developing countries. The problems of youth are so numerous and so urgent that we could not lay down any strategy for development and social progress without taking into account the far-reaching aspirations and needs of youth.
The triple theme "Participation, Development, Peace" of the Conference clearly indicate the importance of this question and the interests it arouses, since youth is indeed the focal point of all the aspects of any country's policy: education and vocational training, employment, unemployment, health, democratic freedom, national independence, peace, the environment and ideals of progress.
All these aspects concurrent with the advancement of youth are among the factors, among many others, underlying the way in which a community deals with its youth and provides it with opportunities to realize its aspirations and to leave its stamp on a common future.
Hence every country has a set of measures designed to support, foster or direct individual and collective initiatives of youth itself and help them to develop their self-reliance and their active involvement in society.
In Mali, youth constitutes almost 53 per cent of our population. This means that the problems of youth are the focal point of the concerns of the political and administrative authorities in my country, which has celebrated with great enthusiasm International Youth Year.
Thus, since November 1984, the Department in charge of youth activities set up a National Commission and Regional Commissions entrusted with the task of considering overall problems of concern to youth nationally, regionally and internationally. Organizations of rural and urban youth, women's organizations, trade unions and technicians of ministerial departments took part in the realization of programmes for the activities laid down by these Commissions.
Through their own organizations and structures, our youth is carrying out sports, artistic and cultural activities. It is participating actively at the grassroots level and at the highest levels of the political life of our country and to work on national and regional construction sites. There exists a National Service for Youth with the task of promoting the education, civic and professional training of youth with a view to its effective and full'participation in the economic, social and cultural development of the country.
Our youth has relations of co-operation and enjoys exchanges in all spheres -sports, culture and politics - with youth organizations in other countries. It follows with great interest and support and in full solidarity youth organizations in countries still under colonial domination or living under the apartheid régime.
Our youth has always taken part in the World Festival of Youth and Students.
RM/2 7
As the central theme of International Youth Year, Mali has chosen the involvement of young people in the flow of production. The choice of that theme was dictated by the fact that the crisis in employment has assumed a national dimension in my country. As a sub-Saharan country, Mali has for more than a decade been subjected to the cumulative effects of drought and desertification. That situation has had a deleterious effect on agricultural production and on the livestock sector, creating a veritable catastrophe in rural areas. As a landlocked country, Mali has been sorely afflicted by ¿all-out from the world economic crisis. The slow-down in economic activity and the insufficient level of productive investments have created a situation of under-employment characterized by growing unemployment, increasing mass-migration and delinquency.
In the face of a such an unfavourable economic situation, it has become almost impossible to implement any sort of strategy designed to include young people in all aspects of development.	-
How can the young people of the third world be able to participate directly in shaping the future of mankind and play a useful role in the establishment of a new international economic order based on equity and justice, when their very existence is being threatened by the arms race and by the events and political consequences of the world economic crisis?
The Governments of developing countries are very well aware of the role that young people should be playing in nation-building. As we said earlier, every country has its policy, its strategy for dealing with its own young people. However, the implementation of that policy and strategy is generally compromised by climatic vicissitudes and by a breakdown in the fundamental balances in our national economies.
In order to achieve our goal we need the establishment of a more just international economic order and a halt to the arms race. The involvement of United
Nations bodies and institutions, of non-governmental organizations and international youth organizations will also be very important in the elaboration, implementation and co-ordination of policies relating to young people.
My delegation believes that in establishing and facilitating co-operation among youth organizations, in mobilizing all young people to rally around the theme "Participation, Development, Peace", between today and the end of the decade we will be able to reduce the number of young people living on the fringes of society and increase their participation in the development process.
The mobilization of all people of goodwill the world over and the creation of conditions for the implementation of a genuine policy of equity and justice in international relations will enable us to offer young people the opportunity and the satisfaction of contributing to the building of a world of prosperty and peace, a world they will want to inherit and in which they will want to live.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The next speaker is the representative of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations, upon whom I now call.
Ms. REINER (Holy See) : It is with special satisfaction that the Holy See is speaking at this Conference on Youth as International Youth Year moves to its climax at this fortieth session of the United Nations General Assembly.
The preparations everywhere have been extensive, and the collaboration of the Catholic Church has been marked by the vitality and joy that characterize many young people in the Church today. Youth activities of the Church have included the International Meeting of Youth in Rome, with the participation of about 250,000 young people who demonstrated the great openness and interest of Catholic young people in the task of building a society of justice and peace inclusive of the spiritual dimension of human persons. Pope John Paul II sent a special message to the World Congress on Youth convened by the United Nations Educational,
(Ms. Reiner, Holy See) Scientific and Cultural Organization in Barcelona. Further, an annual World Day of Youth has been designated by the Catholic Church to direct attention to the contribution and potential of youth in creating a better future. Finally, I would like to recall the numerous programmes, seminars and meetings initiated by the many international Catholic non-governmental organizations with the participation of young people.
The Holy See would therefore express appreciation to all the members of the Third Committee, who for many years have guided the planning for this momentous occasion, and also to the Secretariat for its work culminating in this important event.
As the member of my delegation appointed for this agenda item, I would like to contribute from my research and my experience with my peers on three continents to the international dialogue here in three areas: the importance of International Youth Year, the situation of youth today and some major concerns of contemporary youth for consideration by the United Nations in the future.
The significance of International Youth Year needs to be exposed fully in order to enrich and to guide the actions of the international community in behalf of youth. Careful reflection on the truth about International Youth Year is a means of renewal and rededication.
Although the attractions and stresses of this moment in history command intense attention, the future of youth imposes an overriding importance because the future of youth signifies the future of all humanity. There is no tomorrow without the youth of today. The tomorrow of the world lies in the minds and hearts and hands of today's young people. Youth is the state of the future, and the young are the society of tomorrow. The destiny of all humanity is the destiny of this present generation of youth. When we ask ourselves, "What do we want for our future?" the accuracy of our answer hinges on what we are doing with, and for, our
(Ms. Reiner, Holy See) youth today. For these reasons, International Youth Year appears to us as a time of action to prepare the adulthood of the millions of youth of the world. My delegation insists most emphatically that the world of tomorrow and its society are created out of the actions for and with the youth of today.
Therefore, we say that the youth of today hold the key to the transformation of society. The hopes and plans made during this International Youth Year pass into the hands of my generation for implementation. The improvements envisioned and sought by aduilts will be realised as they are moulded by today's young people, and, in turn, my generation needs to learn this same lesson immediately, for the rapidity of social change is a reality we must cope with. We will have to be ready to prepare for our tomorrow, which is in the hands of the children of today. Therefore, communication among generations assumes' increasing importance, and the openness of heart and mind, and that willingness to learn from others characteristic of little children, as proclaimed by Jesus in Christian Scripture, becomes essential for the happiness of all.
Most importantly, International Youth Year moves all of humanity closer to what we want to be. This year must be the beginning of the co-ordination 'of long-term programmes to confront the grave problems which menace the very existence of humanity by threats to the environment, which attack human creativity by unemployment and which diminish the fullness of humanity by erosion of the spiritual dimension of life.
International Youth Year is an opportunity for youth and adults together to renew themselves. It provides an impetus for all generations to overcome marginalization and divisions of all kinds in order to unite to make a new world where participation, development and peace flourish. It is a challenge to address jointly the uncertainties of the new century and to construct together the new civilization of truth and love.
(Ms. Reiner, Holy See) Certainly one of the achievements of international Youth Year concerning which the world community can already be pleased is the amount of research undertaken through the United Nations Secretariat on the situation of youth. For the first time, as the documentation shows, we know more about the conditions of the youth of the world than before. The results of the research are alarming: health, education, unemployment; the situtation of young women, of young refugees, of migrants and prisoners, of so-called street and abandoned youth, of young prostitutes, both male and female, homeless young people, and victims of violence are often in perilous situations and, we might say, unjust situations when compared with the attention, talent and finances devoted to armaments and destruction. The Holy See has called attention to this injustice on many occasions, and at this time we bring the attention of this International Youth Year meeting to such a scandal in the hopes that action will be taken on behalf of these particular youth groups.
In the matter of peace, a priority theme of International Youth Year, young people today are in the front row. More acutely than others for whom they are often the privileged expression, youth longs to live. And yet they are the first to be forced to take up arms, the first to be indoctrinated and manipulated in favour of violence and war. Many young people are convinced that war is not preparation for peace, and it is not a road to peace. Yet often in the quest for peace our ready good will is rebutted and looked upon with condescension. Young people must often overcome the snubs of cynics and the indifference of those unwilling to listen to them and to encourage their participation in matters concerning themselves and their future, for example, peace. The willingness to participate must be given encouragement in each young person for otherwise we will not develop our abilities to help attain universal peace. Moreover, we will not achieve fulfilment as persons, for peace means the fulness of being. The words of the Holy Father give us confidence and strength here: "I believe in youth with all my heart and the strength of my conviction", he said.
The youth of today are very demanding, sometimes falling into exaggeration and succumbing to personal selfishness. In us there is a desire for honesty, truthfulness, justice and consistency. There is widespread dissatisfaction among us evoked by the widely evident lack of justice and generosity. Very sensitive to the tension between good and evil in the world and in ourselves, many of my peers suffer intensely at the victory of falsehood and injustice and at our powerlessness to make truth and justice triumph. Like the youth of every age, we are searching for truth, for ideals to live by, for responsible participation, moral beauty and innocent joy.
The suffering of young people results also from the contradictory nature of the ideologies that impinge upon us and from the continuing emptying of ideals which we witness. Professional integration in societies where pleasure is the purpose of life demands compromises which for many of us sometimes inspire revolt, escape or resignation. But employment is not even available to so many, even though they have the necessary skills and are animated by good will to contribute to society. Young persons without work are exposed to every type of temptation: violence, drugs, even despair and suicide.
Also we are a questioning youth, wanting to account for what is happening, looking for the meaning of our own lives and the significance of humanity and of the whole universe. We are a youth which invokes certainty and clarity on our own destiny and with regard to our own conduct. Ours is a period of transition when uncertainties abound. Questions arise among us: what meaning does the life we are living have? Is it possible to hope? Certainly, clear ideas, well-defined goals and concrete proposals respond best to our needs. We sense the necessity of finding a reality that may give a decisive and ultimate meaning to our fragmented reality.
Finally, we are a youth filled with fear; fears about the threat to survival of our human species, anxiety about the threat to peace in our world because of atomic armament, worry about the destruction of our ecological balance and our beautiful planet Earth and concern for the problems of our nations which remain unresolved for so long.
These then are some characteristics of youth today: critical, demanding, suffering, questioning and fearful.
An initial concern of my generation can be phrased this way: what will be the meaning of existence in the future? In the third milennium, the time of maturity for the youth of today, many of us believe that we will find our meaning in truth, the possession of truth and the possibility of living in truth. This is truth in thought and truth in action. To experiential and scientific truth must be added a profound moral and religious formation that will be deeply lived and bring about an increasingly harmonious synthesis between faith and other human dimensions:	.
reason, culture, life. In his Apostolic Letter to the Youth of the World on the occasion of International Youth Year, Pope John Paul II explains:
"Truth is the light of the human intellect. If the intellect seeks, from youth onwards, to know reality in its different dimensions, it does so in order to possess the truth, in order to live the truth."
Youth seeks the meaning of human life in truth, the Truth that, as the Church teaches, will make us free.
A second concern of my generation is: how to arrive at goodness, how to pass through sacrifice, effort and struggle to a final triumph. The importance of the family as a teacher of good and a mentor of the good life cannot fail to be recognized. The stable family can provide for the young members loving patience, understanding and support so that they can discover their own infinite capacity for love, trust and sharing. This aspect of the family’s educative role is particularly
relevant to young people as they approach the age of marriage. The responsibilities of raising a family are enormous and in order to establish a solid and loving family relationship, the necesssary qualities must already have been cultivated. The family that encourages its younger members to persevere in the face of difficulty must itself be encouraged by society.
However, in many instances today we find that the ideal of mutual support and development between society and the family is non-existent and the two are often in opposition to each other. If the family must fight for its own survival it cannot also give the necessary guidance to the young persons within it. Consequently, society suffers the double loss of breakdown in the family and the young person’s frequent engagement in anti-social behaviour. Moreover, because their sense of self-esteem was not developed within the family or because they did not have the benefit of family protection, young people are exploited in degrading occupations such as prostitution. The Holy See strongly defends the rights of the family against undue interference in its structure and functiong and condemns those situations that debase the fundamental integrity of the person.
Finally, a concern of ours is how to explain to the world why we young people are filled /ith hope. How do we explain to the world the hope that lies at the very root of youth? Pope John Paul II and many others refer to us as "the hope of society" and "the hope of peace". In fact, youth is a sign that tells people of all ages something about themselves and about what it is to be a creation of God. The images of youth, such as beauty, strength and enthusiasm, symbolize qualities potential within every human person. Youth then is a precious possession, available to each one, not merely to those in the 15-24 age bracket. It is a timeless state defying death and it is a reminder that death is not the end and that death has been conquered. If the folly of youth is to cling to materialism, the wisdom of youth delves into a deeper vision of life where love, beauty,
(Ms. Reiner, Holy See) strength, enthusiasm, courage and resilience flourish. These youthful qualities and spiritual powers live within persons of all ages, and International Youth Year is above all a call to honour such youthful qualities of human nature.
In conclusion I return to an appreciation of International Youth Year as an impetus for the years ahead. This moment marks a determination not to leave the future to chance. It signals a time of commitment: the adults of today commit themselves to youth for a transformation of society into a better world tomorrow. Today's youth, my generation, commits itself to children, the youth of tomorrow and to the society we begin in collaboration with the adults of today. Basic to our future together is the assumption that work for youth must be done with youth, we urge a greater investment of human resources to prepare youth for the tomorrows and the optimism, dedication and good will of the adult generation to prepare with us for a future beyond this great International Youth Year.
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.117 17 December 1985
ENGLISH
■annaMMBMni
Fortieth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 16 December 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
President:	Mr. DE PINIES	(Spain)
-	Tribute to the memory of General Carlos P. Romulo, President of the fourth session of the General Assembly
-	Economic and social consequences of the armaments race and its extremely harmful effects on world peace and security [48] (continued)
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
- Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the twelfth special session of the General Assembly [61] (continued)
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
85-64700/A 7010V (E)
Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session [65] (continued)
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace [66]
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
World Disarmament Conference [67] (continued)
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
Relationship between disarmament and development [69] (continued)
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
Question of Antarctica: report of the First Committee [70]
Strengthening of security and co-operation in the Mediterranean region: report of the First Committee [71]
Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security: report of the First Committee [72]
Implementation of the collective security provisions of the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security [73]
(a)	Report of the First Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
BCT/PLJ
The meeting was called to order at 11. 05 a. m. 
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF GENERAL CARLOS P. ROMULO, PRESIDENT OF THE FOURTH SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): It is my painful duty to draw the attention of members of the Assembly to the sad news of the death, of His Excellency General Carlos P. Romulo of the Philippines, one of the original signatories of the Charter. 
General Romulo, who was President of the fourth session of the General Assembly, in 1949, as well as a former Minister for Foreign Affairs of his country, played a prominent role in this Organization and made a major contribution to the achievement of the objectives set out in the Charter. He was a frequent visitor to the Organization. The last time we saw him was during the meeting in San Francisco commemorating the signing of the Charter. Despite the fact that the illness from which he was suffering was already at a very advance 4 stage, he found the strength to address those who had gathered there to commemorate that anniversary of the signing of the Charter. 
May this illustrious patriot rest in peace. 
On behalf of the General Assembly, I extend to the members of the family of General Romulo and to the Government and people of the Philippines our deepest and most heartfelt condolences. 
I now call on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Today we mourn the loss of a man, General Romulo, whose name is inseparably linked to the United Nations. All of us in this General Assembly Hall are profoundly affected by his death. Only a few months ago he spoke with characteristic energy and eloquence at the fortieth anniversary commemoration in San Francisco, urging us to renew our dedication to the Charter which he had signed. Until the end, he retained that belief in the principles and purposes of the Organization which he had shared with the other signatories in 1945. 

Throughout his long career, General Romulo sought to express his faith in the human worth and his concern for those deprived of the fundamental demands of human equity and justice, in dedicated service to his country, to his region and to the international community. He was a writer, an educator, a diplomat and a statesman. General Romulo held the highest offices of the United Nations, upholding in daily action those ideals which he cherished. He was his region's first President of the General Assembly. He was three times President of the Security Council. He led his country's delegation to the Assembly on numerous occasions. And, as Foreign Minister, he strove to place the cause of the United Nations high on the international agenda. Both publicly and privately he worked tirelessly for the strengthening of the Organization and its endeavours for peace among the peoples of the world. 
His loss yesterday, in this fortieth anniversary year, cannot but suggest the passing of an era. But we would best honour his memory by heeding his call for a fresh commitment to this United Nations which he championed so devotedly. We should recall his concern that a lack of constancy to the principles of the Charter, and a lack of will to implement them, can only diminish the Organization's ability to fulfil its historic mission. But we can take strength from the knowledge that the foundations are sure and enduring. 
For his crucial part in the United Nations continuing endeavour, we and succeeding generations owe General Romulo our lasting gratitude and appreciation. 

The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence. 
Mr. MORENO-SALCEDO (Philippines): My delegation wishes to express to you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General and the representatives of Member States present today the deep appreciation of the Government and people of the Philippines for the tributes paid to General Carlos P. Romulo. Those tributes are what he would have wished to receive and would have appreciated from this Organization, which he loved and to which he devoted the best years of his life. 
AGENDA ITEMS 48, 61, 6a TO 67 AND 69 (continued) AND 70 TO 73 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ARMAMENTS RACE AND ITS EXTREMELY HARMFUL EFFECTS ON WORLD PEACE AND SECURITY
(a)	REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/915)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1019)
REVIEW AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONCLUDING DOCUMENT OF THE TWELFTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(a)	REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/946)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1019)
REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND DECISIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AT ITS TENTH SPECIAL SESSION
(a)	REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (PART II) (A/40/877/Add.1)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1019)
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION OF THE INDIAN OCEAN AS A ZONE OF PEACE
(a)	REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/1018)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1053)
WORLD DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
(a)	REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/947)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1019)
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
(a)	REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/896)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1019)
QUESTION OF ANTARCTICA: REPORT OF TSE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/996 and Corr.l) STRENGTHENING OF SECURITY AND CO-OPERATION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN REGION; REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/1027)
REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION ON THE STRENGTHENING OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY: REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/1028)
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COLLECTIVE SECURITY PROVISIONS OF THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
(a) REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/40/1029) (b) REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1054)
Mr. Souliotis (Greece), Rapporteur of the First Committee, presented the reports of that Committee (A/40/996 and Corr.l, A/40/1027, A/40/1028 and A/40/1029) and then spoke as follows:
Mr. SOULIOTIS (Greece), Rapporteur of the First Committee (interpretation from French): On behalf of Greece, I wish to offer the delegation of the Philippines our condolences and deep sympathy on the passing of the eminent diplomat, General Carlos Romulo, who devoted his life to the cause of the United Nations and the service of peace.
At the 113th meeting, on 12 December, I had the honour of presenting the reports of the First Committee on the agenda items concerning disarmament. Action on the recommendations of the First Committee with programme budget implications -that is those in the reports on agenda items 48 (A/40/915), 61 (A/40/946, 65 (A/40/877/Add.l), 66 (A/40/1018), 67 (A/40/947) and 69 (A/40/896) - had to be deferred pending the Fifth Committee's conclusions on those matters. Today I have the honour to introduce the reports on agenda item 70, "Question of Antarctica” (A/40/996 and Corr.l), and on the agenda items relating to international security (A/40/1027, A/40/1028 and A/40/1029).
This year the differences of opinion on agenda item 70, "Question of Antarctica", were more marked than at previous sessions. Despite all the efforts made by the delegations concerned, it was not possible to reach a consensus, and the Committee finally had before it four draft resolutions, one of which was subsequently withdrawn.
Under draft resolution A in the report of this item (A/40/996 and Corr.l), which was adopted by 80 votes to none, with 9 abstentions in a roll-call vote, the General Assembly would request the Secretary-General to update and expand the study on the question of Antarctica by addressing questions concerning the availability of information from the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to the United Nations, their respective activities in, and their deliberations regarding, Antarctica, the involvement of the relevant specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations in the Antarctic Treaty system and the significance of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in the southern ocean, and to subnit the study to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
Under draft resolution B, which was adopted by 78 votes to none, with 10 abstentions in a roll-call vote, the General Assembly would, inter alia, invite the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to inform the Secretary-General of their negotiations to establish a régime regarding Antarctic minerals and request the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for consideration at its forty-first session a report containing the replies received.
Finally, under draft resolution C, which was adopted by 81 votes to none, with 9 abstentions, in a roll-call vote, the General Assembly wo>’ld, inter alia, urge the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to exclude the racist apartheid régime of South Africa from participation in the meetings of the Consultative Parties at the earliest possible date and invite those Parties to inform the Secretary-General on the actions taken regarding the provisions of the draft resolution.
It should be noted that 35 delegations advised the First Committee that they were net participating in the voting on draft resolutions A and B, and 36 delegations made a similar announcement concerning draft resolution C.
As at previous sessions, a number of States that addressed the question of international security expressed concern about the serious international situation. They mentioned the persistence of many hotbeds of tension and conflict in various parts of the world and the lack of a constructive spirit in the political, economic, social and humanitarian areas as being among the many factors undermining the foundations of international peace and security. Many States also emphasized the vital need to strengthen the role and effectiveness of the United Nations in the maintenance of world peace and security.
The draft resolution in the report on agenda item 71, "Strengthening of security and co-operation in the Mediterranean region“ (A/40/1027), was adopted by the Committee without a vote. Under that draft resolution the General Assembly would, inter alia, invite the member States of the relevant regional organizations to lend support and to submit to the Secretary-General concrete ideas and suggestions on their potential contribution to the strengthening of peace and co-operation in the Mediterranean region.
It requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its forty-first session, on the basis of all the replies received and notifications submitted, in the implementation of that draft resolution, and taking into account the debate on this question during its fortieth session, an updated and comprehensive report on the strengthening of security and co-operation in the Mediterranean region.
In paragraph 8 of the report of the First Committee on agenda item 72, entitled "Review of the inpiementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security" (A/40/1028), the Committee recommends a draft resolution to the General Assembly for adoption. Under that draft resolution the General Assembly would, inter alia, call upon all States, taking into account the views expressed at the commemorative session of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, to promote the role of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General in the strengthening of international security, in accordance with the Charter.
Finally, under the draft resolution in the report on agenda item 73, entitled, "Inpiementation of the collective security provisions of the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security" (A/40/1029), the General Assembly would, inter alia, request the President of the General Assembly to hold consultations regarding the constitution of the Ad Hoc Committee and request that Committee, in considering the matter, to take due account of the views and comments of Member States, including their recommendations, and to submit a progress report to the Security Council for its consideration and comments and to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, and a final report to the Assembly at its forty-second session.
On the whole, the debates on these issues were characterized by moderation, most delegations displaying more restraint and a greater tendency towards dialogue and compromise. This atmosphere seemed to result not so much from an improved international situation as from a sense of hope and expectation in connection with the Geneva summit meeting.
Among the issues highlighted by a number of delegations were those concerning the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security as a favourable background and a source of inspiration for the work of the Committee.
Finally, it has been an honour for me to serve as Rapporteur of the First Committee and I am deeply grateful to all those who have helped me to discharge my duties.	■
I have the honour to commend to the General Assembly for consideration and adoption the recommendations of the First Committee in the reports to which I have referred.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): If there is no proposal, under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the First Committee.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the various recommendations of the First Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
(The President) I remind members that, in paragraph 7 of its decision 34/401, the General Assembly decided that, when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.
I also remind members that, in accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
We shall first take up the report of the First Committee on agenda item 4S, entitled "Economic and social consequences of the armaments race and its extremely harmful effects on world peace and security” (A/40/915).
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget indications of that draft resolution is contained in document A/40/1019. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Z?imbia
Against:	United States of America
Abstaining; Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Luxembourg, Netherlands, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The Draft resolution was adopted by 139 votes to 1, with 7 abstentions (resolution 40/150).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have concluded our consideration of agenda item 48.
The Assembly will now turn to the report of the First Committee on agenda item 61, entitled "Review and implementation of the concluding document of the twelfth special session of the General Assembly" (A/40/946).
(The President)
The Assembly has to take decisions on the 9 draft resolutions recommended by
the First Committee in paragraph 26 of its report.
Draft resolution A is entitled "Disarmament and international security". A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sanna, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia
Against:	United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A was adopted by 123 votes to 1, with 23 abstentions (resolution 40/151 A).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution B is entitled "World disarmament campaign”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia
Against:	None
Abstaining: Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution B was adopted by 139 votes to none, with 11 abstentions (resolution 40/151 B).*
The PRESIDED? (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution C is
entitled "Nuclear-arms freeze". A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Aral Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against; Belgium, Canada, France, Israel, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining; Bahamas, China, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Spain
Draft resolution C was adopted by 131 votes to 10, with 8 abstentions (resolution 40/151 C).*
♦Subsequently the delegation of Yemen advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour; the Federal Republic of Germany had intended to vote against.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution D is entitled "World Disarmament Campaign: actions and activities", A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Cyprvj, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against:	None
Abstaining: Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Draft resolution D was adopted by 114 votes to none, with 34 abstentions (resolution 40/151 D).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution E is entitled "Freeze on nuclear weapons". A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against:	Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel,
Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Bahamas, Barbados, China, Grenada, Iceland, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Spain
Draft resolution E was adopted by 126 votes to 12, with 10 abstentions (resolution 40/151 E).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution F is entitled “Convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons". A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesothc, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against:	Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Austria, Greece, Grenada, Ireland, Israel, Japan
Draft resolution F was adopted by 126 votes to 17, with 6 abstentions (resolution 40/151 F).*	.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution G is entitled "United Nations regional centre for peace and disarmament in Africa". The First Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution G was adopted (resolution 40/151 G).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution H is entitled "United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament". The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of that draft resolution is contained in document A/40/1019. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against:	United States of America
Abstaining; Grenada
Draft resolution H was adopted by 148 votes to 1, with 1 abstention (resolution 40/151 H).*	•
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution I is entitled "Convening of the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament".
The First Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 40/151 I).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): we have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 61.
The General Assembly will now take part II of the report of the First Committee on agenda item 65, entitled "Review of the inpiementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session" (A/40/877/Add.l).
The Assembly will now take decisions on the 17 draft resolutions and one draft decision recommended by the First Committee in paragraphs 59 and 60 of its report.
Draft resolution A deals with the non-use of nuclear weapons and prevention of nuclear war. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against; Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America	‘
Abstaining; Austria, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Paraguay
Draft resolution A was adopted by 123 votes to 19, with 7 abstentions (resolution 40/152 A).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next we turn to draft resolution B, concerning the bilateral nuclear-arms and space arms negotiations. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Democratic Kampuchea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Zaire, Zambia, Z imbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Central African Republic, Chad, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Gabon, German Democratic Republic, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Mexico, Mongolia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland, Romania, Senegal, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia
Draft resolution B was adopted by 107 votes to none, with 40 abstentions (resolution 40/152 B).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution C relates to nuclear weapons in all aspects. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Omun, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Swaziland, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Angola, Bahamas, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Chad, Ireland, Malaysia, Niger, Paraguay, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sweden
Draft resolution C was adopted by 117 votes to 19, with 11 abstentions (resolution 40/152 C).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution D is entitled "Comprehensive programme of disarmament". The First Committee adopted draft resolution D without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution D was adopted (resolution 40/152 D).
*Subsequently the delegation of Angola, Bolivia and the United Arab Emirates advised the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour? Congo and Luxembourg had intended to vote against; Bahrain had intended to abstain.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We now turn to draft resolution E, entitled "Disarmament week”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution E was adopted by 129 votes to none, with 22 abstentions (resolution 40/152 E).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution P is entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission". The First Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wished to
do the same?
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution G is entitled "Climatic effects of nuclear war, including nuclear winter”.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of this
draft resolution is in document A/40/1019. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	United States of America
Abstaining: Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution G was adopted by 141 votes to 1, with 10 abstentions (resolution 40/152 G).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution H deals with the prohibition of the nuclear neutron weapon. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paoua New Guinea, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Portugal, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burma, Central African Republic, Chad- Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Democratic Kar «shea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt., El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Gambia, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela
Draft resolution H was adopted by 70 votes to 11, with 65 abstentions (resolution 49/152 H).*
♦Subsequently the delegation of Zaire advised the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Now we turn to draft resolution I, which concerns international co-operation for disarmament. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Austria, Bahamas, Brazil, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Fiji, Finland, Greece, Grenada, Haiti, Ireland, Morocco, Paraguay, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sweden
Draft resolution I was adopted by 109 votes to 19, with 17 abstentions (resolution 40/152 I).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next we come to draft resolution J, which deals with the inpiementation of the recommendations and decisions of the tenth special session. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining: Austria, Belgium, Burma, Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Luxembourg, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution J was adopted by 128 votes to none, with 20 abstentions (resolution 40/152 J).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution K relates to United Nations disarmament studies. The First Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next we come to draft resolution L, dealing with the review and appraisal of the implementation of the declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade. The First Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution 1 was adopted (resolution 40/152 L).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution M relates to the report of the Conference on Disarmament. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, ^gypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	France United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Demark, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution was adopted by 133 votes to 2, with 18 abstentions (resolution 40/152 M).
THE PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution N is entitled "Implementation of the recommendations and decisions of - th® tenth special session". A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against; Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Iceland, Israel, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining; Australia, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Spain
Draft resolution N was adopted by 135 votes to 13, with 5 abstentions (resolution 40/152 N) .*
♦Subsequently the delegation of Italy advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against; the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic had intended to abstain.
The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution 0 refers to verification in all its aspects.
The First Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution 0 was adopted (resolution 40/152 O)
The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Spanish)s Draft resolution P concerns the cessation of the nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against; Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Bahamas, Denmark, Grenada, Japaa, Sierra Leone, Spain
Draft resolution P was adopted by 131 votes to 16, with 6 abstentions (resolution 40/152 P).
The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution Q relates to the prevention of nuclear war. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining: Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Federal Republic of, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey
Draft resolution Q was adopted by 136 votes to 3, with 14 abstentions (resolution 40/152 Q).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation froa Spanish): Finally, we cose to the draft decision in paragraph 60 of the report of the First Committee.
The First Consittee adopted that draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of France, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote after the vote.
Mr. de La BAUME (France)(interpretation from French): The French delegation voted against draft resolution N, although in the First Committee it had abstained in the vote on draft resolution A/C.l/40/L.58/Rev.l. Upon studying the text, we came to the conclusion that in no way could we support a draft resolution challenging nuclear deterrence, which forms part of my country's defence and security policy.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 65.
The Assembly will now turn its attention to the report of the First Committee on agenda item 66, entitled "Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace" (A/40/1018).
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 8 of that report. The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of that draft resolution is contained in document A/40/1053.
The First Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes 'to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/153).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 66.
The General Assembly will now turn to the report of the First Committee on agenda item 67, entitled "World Disarmament Conference" (A/40/947).
The text of the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee is contained in paragraph 8 of that report. The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of this draft resolution is contained in document A/40/1019.
(The President)
The First Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote. May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/154).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 67.
The Assembly will now consider the report of the First Committee on agenda item 69, entitled "Relationship between disarmament and development" (A/40/896).
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 8 of that report. The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of the draft resolution is contained in document A/40/1019.
The First Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/155).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 69.
We shall now turn to the report of the First Committee on agenda item 70, "Question of Antarctica" (A/40/996).
I call on the representative of Australia, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. WOLCOTT (Australia): First, as representative of Australia and as former Australian Ambassador in the Philippines, I should like to take this opportunity to pay both an official and a personal tribute to that great diplomat, author and supporter of the United Nations, Carlos P. Romulo, who was known around this Organization as "Mr. United Nations", and who died in Manila on Friday last. General Romulo was a historic figure. He was a long-standing friend of Australia
(Mr. WOolcott, Australia)
and a man who made a great contribution to regional co-operation in South-East Asia and to international co-opera$ion through his dedicated and steadfast support of this Organization. The Australian Government joins, X am sure, all other Governments in mourning the passing of this great figure.
A roll-call vote has been requested on the draft resolutions on the question of Antarctica. I wish to ask, on behalf of the parties to the Antarctic Treaty, that the non-participation of countries so announcing be reflected in the records of the General Assembly.
The Treaty parties are firmly of the view that consensus offers the only realistic basis for General Assembly consideration of Antarctica. Accordingly they will be compelled to reconsider their further participation in the consideration of this item unless consensus can be restored.
AF/rah
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now turn its attention to draft resolution A. A roll-call vote has been requested.
A roll-call vote was taken.
Democratic Kampuchea, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour; Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sr.’ Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining; Austria, Canada, China, Fiji, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands, Turkey
Draft resolution A was adopted by 96 votes to none, with 11 abstentions (resolution 40/156 A).*
♦During the course of the roll-call vote Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Samoa, Spain, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay announced that they were not participating.
Subsequently the delegation of Chad advised the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.
BCT/sm
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): we turn now to draft resolution B. A roll-call vote has been requested on this draft resolution, too. A roll-call vote was taken.
Bulgaria, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote
In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against :	None
Abstaining: Austria, Bahamas, Canada, China, Fiji, Grenada, Ireland, Luxembourg, Peru, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands, Turkey
Draft resolution B was adopted by 92 votes to none, with 14 abstentions (resolution 40/156 B).*
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I now put to the vote draft resolution C. Again, a roll-call vote has been requested.
♦During the course of the roll-call vote Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Samoa, Spain, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist ïtepublics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay announced that they were not participating.
Subsequently the delegation of Chad advised the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.
A roll-call vote was taken.
Trinidad and Tobago, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,'Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining: Austria, Canada, Fiji, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malawi, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Turkey
Draft resolution C was adopted by 100 votes to none, with 12 abstentions (resolution 40/156 C).*
‘During the course of the roll-call vote Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritius, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Samoa, Spain, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Uruguay announced that they were not participating.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly has concluded
its consideration of agenda item 70.	-
The Assembly will now turn to the report of the First Committee on agenda item
71, entitled "Strengthening of security and co-operation in the Mediterranean region" (A/40/1027). The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the First Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The First Committee adopted that draft resolution by consensus. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/157).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 71.
We now turn to the report of the First Committee on agenda item 72, entitled "Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security" (A/40/1028).
(The President)
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
First Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 127 votes to none, with 26 abstentions (resolution 40/158).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly has concluded its consideration of agenda item 72.
The Assembly will next turn its attention to the report of the First Committee on agenda item 73, entitled "Inpiementation of the collective security provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security" (A/40/1029).
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the First Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of that draft resolution is contained in document A/40/1054. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Afghanistan, Belgium, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, France, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg, Mongolia, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Grenada, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Spain, Sweden, Viet Nam
The draft resolution was adopted by 114 votes to 21, with 16 abstentions (resolution 40/159).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 73 and of all First Committee items.
(The President)
I wish to thank representatives, the Chairman of the First Committee, the other officers of the Committee and the members of the Secretariat concerned for the effective way in which they have carried out their work, bringing it to a successful conclusion.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV. 122
10 January 1986
ENGLISH
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 18 December 1985, at 3 p.m.
President;	Mr. DE PINIES	(Spain)
later:	Mr. MAKEKA (Vice-President)	(Lesotho)
-	Report of the Economic and Social Council: chapters considered directly in plenary meeting [Chapters I, II, III (sections E), VIII and IX (sections A and B)J [12]
-	Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments: [17] (continued)
(	h) Appointment of the members of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
-	The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives [21]
-	Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development [41]
-	Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council [42]
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
85-64730/A 7118V (E)
Observance of the quincentenary of the discovery of America [43]
Question of Cyprus [44]
Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations [45]
Consequences of the prolongation of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq [46]
Celebration of the one-hundred-and-fiftieth anniversary of the emancipation of slaves in the British Empire [47]
Report of the Economic and Social Council: report of the Fifth Committee [12] (continued)
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 1986-1987: report of the Fifth Committee [116]
Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency: report of the Fifth Committee [119]
Joint Inspection Unit: report of the Fifth Committee [120]	.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: report of the Fifth Committee [122]
Personnel questions: report of the Fifth Committee [123]
Concluding statement by the President
Suspension of the session
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 12 (continued)
REPORT PF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL: CHAPTERS CONSIDERED DIRECTLY IN PLENARY meeting [Chapters I, II, III (sections F and H), VI (section E), VIII and IX (sections A and B) ]	.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Members will recall that chapters I, II, III (sections F and H), VI (section E), VIII and IX (sections A and B) of the report of the Economic and Social Council were assigned to plenary meetings.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note of those chapters of the report?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish) : The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 12.
AGENDA ITEM 17 (continued)
APPOINTMENTS TO FILL VACANCIES IN SUBSIDIARY ORGANS AND OTHER APPOINTMENTS (h) APPOINTMENT OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE ON THE VOLUNTARY FUND FOR THE UNITED NATIONS DECADE FOR WOMEN
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will new turn its attention to agenda item 17 (h), concerning the appointment of the members of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women. The terms of office of the present five members of the Consultative Committee appointed under General Assembly decision 37/326 of 21 December 1982 expire on 31 December 1985.
Following consultations, I have appointed India, Kenya and Norway as members of the Consultative Committee for a three-year term beginning on 1 January 1986. May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of those appointments?
It was so decided.	'
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Regarding the remaining two vacancies, I have been informed by the Chairmen of the Group of Eastern European States and the Group of Latin American States that further consultations will be needed before candidates can be endorsed.
I shall therefore proceed to the appointment of the remaining members of the Consultative Committee as soon as candidates have been endorsed by those respective groups.
I therefore propose that item 17 (h) be kept on the agenda of the fortieth session of the Assembly.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees.
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 21 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA: THREATS TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY AND PEACE INITIATIVES
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now resume its consideration of agenda item 21, "The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives".
In this connection the Assembly has before it two draft resolutions, A/40/L. 34 and A/40/L.36. The sponsors of those two draft resolutions have requested that they not be put to the vote at this time and that this item be kept on the agenda of the fortieth session in order to allow for further consultations.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to retain this item on the agenda of the fortieth session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 41
LAUNCHING OF GLOBAL NEGOTIATIONS ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPSIATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now consider agenda item 41, " Launching of global neogtiations on international economic co-operation for development”.
I would propose that agenda item 41 be kept open in order to allow for the continuation of informal consultations after the suspension of the session and to reconvene on short notice to consider any decision or agreements that might emerge from those negotiations. May I take it that the Assembly decides to accept that proposal?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 42
QUESTION OF EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION ON AND INCREASE IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next, I invite members to turn their attention to agenda item 42, "Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council". I understand that there is no request to consider this item at the present session.
If that is the case, may I take it that the General Assembly decides to include the item in the provisional agenda of the forty-first session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITSi 43
OBSERVANCE OF THE QUINCENTENARY OF THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)s The Assembly will now consider agenda item 43, "Observance of the quincentenary of the discovery of America« In this connection I have received a request that this item be kept on the agenda of the fortieth session in order to allow for further consultations.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to retain this item on the agenda of the fortieth session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 44
QUESTION OF CYERUS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We now turn to agenda item 44, "Question of Cyprus". Members will recall that on 20 September 1985 the Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of the present session but deferred a decision on the allocation of the item to an appropriate time in the future.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to leave the question of Cyprus open at the present session. May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that understanding and decides to retain the item on the agenda of its fortieth session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 45
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next on our agenda this afternoon is agenda item 45, "Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations".
I have received-a request to the effect that this item be retained cm the ' agenda of the current session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to retain this item on the agenda of the fortieth session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 46
CONSEQUENCES OF THE PROLONGATION OF THE ARMED CONFLICT BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn now to agenda item 46, "Consequences of the prolongation of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq", in this connection I have received a request that this item be kept on the agenda of the current session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to retain this item on the agenda of the fortieth session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 47
CELEBRATION OF THE ONE-HUNDRED-AND-FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE EMANCIPATION OF SLAVES IN THE BRITISH EMKRE
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now consider agenda item 47, "Celebration of the one-hundred-and-fiftieth anniversary of the emancipation of slaves in the British Empire".
I understand there is no request to consider this item at the present session. If that is the case, may I take it that the Assembly decides to include the item in the provisional agenda of the forty-first session?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEMS 12 (continued), 116, 119, 120, 122 AND 123 REPORT OP THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1068)
PROPOSED PROGRAMME BUDGET FOR THE BIENNIUM 1986-1987: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1069)
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY CO-ORDINATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS WITH THE SPECIALIZED AGENCIES AND THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1064)
JOINT INSPECTION UNIT: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1065)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1066)
PERSONNEL QUESTIONS: REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/40/1067)
Mr. Meltke (German Democratic Republic), Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, presented the reports of that Committee (A/40/1068, A/40/1069, A/40/1064, A/40/1065, A/40/1966 and A/40/1067) and then spoke as follows:	'
Mr. MELTKE (German Democratic Republic), Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee: The plenary Assembly, having dealt this morning with 15 reports of the Fifth Committee, I now have the honour to introduce the remaining six reports for its consideration this afternoon.
In the first place, with regard to agenda item 12 the Fifth Committee has dealt with the portions of the report of the Economic and Social Council allocated to it, and its report is contained in document A/40/1068, which contains, in paragraph 5, two draft decisions, both of which were adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote.
The next item the President has indicated will be considered by the Assembly is agenda item 122 on the question of the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations. The Fifth Committee's report in this regard is contained in document A/40/1066, which contains in paragraph 7 a draft resolution recommended by the Committee. This draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee by a recorded vote.
Agenda item 119 deals with the question of administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency. The report of the Fifth Committee on this item is contained in document A/40/1064, and the Committee recommends three draft resolutions and one draft decision for adoption by the General Assembly. All of them were adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote.
The next agenda item is item 116, which has occupied the attention of the Fifth Committee throughout most of the session, namely, the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1986-1987. The Fifth Committee concluded its consideration in the early hours of this morning; therefore time has not permitted an appropriate presentation of the related report in a consolidated document. It has been the practice of the General Assembly to consider the report on this item in the document considered by the Fifth Committee, with addenda or corrigenda reflecting the actions taken by the Committee.
I therefore wish to draw the attention of the General Assembly to document A/40/1069 - which is the number under which the consolidated report will eventually be issued in its final form - and to the attachments to this document. They are the four parts of document A/C.5/40/L.20, with their addenda and corrigenda, to which reference is made in document A/40/1069.
The recommendations of the Fifth Committee under this agenda item are contained in part IV of document A/C.5/40/L.20 and consist of six draft resolutions.
Draft resolution I incorporates a number of different sections, each dealing with an individual special subject dealt with by the Committee.
Draft resolution II A is the draft resolution on the budget appropriations for the biennium 1986-1987.
Draft resolution II B relates to the income estimates for the biennium, while draft resolution II C concerns the financing of the appropriations for the year 1986.
Draft resolution III concerns unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium, and draft resolution IV concerns the Working Capital Fund for the same biennium.
Draft resolution V is entitled "Conditions of service and compensation for officials, other than Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly"; and, finally, draft resolution VI concerns the emoluments, pension scheme and conditions of service for the members of the International Court of Justice.
Draft resolutions II to VI were adopted by the Committee by vote.
As for draft resolution I, which contains several separate sections, the method by which the Fifth Committee dealt with each section is indicated in the body of the report.
The next item to be considered by the plenary Assembly this afternoon is the report on agenda item 123, "Personnel questions", as contained in document A/40/1067.
In paragraph 17 of the report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the General Assembly adopt a draft resolution the Committee adopted by consensus. In addition, the Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of four draft decisions as indicated in paragraph 18 of the report. All the draft decisions were adopted by the Committee without a vote, except for paragraph (d) of draft decision I, dealing with the effective date of the implementation of the results of the classification of General Service posts at Headquarters. This paragraph was adopted by the Committee following a recorded vote, the details of which are indicated in paragraph 11.
Finally, I have the honour to introduce the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 120 - Joint Inspection Unit - which appears in document A/40/1065. In it the Fifth Committee recomaends that the General Assembly adopt a draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without a vote.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish); If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall consider that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The positions of delegations regarding the various recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in meetings of the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that in paragraph 7 of its decision 34/401, the General Assembly decided that when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.
May I also remind members that, in accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
The Assembly will first consider the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 12, dealing with those chapters of the report of the Economic and Social Council which were allocated to the Fifth Committee. The Committee's report is contained in document A/40/1068.
The Assembly will now take decisions on the two draft decisions contained in
paragraph 5 of the report of the Fifth Committee.
BCT/m
Draft decision I concerns the report of the Economic and Social Council« The Fifth Committee decided without objection to recooaend to the General Assembly the adoption of that draft decision. May I take it that the Assembly adopts it?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation froa Spanish): Draft decision IX is entitled "Agreement between the united Nations and the Waited Nations Industrial Development Organization".
The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of that draft decision. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): That concludes our consideration of the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 12.
We new turn t< agenda item 122, entitled "Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the united Nations". That report is contained in document A/40/1066.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. SHABEED (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): My delegation wishes to reaffirm its belief in the principle of collective responsibility in bearing the burdens of the budget. The principle of a country's ability to pay must be taken into consideration in determining the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations. That should be done in the light of a country's material capabilities and its economic conmitments.
We do not agree with the methodology used by the Committee on Contributions, because we regard it as a deviation from the principle of a country's real ability
(Mr. Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) to pay. This methodology has led to an increase in the contributions of certain Member countries, like my own, and to a reduction or stabilization in the contributions of other Meober countries. 7hat makes the scale of assessments neither fair nor logical.
It is very well known to everyone that the Syrian Arab Republic is located in an area that has been the target of many Zionist, racist and colonialist plans and designs. The United Nations has been seized of the problems of that region ever since it was established in 1945. It is natural that these plans and designs have led to a constant and continuous increase in our military expenditures - even to the detriment of other expenditures for urgent needs. For our military expenditures are related to foiling the plans and designs, on the one hand, and to liberating the occupied Arab territories, including the Golan Heights, and preserving our independence and sovereignty, on the other.
It would have been difficult to oppose the increase decided upon by the Committee for country contributions if it had been based on the discovery of any new mineral wealth or on the solution of some economic problem confronting my country. In that case, the increase could be justified. But parts of my country are still languishing under the yoke of Zionist occupation, and those are the most fertile parts of the country, from the economic and agricultural points of view.
Bach Member State has the right to ask for a minimum linkage between its assessment and a change in its economic situation - for in the final analysis, it is such a change that determines its ability to pay.
Finally, we very much wish that the Committee on Contributions, in determining my country's contribution to the budget, had taken into consideration all the facts that I have set out.
We cannot support the new scale proposed by the Committee on Contributions. It should pursue its endeavours to find a fairer methodology for the apportionment
(Mr. Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) o£ the expenses of the Uhited Nations in order truly to reflect Metier States' real ability to pay.
Mr. MAffilBANI (Singapore); Singapore supports the work done by the Committee on Contributions and is highly appreciative of its efforts to prepare the recomended scale for the next triennium. However, regrettably, we are unable to support its recommended scale for the next triennium.
To avoid any misunderstanding of our position, let me state Singapore's firm commitment to two fundamental points. First, we believe that toe least developed countries should be assessed at the floor level. None of these States should be made to bear any additional burden. Secondly, we believe in toe principle that it is the collective responsibility of all Member States to contribute to the United Nations regular budget on the basis of their capacity to pay. We accept the fact that as developing countries achieve some economic progress they should be prepared to beer a bigger share of the financial burden of this Organization. However, the financial burden of this Organization must be borne fairly and equitably by all States. A few States should not be penalized. Unfortunately, the recommended scale before us does not satisfy those criteria and has penalized a few States, including Singapore.
The greatest flaw of the present methodology of assessment is its inability to provide a uniform measure to compare toe economic performances of the centrally planned and the market economies. This is due to the failure of the present methodology to correct the distortions in statistics provided by the Socialist economies which are caused by inflation and exchange-rate fluctuations.
(Mr. Mahbubani, Singapore)
That has resulted in a highly untenable situation, where despite the high growth rates achieved by the socialist countries they have been given substantial reductions in their contributions in the next scale. At the same time, the majority of countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development will have no increases. It therefore seems patently unfair that the Group of 77 as a whole should have its scale increased by 33 points while the socialist bloc as a whole has its assessment reduced by 64 points. Even more regrettably, the largest single reduction for any State will be enjoyed by the Soviet Union, a permanent member of the Security Council and one of the world's two super-Powers. My delegation finds that situation to be extremely unfair. The large number of countries that either voted against or abstained in the vote when this scale of assessments was put to the vote in the Fifth Committee provides an indication of how widely that sentiment is shared.
Over the years Singapore has seen its assessed contribution unfairly increased substantially. No special consideration has been given to our unique case as a developing island State with no natural resources - I repeat: no natural resources. Owing to the large foreign component of our gross national product, the use of national income statistics as the basic criterion for the assessment of our scale is unfair, since a more accurate reflection of our earrings would be our indigenous gross national product, which is approximately 20 per cent lower than the nominal national income.
Instead of being given any special consideration for our unique situation, we find ourselves treated just like any other developed State by the Committee on Contributions during its assessment of our contribution. Under the present methodology no distinction is made between developed and developing countries in the distribution of the burden of relief. Developing countries such as ours with a per capita income greater than $2,200 have to bear the same proportion of relief
(Mr. Mahbubani, Singapore) burden as the developed countries. That also is unfair, but since my statement in the Fifth Committee went into this question at length I shall not elaborate on the point here.
We regret also that during the process.of mitigation little objectivity was shown by the Committee on Contributions in the distribution of mitigation points. As a result, that relief r^chanism has not benefitted all those Member States that deserve relief. We hope that situation will not be repeated for the following triennium of 1989-1991.
For those reasons, and given the difficult economic circumstances that Singapore is facing now, the delegation of Singapore cannot support the recommended scale and will therefore vote against it.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now take decisions on the recommendations of the Fifth Committee contained in paragraphs 7 and 8 of its report (A/40/1066).
The General Assembly will first take a decision on the draft resolution contained in paragraph 7 of that report. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea^ Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, ■ Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Romania,
Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against; Bahrain, Colombia, Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Venezuela
Abstaining; Belgium, Brunei Darussalam, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Paraguay, Portugal, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 109 votes to 15, with 27 abstentions (resolution 40/248).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft decision contained in paragraph 8 of the report (A/40/1066). The Fifth Committee decided without objection to recommend to the General Assembly that it continue at its forty-first session the negotiations on the methodology for the elaboration of future scales of assessments.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish); The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 122.
Ke turn now to the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 119, entitled "Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency" (A/40/1064).
The General Assembly will take decisions on the recommendations contained in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the report of the Fifth Committee.
Draft resolution I is entitled "Impact of inflation and monetary instability cn the regular budget of the United Nations". The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I without objection. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 40/249).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution II concerns administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency. The Fifth Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 40/250).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution III also was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 40/251).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We shall now take a decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report (A/40/1064). May I consider that the General Assembly adopts that draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 119.
We turn now to the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 116, "Proposed programme budget for the biennium 1986-1987" (A/40/1069).
I call upon the Secretary-General.
EMS/14
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Assembly has heard, during the present fortieth session, statements of high importance from the senior leaders of most Member States. Their voices have confirmed the contribution to the improvement of global conditions of life made over the past 40 years by the United Nations. Of greatest potential significance, support for the Organization and commitment to the Charter have been widely reaffirmed in the interest of realizing those basic purposes for which the United Nations was created, and which retain their full validity. The future will be greatly, perhaps decisively, influenced by the seriousness and constancy of intent which underlie those reaffirmations. I said during the commemorative meeting of the Assembly that they need to be "backed up by responsible negotiations towards resolving major disputes and in the key areas of arresting the arms race, overcoming the crisis in development and promoting human rights". (A/40/PV. 49, p. 6) I would add to that today another area: the assurance of the financial integrity of the Organization itself. 

The effectiveness of all the programmes of the United Nations, and the attainment of those purposes which have such universal endorsement, depend heavily on the reliable availability of resources as provided in the Charter and on the efficiency and vision with which these resources are utilized. I have asked for the opportunity to speak to the plenary meeting, now that the budget for the next biennium is to be adopted, because of my concern that, precisely in this respect, the integrity of the Organization may stand in jeopardy. The United Nations now confronts problems related to the budget which, beyond the financial soundness of the Organization, can challenge its political cohesion and its capacity to execute the programmes agreed to by Member States. 
Since assuming the duties of Secretary-General, I have been guided by a deep sense of responsibility to all Member States to contain the costs of the united Nations to the greatest extent possible without prejudice to the agenda of work mandated by Member States. I have no doubt that this corresponds to the wish of the Assembly. For two successive biennia, I have put forward budgets in a spirit of maximum restraint, resulting in insignificant growth. Yet substantial additional demands have been accommodated. For illustrative purposes, I will cite just one example: during the 1984-1985 biennium, the work-load of interpretation, editing, and reproduction for conference servicing increased by 7 per cent over the previous biennium. The level of resources utilized remained constant. Expenditures under the budget to be adopted by you today are, in real terms, only slightly more than the budget you adopted for 1984-1985. 
To accomplish this economy, expenditures have been strictly controlled. Recruitment of professional personnel was frozen for six months in order to encourage a disciplined assessment of needs. Overtime pay has been under careful scrutiny. The travel of staff members to international and intergovernmental meetings is co-ordinated and controlled in my own Executive Office and the amount

of such travel has been substantially reduced. Savings have also been made in consultancies. The Assembly, by its action, has frozen the salaries, allowances, and pensions of professional staff beginning in 1985 and continuing well into the future. 
I would emphasize on this occasion that I intend to continue a policy of maximum financial restraint. To do otherwise, at a time when so many Member States are burdened with unprecedented debt and serious deficits, would be irresponsible. A continuing process is under way within the Secretariat to attempt to identify areas where further savings can be achieved. I shall maintain this process and will, of course, undertake any steps I can towards further economies, provided that such savings will not be of a nature to prejudice the accomplishment of mandated programmes. 
There are, in my view, also measures which the Assembly and its subsidiary bodies could, and I believe should, take to keep costs down. For example, the addition of supplementary expenditures not foreseen in the programme budget proposals submitted by the Secretary-General tends to weaken the effect of careful and disciplined budgetary planning. It might, therefore, be advantageous if, to a greater extent than is now the case, all projected expenses of the Organization were included in the programme budget as reviewed by the Committee on Programme Co-ordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and recommended by the Fifth Committee. Limits should be set and, where established, strictly maintained on the number and duration of meetings, on the documentation produced and on reports requested. I strongly ask that care be taken to schedule meetings so as to minimize related costs, and to take full advantage of the United Nations facilities in the Headquarters cities. 
I believe it is necessary, however, to acknowledge that we face problems of a more fundamental nature. Even though the budget adopted by the Fifth Committee provides for a real growth of only 0. 1 per cent, Member er States which account for

almost 80 per cent of the assessed budget either cast a negative vote or abstained in the vote. This is disturbing evidence of a growing division in the membership on financial matters which, if long continued, can have very negative triplications for the Organization. This division, I must emphasize, cannot be resolved through greater economies by the Secretary-General or by greater efficiency of management. It can only be alleviated through action of Member States. Earlier in the present Assembly session, I spoke to the Fifth Committee of the need for greater consensus on key financial issues. I would, on this occasion, reiterate this point. It is all the more reinforced by the absence of agreement yet again on one of these issues, namely, the manner in which the basis for the calculation of the scale of assessments could be reviewed. On the brighter side, I welcome the resolution adopted by the Assembly which developed from an initiative of Japan. I hope that recommendations to the forty-first session from the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts, including recommendations on the key financial issues which I have mentioned, will provide a basis for greater unity and confidence among Member States. I will co-operate fully with the Group and take serious account of any suggestions specifically relating to management. I would only make clear that the responsibilities, as defined in the Charter, of the Secretary-General as Chief Administrative Officer and his capacity to meet these responsibilities should not be prejudiced. Any action which would have that effect could bring adverse consequences for the operation of the United Nations. 
Because of the depth of my concern and my profound commitment to the health and effectiveness of the United Nations, I feel compelled to speak in all frankness to the Assembly of another, not unrelated problem of utmost gravity facing the United Nations in the financial field. I refer to legislation enacted in a principal contributor State according to which that State will not contribute its full assessed contribution to the United Nations and the other agencies of the

system unless weighted voting is followed on all budgetary matters. Such withholding is scheduled to begin for the United Nations during 1986. The Charter, to which each Member State is bound as party to a solemn treaty, provides that tile expenses of the Organization shall be borne by the Members as apportioned by the General Assembly and that all Members shall fulfil, in good faith, the obligations assumed by them. The unilateral withholding of assessed contributions by any Member State is, I believe, contrary to these provisions and is destructive to the orderly implementation of the Organization's mandated programmes. If the amount withheld is of the size foreseen in the legislation in question, it will place the financial viability of the United Nations under enormous strain. Beyond that, such withholding would inevitably have a political effect on the strength and potential of the Organization. For these reasons, it is my earnest hope - and I have made my position clear on this matter - that this legislation will be altered. I will stay in contact with Member States through the Permanent Missions but would caution now that, depending on developments, it may be necessary to ask that the General Assembly and the Fifth Committee reconvene early in 1986. 
Only a few short and busy weeks have passed since the impressive commemorative meetings of the Assembly. Clearly insufficient time has elapsed to judge the extent to which the high and serious attention given to the United Nations on that occasion will ultimately bring greater strength and authority to the Organization and contribute to the resolution of critical problems, long on our agenda. This session has seen positive accomplishments. The coming together of all Member States in the fight against the terrible plagues of terrorism and illicit drug traffic is a notable development. We can now expect the enhanced international co-operation which is essential if these problems are to be overcome. The preparations made for the Conferences on the Emergency Economic Situation in Africa


and on Disarmament and Development, to mention but a few examples, promise useful, constructive results in 1986. An encouraging, if less than comprehensive, reduction in the level of tension accompanying the debates and discussion has been evident and helpful during this session. 
Yet there have been no breakthroughs on major political and economic problems. That situation has a direct bearing on the budgetary questions before us. Progress on political and economic issues could substantially reduce certain financial obligations of the United Nations, while encouraging a wider consensus on other difficult issues. 
Clearly, the United Nations must be financially sound if it is to contribute its part to the resolution of present and future problems. There is a direct and critical relationship between the financial integrity of the United Nations, as foreseen in the Charter, and its capacity to attain the objectives for which it was founded. As we enter a year of challenge and hard decisions in this area, I believe it is of the highest importance to recognize that the maintenance of this integrity is in the interest of all Member States. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now take a decision on the recommendations contained in paragraph 129 of the report of the Fifth Committee (A/40/1069). For the time being, the text of these recommendations may be found in document A/C. 5/40/L. 20, Part IV and Corr. l and Part IV, Add. l. 
The Assembly will first consider draft resolution I, which is to be found in document A/C.5/40/L.20 Part IV, and which consists of 12 sections.
A recorded vote has been requested on section IV.
A recorded vote was taken. -
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kaspuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxeobourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining: Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, France, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Italy, Mongolia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Section IV of draft resolution I was adopted by 13 5 votes to 2, with 11 abstentions.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt sections I to III and V to XII?
Sections I to III and V to XII were adopted.
Draft resolution I, as a whole, was adopted (resolution 40/252).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn now to draft resolutions II A, B and C, to be found in document A/C.5/40/L.20 (Part IV) Add.l, which concerns the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1986-1987.
Draft resolution II A is entitled "Budget appropriations for the biennium 1986-1987". A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
. Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Iceland, Ivory Coart, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against; Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Israel, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America
Abstaining; Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Nethe. ands, Portugal, Romania, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain ;.i<d Northern Ireland
Draft resolution II A was adopted by 127 votes to 10, with 11 abstentions (resolution 40/253 A).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution II B concerns income estimates for the biennium 1986-1987. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favours Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brasil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Israel, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America
Draft resolution II B was adopted by 137 votes to 10 (resolution 40/253 B).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft resolution II C deals with financing of appropriations for the year 1986.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, .	Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland- India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Israel, Mongolia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America
Abstaining: Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution II C was adopted by 126 votes to 11, with 11 abstentions (resolution 40/253 C).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn now to draft resolution III, which is found in document A/C.5/40/L.20 (Part IV) and Corr.l and which is entitled "Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the biennium 1986-1987".
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour; Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Draft resolution III was adopted by 139 votes to 8, with no abstentions (resolution 40/254).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next we turn to draft resolution IV in document A/C.5/40/L.2C (Part IV) and which deals with the Working Capital Fund for the biennium 1986-1987. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, •	Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia,
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Spain, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America	•
Abstaining: Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 124 votes to 11, with 13 abstentions (resolution 40/255).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn to draft resolution V, dealing with conditions of service and compensation for officials, other than Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly. The Fifth Committee recommends the draft resolution for adoption. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution V?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 40/256).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Finally, we turn to draft resolution VI A, B and C, which concerns emoluments, pension scheme and conditions of service for the members of the International Court of Justice. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining; Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Fiji, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Romania, Solomon Islands, Spain, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia
Draft resolution VI (A), (B) and (C) was adopted by 121 votes to 11, with 15 abstentions (resolution 40/257 A, B and C).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On the basis of the statement just made by the Secretary-General, I propose that this item be kept on the agenda of the fortieth session of the General Assembly. If I hear no objection I take it that the Assembly so decides.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn now to the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 123, entitled "Personnel Questions(A/40/1067). I call on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I have read with great attention the report of
the Fifth Committee on this item and I wish to express my appreciation of the thorough and positive manner in which that Committee has dealt with the many important issues which it has considered under this item. 
I wish, however, to place before the Assembly my concern on one very basic point. This relates to the reclassification of General Service staff and related categories, on which I have already had occasion to speak before the Fifth Committee. 
I find myself in a difficult situation, essentially because thousands of staff members - drawn, after all, from the Member States of this Organization - find themselves in an even more difficult one. On the basis of assurances given under my authority and in good faith they had expected the results of the reclassification exercise to be implemented this year, but they now find that this implementation is being deferred until the General Assembly meets again. The perplexity and unhappiness of those staff members is increased by their knowledge that their colleagues in other parts of the United Nations system in New York have seen their regradings implemented. 
This is an unhealthy situation, and whenever there is any such situation we should try to put an end to it as soon as possible. I note the reasons which have prevented the Assembly from considering this matter at its current session. I am also extremely appreciative of the recommendation of the Fifth Committee that the principle of retroactivity to 1 January 1985 be maintained, thus protecting the legitimate expectations of the staff and confirming my own assurances in that regard. 

In looking for a solution to this problem I have noted the recommendation of the Fifth Committee in draft decision I of its report that the Assembly defer consideration of this issue until its forty-first session. I would hope, in this regard, that the Assembly could consider another possibility, namely, not to close consideration of this item but instead to keep it open, which would permit the Fifth Committee to consider this matter and reach a final determination on it as soon as it has before it the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the observations of the International Civil Service Commission. I leave that suggestion in your hands, Mr. President and those of the Assembly. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly will now take a decision on the recommendations in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the report of the Fifth Committee in document A/40/1067. 
The draft resolution in paragraph 17 is entitled "Personnel questions” and concerns: A, the composition of the Secretariat; B, the improvement of the status of women in the Secretariat; and C, respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations.
The Fifth Committee adopted that draft resolution by consensus. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/258 A, B and C).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The General Assembly will now turn to the four draft decisions in paragraph 18 of the report in document A/40/1067.
Draft decision I is entitled "Job classification of the General Service and related categories in New York". Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) were adopted by the Committee without objections. With regard to paragraph (b), it is my understanding
ra/«a
(The President)
that, on the basis of informal consultations, there was general agreement that the words "or if possible before the session" should be inserted after the words "forty-first session" in the first line, so that the paragraph as a whole would read:
"(b) TO consider at its forty-first session, or if possible before the session, on the basis of the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and any observations that may be made by the International Civil Service Commission;".
If I hear no objection, may I take it that the General Assembly adopts paragraphs (a) and (c), and paragraph (b) as amended, of draft decision I?
Paragraphs (a), (b) as amended, and (c) of draft decision I were adopted.
51
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Next the Assembly will consider paragraph (d) of draft decision I. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brasil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Surinne, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, zaire
Against:	Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Czechoslovakia, France, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mongolia, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Belize, Egypt, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Solomon Islands, Sweden, Turkey, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Paragraph (d) of draft decision I was adopted by 103 votes to 22, with 15 abstentions.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Draft decisions II, III and
IV - entitled "Amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations";
"Amendments to the Staff Rules"; and "Situation of General Service staff" - were recommended by the Fifth Committee for adoption by the General Assembly. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts those draft decisions.
Draft decisions II, III and IV were adopted.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic in explanation of vote.
Mr. SHAHEED (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): My delegation would like to affirm its commitment to the United Nations Convention on Privileges and Immunities and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of Specialized Agencies. My country offers United Nations international civil servants every assistance in accordance with these Conventions. Our commitment covers all United Nations international civil servants in Syria. There is no doubt that while Syria; like other countries, grants these privileges and immunities, it expects United Nations international civil servants to abide strictly by the Conventions, not to violate any of their terms, fully to respect their internal provisions related to the national sovereignty of the host country and to refrain from any act unrelate' to their functions and mandate. My country endorses all these privileges and immunities, provided that that does not lead to interference in our internal affairs.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): On the basis of the adoption of draft decision I, if there is no objection, I suggest that the item now under consideration be kept on the agenda of the fortieth session of the Assembly.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn now to the report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 120, "Joint Inspection Unit“0 The Assenbly will now take a decision on the draft resolution contained in paragraph 13 of the report of the Fifth Committee (A/40/1065).
That draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee without objection. May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to adopt that draft resolution? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 40/259).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have now concluded our consideration of agenda item 120. PROGRAMME OF WORK
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In the light of the action already taken at its 119th and 120th plenary meetings, as well as action taken at the present meeting, the General Assembly has decided to retain on the agenda of the fortieth session the following agenda items: .
Item 16 (a), Election of two members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme; item 17 (h), Appointment of members of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women; item 17 (1), Appointment of a member of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples; item 21, The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives; item 41, Launching of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development; item 43, Observance of the quincentenary of the discovery of America; item 44, Question of Cyprus; item 45, Inpiementation of the resolutions of the United Nations; item 46, Consequences of the prolongation of the armed conflict between Iran and Iraq; item 84 and 84 (c), Development and international economic co-operation: trade and development; item 116, Proposed programme budget for the biennium 1986-1987; and item 123, Personnel questions.
With those exceptions, therefore, we have concluded our consideration of all the items on the agenda of the fortieth session.
CONCLUDING STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Tradition requires that, when we are on the point of concluding the work of a General Assembly session, the President should review the most outstanding features of that work.
I do not know how far distinguished delegates, subjected as they have been during these months to a veritable flood of words and now on the point of enjoying a well-deserved rest, need me to distract them by reminding them, for example, that once again the General Assembly has taken decisions on problems of such concern as the policy of apartheid of the Government of South Africa, the question of Palestine or those of Kampuchea and Afghanistan. Or that while we have solemnly commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the question of Namibia continues unresolved. Or that while unanimity has been achieved with regard to the convening of an International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, this unanimity disappeared as soon as the question of Antarctica was discussed. Or that, while general agreement certainly exists« regarding the need for new approaches to dealing with the serious problem of external debt, the agreement is for the time being limited to that recognition, and disappears when it comes to seeking remedies. And that while it has been possible to reach agreement on such a controversial topic as international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space, it remains impossible to do so on questions relating to information. Or the positive fact of the convening of another international conference, one on issues relating to drug use and trafficking, set against the continued violation of human rights in so many parts of the world. Or the unanimous adoption of resolutions on the protection of diplomatic and consular missions or on terrorism. And, lastly, the always complicated financial questions which arise in a budget and assessment year, discussed in the shadow of threats which are in all our minds.
Rather than such a list, which I have just given in incomplete form, I would prefer to make some brief remarks about the spirit which prevailed during the . conduct of this session and the lessons we can learn for the future.
This has been, above all, the session commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations. It has been my privilege to preside over this General Assembly on an occasion when so many heads of State or Government, Special Envoys and Ministers for Foreign Affairs honoured us with their presence. They have all made their valuable intellectual contribution to the assessment of the Organization's successes and failures over that period. We have all been enriched by this debate, and I believe that, to a great extent, we have succeeded in recapturing for the United Nations the attention of world opinion, which we should never have lost. It is true that when it comes to forming a judgement on what some parties have referred to as a loss of prestige for the United Nations, we must, in all honesty, acknowledge that not everything has been positive in the past 40 years.
However, let us consider just the enormous task of decolonization. I referred at the outset to what still remains to be done in that field. Nevertheless the positive balance is so much greater in this case. I regard the coincidence of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration with the more extensive celebration of the fortieth anniversary as an extremely appropriate occasion for recalling once again that our Organization has been a genuine driving force behind the liberation of peoples under colonial domination, many of whose representatives are happily sitting here with us today.
I believe that it is fair to say that a feature of this year's debates, both in the Main Committees and in the plenary meetings, has been a greater degree of moderation and willingness to enter into compromise, while, of course, not failing
to take account of the legitimacy of the positions of each and every Member State and the inevitability of differences of opinion on controversial matters. 
However, an endeavour has been made, and perhaps this can be attributed to the commemorative spirit of this session, to overcome differences and to transmit to the world a message of solidarity in focusing on important and urgent questions. I have in mind, for example, the consensus reached on the condemnation of terrorism and on the critical economic situation in Africa, among many other issues. 
Much has been said at this session about the need to reform the procedures and methods of work of the United Nations, and more particularly of the Assembly, with a view to rationalizing and streamlining them. For some time now I have been fully convinced of the urgent need for these improvements. I am convinced of the need to avoid the considerable loss of resources entailed in apparently very trivial matters, such as the chronic failure to be punctual so that meetings can begin on time, the sometimes unnecessary length of some debates, the excessive amount of documentation and the repetition, year after year, of virtually identical resolutions. It is sometimes these more down-to-earth matters that contribute to this supposed loss of prestige that some parties have claimed to note. I should like us to suspend this session with a firm undertaking to adopt genuinely effective and urgent measures designed to contribute to this streamlining of our activities. 
Once again I wish to. state what a pleasure and an honour it has been for me to preside over the fortieth session and to thank you all - first, for having made this possible and, secondly, for your co-operation these past few months. 
I wish in particular to thank the Secretary-General, my old and good friend Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his friendship, sound advice and help at all times. 
(The President)
I thank the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly for their readiness to take this chair and thus to lighten the work of the President during a session which has been particularly filled with activities. I also thank the Chairmen, Vice-Chairmen and Rapporteurs of the Main Committees for their excellent work and their spirit of co-operation. 
I wish to make a special mention of the Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs, Mr. william Baffum, and the entire staff of his Department for the invaluable help I have received from them. I would like to give special thanks to the Division of General Assembly Affairs for the difficult task which it has carried out in an exemplary fashion at all times. 
My thanks also go to the Department of Conference Services, to the interpreters, translators, conference and documents officers, typists and press officers and to the efficient security services. I trust I have not overlooked any of those who contribute - whether visibly or behind the scenes - to the success of our work. 
Finally, allow me to wish you all happy holidays and a peaceful and prosperous year in 1986. 
SUSPENSION OF THE SESSION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I declare the fortieth session of the General Assembly suspended. 
The meeting rose at 6. 10 p. m. 
United Nations GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FORTIETH SESSION Officiât Records*
> A V
FIRST COMMITTEE 21st meeting held on Thursday, 31 October 1985 at 10,30 a.m.
New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 21st MEETING
Chairman.* Mr. ALATAS (Indonesia)
CONTENTS
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
Statements were made by;
The	Chairman of the First Committee
The	President of the General Assembly
The	Secretary-General
Mr.	Ononaiye (Nigeria)
Mr.	El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic)
Mr .	Oudovenko (Ukrainian SSR)
Mr .	Daza (Chile)
Mr.	McDonagh (Ireland)
'This in'Md is sobjivi to ivr/ftnon, Corrwiloih sbcyld be mai uAdti (he djMiurt ot t member of <M 44-UOiw) uiwrnifd wu^m tjae rrt uf the dutt V pvbUi*Hwi io iM Chief of (he Officii! Record« Uldq Sect Loa. '««wh IX2-7JO. 2 Uflnd Niugai PIuj. md inctf/kxiied in t cofyot iht record.
( iwrAimn «II be issued ifltr ilw «nd af (hr mkiM. Io « wm/ìh furici« for tech Commit lot.
Distr. GENERAL A/C.1/40/PV. 21 1 November 1985 ENGLISH
85-63123 4957V (E)
2
The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN; As we have done for the past seven years, today the First Committee is holding this special meeting in observance of Disarmament Week. I have the distinct pleasure and honour to welcome to the Committee on this occasion the President of the General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Jaime de Pinies, and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. The observance of Disarmament Week affords all of us the opportunity to reflect on the most basic aspirations of humankind, which are peace, disarmament and security, and on how the international community has striven to achieve these goals.
The chilling reality today is that the arms race has become a global phenomenon and that the weapons arsenals, especially those in the possession of the major military Powers, have grown far beyond any rational requirement of defence. But the Lesson that should have been learned by now is that the massive and competitive build-up of arms, particularly nuclear weapons, in the world today, far from promising greater security for any State or any group of States, has actually placed all humanity on the precipice of self-extinction.
One central truth that roust be faced by all of us is that, no matter what unilateral choices a nation makes in pursuit of its security, it will remain vulnerable and, thus, ultimately insecure. Hence our vision of world peace cannot but be based on our acknowledgement of the reality that, without common security for all, there may well be a future for none.
I believe there is no better time than the occasion of Disarmament Week, coinciding as it does with the auspicious occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, to rededicate ourselves to our common responsibility and commitment to restore the United Nations in its central role on issues concerning
disarmament, to ensure the adequate implementation of its collective security
(The Chairman) provisions in order that the Organization can exercise its authority and give its contribution to our efforts towards a better world.
As we continue our work in the days ahead, let us therefore do so with this renewed sense of dedication so as to ensure that our efforts here will contribute in as concrete a manner as possible to the advancement of our goals of peace and security in the world.
I now have the pleasure to call upon the President of the General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Jaime de Piniés.
Mr, DE PINIES (President of the General Assembly) (interpretation from Spanish) : I appreciate the invitation extended to me to address the First Committee at this meeting on the occasion of Disarmament Week.
It is in fact appropriate that this year, as we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the founding of our Organization, we pledge our dedication to the ideals, purposes and pinciples of the Charter. And one of the priorities - and I would say the fundamental priority - is "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
The United Nations concern for disarmament has been clear since the very first days of its existence. In fact, the first résolus ion adopted by the General Assembly in 1946 referred to disarmament, specifically to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, then recently discovered, and to the elimination of nuclear weapons.
(The President of the General Assembly) Since then, many initiatives and appeals for disarmament have have been put forward in the United Nations. At the present session of the General Assembly, the vast majority of speakers participating in the general debate and in the special commemorative meetings rightly underscored the widespread concern that exists at the dizzying pace of the arms race, and in particular at the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
There is no doubt that the proliferation, in all senses of the word, of the atomic weapon increases the risk of nuclear confrontation. The General Assembly itself has declared that
Nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States should together take new measures to achieve an international consensus on ways of preventing, on a ersal and non-discriminatory basis, the proliferation of nuclear weapons". Let us renew our efforts in that direction.
t the same time, I believe that the efforts being made in various forums to curb the conventional arms race, and most particularly those made in a regional context, should be encouraged. For while it is true that in the last 40 years a global conflagration using nuclear weapons has been avoided, the same cannot unfortunately be said of the many local conflicts which have broken out one after another during that same period, which have claimed so many victims and caused such great damage, and which have been fought with conventional weapons.
We must not let slip the opportunity afforded us by this fortieth anniversary to revitalize the purposes of the Organization by making full use of existing instruments and of the abundant machinery at our disposal. We must not scorn the disarmament efforts being made in other forums, and in this respect we must recall again how anxiously the international community is awaiting the result of the forthcoming meeting between the leaders of the two major nuclear-weapon Powers. But that should not make us forget the primary responsibility and central role of the United Nations under the Charter in the sphere of disarmament.
(The President of the General Assembly) Disarmament Week, in my view, provides an excellent opportunity to draw attention to the need collectively to reflect, within the framework of the United Nations, the political will to make the fullest possible use of the institutional machinery established by the Organization in the field of disarmament. 
The CHAIRMAN; It is my pleasure now to call upon the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: This year, Disarmament Week closely follows the comprehensive review of the goals and achievements of the United Nations made by world leaders at the commemorative session of the General Assembly. It should, therefore, help to maintain emphasis on one of the prime requirements of a peaceful and stable world order. It should also serve as a pointed reminder that, while progress has been made in diverse areas of international life, the goal of eliminating nuclear weapons and restraining the conventional arms race is still un-attained. 
In recent years there has been an upsurge of feeling in sections of expert opinion about the measureless perils of the arms race, particularly in the nuclear field. The United Nations has responded to this wave of concern by adopting numerous resolutions on the subject. The case for arms Limitation and disarmament has been set out with compelling clarity. The calls for concrete measures have become insistent. 
Despite all this, however, there has been no abatement in the wasteful accumulation of arms, no halt in the frantic search for more sophisticated weapons, no respite in the ceaseless activity of adding to the world's already huge arsenal of weapons of destruction. Seven years have passed since the General Assembly, at

its first special session devoted to disarmament, made the categorical pronouncement that mankind is confronted with a choice: we must halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament or face annihilation. But the admonition has remained unheeded. 	
In a situation of this nature, the question may be asked: What is the purpose of observing a Disarmament Week and paying homage to a goal in word when nothing has been done in deed? Is the observance a mere ritual? I believe the answer is that the non-fulfilment of a goal provides no justification for abandoning the effort. Publicizing the urgent necessity of measures towards disarmament is certainly part of the effort. Were we to de-emphasize that necessity, were we to cease discussion on it, we would accentuate that feeling of hopelessness about the prospects of disarmament which itself has facilitated the arms race. For disarmament to have any chance, it is vitally necessary that the public mind should not settle into a fatalistic stance vis-à-vis the present disastrous course. 
As long and as often as it is necessary, the truth has to be repeated that, given rationality and a cool calculation of national as well as international interests, the arms race is by no means irreversible. 
It is not a natural or inevitable state of affairs that ours should be the most militarized peace-time period in history. Wars and the growth of weaponry may have been endemic in all previous ages, but one of the prime characteristics of our age is that the nature of war has been transformed, as has that of the weapons of war. Never before in history has humanity been faced with the very real and mounting threat of the death of the whole species. Never before did human society expend as much of its resources on the weapons and technology of destruction as it does now. And never before have resources been so badly needed for the elimination of hunger, ignorance and disease from the earth. The persistence of the arms race constitutes a stark denial of all these truths. 

We must on this occasion take note of some encouraging signs as far as arms limitation is concerned. At one level the Final Document of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty indicates that national differences can be transcended and consensus achieved if the political will exists to let the common interest prevail. At another level, the forthcoming meeting between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States holds the promise of achieving results that would make the world a safer place for present and future generations. 
These, I repeat, are encouraging signs, but they do not warrant complacency about the present state of disarmament endeavours. The goal we pursue is as far-reaching as it is crucial to human survival and progress. By the progressive limitation of arms, we seek to encourage a perception of security in terms other than military. We seek to base international relations on common interest rather than on fear and competition in arms. The pursuit needs to be sustained with a force and conviction that neither partial successes nor temporary setbacks can diminish. This I regard as the purpose of Disarmament Week. 
The CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the representative of Nigeria, Ambassador Michael Ononaiye, who will speak on behalf of the Chairman of the Group of African States.
Mr. ONONAIYE (Nigeria): It gives me great pleasure to have the privilege of representing the Africa Group on this occasion. We in Africa have always had a stake in disarmament, in the World Disarmament Campaign and in all efforts designed to facilitate and complement existing programmes of information in the area of disarmament.
The triangular relationship betweeen disarmament, security and development has long been recognized and given due emphasis in various United Nations forums. The arms race has reached an unprecedented stage of expenditure estimated at over $US 2 billion a day. The military budgets of many countries are far in excess of their budgets for health care and education combined. It represents a major diversion of the world's scarce resources from socio-economic purposes to military pursuits. The report in the study on the relationship between disarmament and development, commissioned by the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, was conclusive in proving that the world can either pursue the arms race or move with deliberate speed towards more stable and balanced economic and social development. Certainly it cannot pursue both at the same time because the arms race and development are competing for resources or consumption. At the same time, the problems posed for mankind by the arms race are complex. Consequently the arms race has to be halted and reversed in accordance with the Programme of Action set out in the Final Document, and in particular paragraphs 45 to 50. Aside from these measures, world public opinion has to be mobilized on behalf of disarmament. Information on disarmament has to be made available to the peoples of the world, even at the grass-roots level. Progress in disarmament would be more
meaningful if public understanding and support could be generated for the objectives of the United Nations in the field of disarmament. It is In this context that we support the establishment of regional disarmament centres for peace and disarmament within the framework of the World Disarmament Campaign. We therefore call on the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance to those regions of the world that have expressed their common wish to establish regional disarmament centres. The multiplier effect that such centres could generate on the campaign cannot be overemphasized. Suffice it to say that it would be most efficient in reaching the grassroots level with regard to the dissemination of disarmament information and related functions.
In this connection I wish to place on record our appreciation of the efforts of the Department for Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research in organizing various regional seminars and conferences for the promotion of the objectives of the World Disarmament Campaign. Two of these took place in the African region this year. A seminar was held in Cairo in February. A Ministerial Regional Conference on Security, Disarmament and Development in Africa was also held in Lome, Togo, from 13 to 15 August 1985 by the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in co-operation with the Department for Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research. The Conference was a success and constituted a milestone in African regional efforts aimed at the attainment of the objectives of the World Disarmament Campaign.
On behalf of the Africa Group I urge the Department for Disarmament Affairs not to relent in its efforts to attain the aims and objectives of the World Disarmament Campaign. For the moment it is indispensable to mobilize world public opinion so that disarmament may become a reality. The United Nations system, Member States and the non-governmental organizations must co-operate towards achieving the objectives of the World Disarmament Campaign. The ultimate goal is world peace and security through disarmament.
I should like to make some brief remarks on Africa and the disarmament process. As a region Africa was first to take a remarkable regional position on a major disarmament measure, namely, nuclear non-proliferation. The French atomic test in the Sahara in 1960 presented a challenge to African States. It was therefore not surprising that a proposal was made in the General Assembly to prevent nuclear tests in Africa, but it was not pressed to a vote. When, therefore, the first summit of African Heads of State or Government was held in Cairo in July 1964, the issue of the denuclearization of Africa was paramount and led to the celebrated Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa.
The United Nations General Assembly, in its resolution 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965 endorsed the Declaration, calling on all States to respect the continent of Africa as a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Thus a unilateral denunciation of the right of acquisition of nuclear weapons was first made by Africa, to which a great deal is owed with regard to the concept of the nuclear-weapon-free zone as a major non-proliferation device.
It is sad that the apartheid régime in Pretoria has frustrated the efforts and the common wish of Africans to have the continent a nuclear-weapon-free zone. There is now conclusive evidence that the racist régime in South Africa has nuclear-weapon capability, which constitutes a threat to peace and security in the region and in the world at large. South Africa's nuclear-weapon capability has altered the security balance in the region and left the continent at a crossroads as regards the acquisition of nuclear weapons. African States have to continue to adhere to what may be a delicate non-nuclear option. We therefore call on the United Nations and on the world community at large to bring pressure to bear on apartheid South Africa to renounce nuclear capability, become a party to the NPT and place all its nuclear installations under International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards. This is the only guarantee of peace and security in the continent. It is the only way to put an end to the destabilizing factor of South Africa’s nuclear-weapon capability in Africa.
All disarmament efforts at the United Nations have failed to yield the much desired results. A series of negotiations aimed at achieving disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament, have not produced the expected results. Several measures have been advocated to prevent a nuclear catastrophe. These include the nuclear freeze, non-first-use, non-use, reduction, prevention of an arms race in
outer space and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty.
The bilateral talks between the two super-Powers are but another attempt to prevent a nuclear holocaust. These measures to date have not been successful in preventing the arms race. Disarmament, to a large extent, is therefore still a failure. Vital solutions lie Ln the political will and the reconstruction of the Charter concept of collective security as envisaged by the drafters of the United Nations Charter.
In conclusion, may I join those who have appealed to world leaders, particularly the super-Powers, on this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, to take a backward look and determine where we took a wrong turn and went astray from the path indicated by the United Nations Charter. That should be the new starting point.
The CHAIRMAN: I shall now call on Ambassador Dia-Allah El-Fattal, the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, Chairman of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): It is an honour for me to speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States on the occasion of the observance of Disarmament Week. Disarmament Week, which we are observing today, is the culmination of intensified efforts on the part of the international community which were crystallized In the Final Document of the General Assembly first special session devoted to disarmament in 1978. The profound significance of Disarmament Week is that it enables international public opinion to participate In the discussions of matters posing a danger to international peace and makes it more aware of the increasing danger of war, and especially nuclear war.
The international scene shows a steady deteriorating. Relations between States are fraught with tension, and there is a lack of commitment to the provisions of the Charter, and it is even disregarded in certain cases, an attitude that has been the hallmark for the conduct of certain States. All those
AW/fc
(Mr. El-Fattal, Syrian Arab Republic)
elements are thesource of the increasing concern felt so deeply by all the nations and peoples of the world, especially in view of the suffering that may be inflicted on them in this nuclear age of ours.
The arms race, and especially the nuclear arms race, has become extremely frightening. Arsenals are being built up in many parts of the world, nuclear tests are being conducted at an increasing rate and must be halted, and chemical weapons are being used in certain regional conflicts. Above all, a lack of confidence is widening the gap between the nuclear-weapon Powers, and especially the two super-Powers.
Such is the sad international situation. To make matters worse, the arms race has spread to outer space and serious attempts are being made to militarize space. We are all aware of the danger of nuclear wars but whether it breaks out on earth or in outer space, the inevitable result is the same, namely, the complete destruction of civilization.
The facts are therefore crystal clear and need not to be belaboured. Destruction threatens all nations, regardless of their size and geographical location- and regardless whether they are nuclear-weapon or non-nuclear-weapon States, unless serious efforts are made to bring about nuclear disarmament.
Let us on this occasion mention the second tragic aspect of the arms race. While people in Africa, in Asia and in other parts of the world are dying of hunger, while millions of human beings live in grinding poverty, deprived of the most rudimentary necessities of life, and while the majority of human beings live below generally-accepted health standards, billions of dollars are wasted every year on the development of the war machine.
Consequently, it seems that man, just like the environment in which he lives, has been subjected to changes as a result of nuclear explosions. On this occasion, let us listen to the voice of reason, the voice of conscience, and to the appeal
(Mr. Bl-Fattal, Syrian Arab Republic) i
of the majority of mankind for a nuclear freeze and for a commitment on the part of all the nuclear-weapon States not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. On this occasion, which coincides with the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, let us work for another 40 years of continuous peace and make every effort to put an end to the arms race.
The Group of Asian States, on whose behalf I am privileged to speak today, and to be its Chairman this month, is fully convinced that the dangers threatening mankind are inconceivable. It wishes to affirm its commitment to work for genuine and complete disarmament in the nuclear field. The Group of Asian States devoutly believes in the lofty meaning of Disarmament Week.
The CHAIRMAN: I now call on Ambassador Guennadi Oudovenko, the Permanent Representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. OUDOVENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian) : I have the honour to address the First Committee at this special meeting in my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
Disarmament Week is held annually for one single purpose: to contribute to the maintenance and consolidation of peace. Forty years ago the United Nations Charter clearly proclaimed the determination of the United Nations to save the world from the scourge of war which twice in a single lifetime had brought untold sorrow to mankind.
Now, as we are taking stock of its achievements in connection with the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, we cannot fail to note that for two human generations mankind succeeded in preventing the unleashing of a third world war, and the United Nations certainly deserves credit for this.
(Mr. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR) Yet throughout those same 40 years« the arms race has not stopped for a single day and, consequently, material preparations for a cataclysmic war have not ceased.
In our age, as never before, there exist the necessary objective conditions for the attainment of mankind's dream of lasting peace. World wars were unleashed by imperialism during the period when it occupied a dominant position in international relations. But much has changed since then. The community of the socialist countries has come into being, has grown stronger and has consistently defended the cause of peace. The independent States of Asia, Africa and Latin America have reached maturity and are united in the Non-Aligned Movement. The broad masses of the people in all countries are clamouring for the elimination of the threat of nuclear war once and for all on behalf of present and future generations.
Contemporary means for the total destruction of all living things on earth have made war suicidal madness. In our day the world is united, not only by common history and comprehensive economic links, information media, communication and transport, but also by the common threat of nuclear destruction and extermination. That is why today, as never before, there is need for the joint efforts of peoples and countries to save mankind from nuclear catastrophe.
We are deeply convinced that the very best way to rid mankind of the nuclear danger is to curb the arms race, and above all the nuclear arms race, and to reduce existing arsenals to vastly lower levels. That is why the entire history of the participation of the socialist countries in United Nations activities has been one of their untiring struggle for disarmament.
The ideal of socialism is a world without war, a world without armaments. The prevention of war and the guaranteeing of durable international security is the ®ost Inportant foreign policy task of the peoples and Governments of the socialist countries. I would even say it is their constitutional aim. For example,
article 28 of the Constitution of the Ukrainian SSR provides: “In the
Ukrainian SSR war propaganda shall be prohibited." Article 61 of that Constitution provides:
■The internationalist duty of the citizens of the Ukrainian SSR is to promote the development of friendship and co-operation with the peoples of other countries and to maintain and strengthen world peace."
Tn the socialist countries there has always been warm support for the observance of Disarmament Week as one of the numerous levers used by peace-loving forces to promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion of the world’s human and economic resources to armaments.
The sum of $1 trillion spent annually in the world on the arms race is evidence of the fact that the world is still a long way from the goal formulated in Article 26 of the Charter. Whipped up by imperialist desire for military supremacy and stimulated by distrust and hostility, the arms race, even in peacetime, is causing colossal damage to mankind. It deprives millions of persons of their livelihood and the thought of the military threat weighs heavily on their lives.
If the arms race is to be halted, the unattainable and highly dangerous desire for military supremacy must be renounced, barriers of hostility between States overcome and mutual restraint exercised in relations, good will in negotiations and good faith in carrying out the agreements arrived at.
More progress towards disarmament can and must be made. The work of the competent international forums has identified a series of problems which have now matured and on which international agreements and treaties can be concluded. And if, so far, no International agreements have been concluded on the non-first-use of nuclear weapons, the cessation of stockpiling of nuclear weapons and the
(Mf. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR} non-militarization of space# if the elaboration of treaties on a comprehensive nuclear test ban, the prohibition of production of chemical weapons and the destruction of stockpiles of such weapons has been delayed, and if so far certain agreements which have been drawn up have not been ratified, responsibility for the situation does not lie with the socialist countries.
In the statement on the elimination of the nuclear threat and a turn for the better in European and world affairs, adopted on 23 October in Sofia - just before Disarmament Week - the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty once again confirmed that there is no weapon which the socialist countries would not be prepared to destroy, reduce, or remove from their arsenals and eliminate for ever, on the basis of an agreement with other States and in accordance with the principle of equality and equal security.
The steps taken unilaterally by the Soviet Union, which has declared a moratorium on all nuclear explosions and on the deployment of medium-range missiles in Europe as well as its other initiatives designed to prevent an arms race in outer space and to halt the arms race on earth, are of fundamental importance to the solution of the cardinal task of our age - the cessation of the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and a shift to effective disarmament« The far-reaching proposals made by the Soviet Union just before the meeting of the Soviet and United States leaders for a 50 per cent reduction of nuclear armaments capable of reaching each other’s territory, and the cessation of the development, testing and deployment of space strike weapons are of particular importance.
As is noted in the statement adopted by the meeting of socialist States in Sofia, there are other spheres in which the Soviet Union and the United States could set a good example for the reduction of nuclear and conventional armaments.
The participation of the broad popular masses in anti-war movements is of considerable importance in the implementation of measures relating to Disarmament Week. Particularly commendable are the unselfish activities of such organizations as the World Peace Council, which for 35 years has in word and deed demonstrated its dedication to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter by mobilizing public opinion in support of United Nations decisions conducive to peace and disarmament, the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, which has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1985, and many others. Numerous national organizations whose members include women and young persons, veterans, schoolchildren, realistic religious figures and political leaders have also called resolutely for disarmament.
The appeal addressed by the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty to the Governments and peoples of all countries to combine efforts in the fight against the threat of nuclear destruction which is hanging over mankind is fully consonant with the purposes of Disarmament Week. The socialist countries propose that all international problems, including the most acute and complex, should be solved by political means, negotiation and productive dialogue, on the basis of the legitimate interests of the sides.
(Mr. Qudovenko, Dkrainian SSR) Differences in ideologies, and in political and other convictions must not stand in the way of that. By taking an active and united stand, the forces of peace have it within their power to prevent a nuclear catastrophe and to guarantee the paramount right of peoples, namely, the tight to a peaceful life, to independent and free development.
The CHAIRMAN: I now call on Ambassador Daza, the permanent representative of Chile, Chairman of the Group of Latin American States.
Mr. DAZA (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a great honour for me to address this First Committee on behalf of the countries members of the Latin American and Caribbean group on an occasion as special as this when we are not only beginning the eighth celebration of the now traditional Disarmament Week, but also commemorating the fortieth anniversary of our Organization,
Today, as we commence this year’s Disarmament Week, we should, I believe, recall its origins and purposes. It was instituted at the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, with the clear objective of responding to the legitimate desire to involve our peoples in, and to keep them informed about, the work being done to promote disarmament, it is in this context, therefore, that this Week should be considered, particularly at a time such as the present when world public opinion is becoming increasingly concerned by the obvious lack of progress in the tasks entrusted to international organizations in areas connected with the maintenance of international peace and security. Our region, which by tradition conforms to the law in all its activities, has always been guided by and acted in accordance with fundamental principles of the Charter. We believe in them and endeavour to have them applied and strengthened, as we are convinced that their ideals underlying are fully valid today, and that the means they offer are more than sufficient to eliminate the scourge of war and to build an international society based on the rule of law and justice.
(Mr. Daza, Chile)
That is why our region has at all times supported any proposal and any initiative that might lead to general and complete disarmament. That is also why we can present concrete examples, such as the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, achieved through the initiative of our region alone, and whose purpose, as everyone knows, is to keep Latin America definitively free of the terror of nuclear weapons.
Through the Contadora Group, our region has also made great efforts - and is at present negotiating intensely - to reach agreements designed to eliminate any threat to peace in the Central American region through confidence-building, verification and military control measuress. Our regional group also resolutely supports the creation of new nuclear-weapon-free zones and all regional disarmament proposals.
We are determined to support firmly all disarmament possibilities, not only in our own region but also in the world at large, until mankind can live in peace and security, until we can eliminate for succeeding generations the danger of war, promote social progress and raise the standard of living of our peoples.
None the less, in spite of so many efforts for peace, we are discouraged at how the spectre of death and destruction holds sway, challenging the higher ideals of the international community. We see the proliferation of armed conflicts, an increase in the stockpiling of and trade in increasingly sophisticated weaponry. Furthermore, the balance of terror has brought with it a much more destructive and onerous race. Experts estimate that by the end of this century over 30 countries will be participating in this horrifying rivalry.
If we draw up a balance sheet, we can see that from one year to the next military expenditures increase by over $50 billion at a time when mankind is
(Mr. Daza, Chile) confronting one of the greatest economic crisis in its history. We do not feel frustrated, nor are we inclined to be pessimistic, for we are convinced that, in spite of all the difficulties and all the obstacles that may arise in our endeavours, efforts for disarmament will prevail and ultimately our objectives will be attained.
We believe in the work of the United Nations. On this special occasion we wish to prepare to all the members of this Committee, all the members of the international community, that we should renew our commitments to the principles of the Charter and accord the highest priority to peace and development Initiatives for the benefit of all mankind.
The CHAIRMAN: I shall now call upon the permanent representative of Ireland, Ambassador Robert McDonagh, Chairman of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. MCDONAGH (Ireland): I am honoured to address the First Committee on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other states today, which marks the culmination of Disarmament Week. It is a particular privilege for me to do so during the month which marks the fortieth Anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations,
It was at the first special session devoted to disarmament in 1978 that the General Assembly decided to proclaim the week commencing 24 October as a period to be devoted to the objectives of disarmament. Since 1978, our Organization has commemorated Disarmament Week on an annual basis, with the purpose of increasing public awareness of the dangers of the arms race and of creating an atmosphere conducive to progress towards disarmament.
The carefully considered words contained in the Final Document of 1978 have
lost none of their force or relevance with the passage of time. With your
permission, Mr. Chairman, I should like to quote from the opening paragraph of the Declaration set out in the Final Document which was adopted by consensus: "Military budgets are constantly growing, with enormous consumption of human and material resources. The increase in weapons, especially nuclear weapons, far from helping to strengthen international security, on the contrary weakens it. The vast stockpiles and tremendous build-up of arms and armed forces and the competition for qualitative refinement of weapons of all kinds, to which scientific resources and technological advances are diverted, pose incalculable threats to peace. This situation both reflects and aggravates international tensions, sharpens conflicts in various regions of the world, hinders the process of détente, exacerbates the differences between opposing military alliances, jeopardizes the security of all States, heightens the sense of insecurity among all States, including the non-nuclear-weapon States, and increases the threat of nuclear war". (Resolution S-10/2, para. 11).
(Mr. McDonagh, Ireland) z
With the potential now available to man to destroy not only his own kind but the very planet on which we live, it is scarcely surprising that the cause of disarmament should occupy so much of our time and attention in this Organization. And so it should be. The achievement of positive and significant developments in the disarmament field is an objective which we all pursue, and in that context the importance of ensuring that international public opinion is well informed cannot be emphasized strongly enough.
We, the members of the Group of Western European and Other States, are deeply conscious of the fact that the United Nations provides a unique public forum for the expression of views on this vital issue, and we are mindful of the role that the United Nations can play in serving as a source of information supportive of the disarmament process. It is in this light that today we observe Disarmament Week, and in doing so we rededicate ourselves to the principle of the maintenance of international peace and security, and to the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the disarmament process - that of general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
The CHAIRMAN; We.have come to the conclusion of this meeting- devoted to the observance of Disarmament Week. It is my sincere hope that the thought-provoking and inspiring words we have heard today will imbue us with a fresh sense of determination to press forward in out continuing search for a world in which people can live lives free of the scourge of war and the deprivation that results from the squandering of resources on the instruments of war.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/40/PV.124 28 April 1986
ENGLISH
Fortieth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 28 April 1986, at 3 p.m.
President;	Mr. DE PINIE3	(Spain)
- ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA OF THE FORTIETH SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, ALLOCATION OF ITEMS AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK [8] (continued)
FIFTH REPORT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE - CURRENT FINANCIAL CRISIS OF THE UNITED NATIONS [150]
(a)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
(b)	REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
86-64752/A 8282V (E)	pp.^y
I palmer ::i^
*s D&r;^ C. ill
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA OF THE FORTIETH SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, ALLOCATION OF ITEMS AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK
FIFTH REPORT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (A/40/250/Add.4)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): This afternoon the Assembly will first consider the Fifth Report of the General Committee, which is to be found in document A/40/250 (Add.4).
In paragraph 2(a) of the report the General Committee recommends the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of an additional item, entitled "Current financial crisis of the United Nations".
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to include in its agenda the additional item, entitled "Current financial crisis of the United Nations?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In paragraph 2(b) of the report the General Committee recommends that the item be considered directly in plenary meeting. This recommendation was made in recognition of the fact that the General Assembly is master of its own procedure and may, if it so wishes, call on the Fifth Committee or any other Committee at any time.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that recommendation of the General Committee?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 150	. 
CURRENT FINANCIAL CRISIS OF THE UNITED NATIONS
(a)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/40/1102 and Corr. 1 and 2 and A/40/1102 and Add. l and 2)
(b)	REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS (A/40/1106)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We turn now to item 150 of the agenda, entitled "Current financial crisis of the United Nations". 
As members are aware, upon a request of the Secretary-General, the General Assembly session has been resumed on an urgent basis to deal with this question. 
I call on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The United Nations Charter, in Article 99, provides that the Secretary-General may bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security. In the event of a threat to the viability and the very integrity of the Organization itself a comparable need arises - a need to bring the situation urgently to the attention of the General Assembly, as the main organ competent to take action. Such a threat to the Organization now exists. On 18 December last year, as the budget for the biennium was being adopted, I asked to speak to the Assembly on this grave problem. Now I have requested that the Assembly reconvene to consider measures to be taken to address the present emergency - to preserve the operational effectiveness of the United Nations during a time of severe financial strain. 
Representatives have before them the report that I submitted to the Assembly on 12 April 1986 on the current financial crisis. I will not on this occasion repeat the extensive details which it provides on the situation. I would, however, 
JP/PLJ


like again to emphasize that, while the present crisis is indeed one of insufficient funds, it is also - and above all- a political crisis. It arises principally, though not exclusively, from disregard for obligations flowing from the Charter and from lack of agreement among Member States on the purposes for which the United Nations should be used, and on the support to be rendered by each Member State to ensure its effectiveness. 

The United Nations was established not simply to symbolize the universal aspiration for peace and the improved conditions of human existence on which lasting peace heavily depends. The United Nations was formed as a working organization capable of serving directly to bring resolution to disputes, to point the way to, and provide a structure for, international co-operation on the major human problems and to pursue disarmament. For more than 40 years now the United Nations has functioned to these ends. 
On the occasion of the fortieth anniversary there was ample testimony to its vital importance and achievements as well as to the difficulties it has encountered. There was not then, nor ought there to be, any serious suggestion that the goals of the Charter should be disregarded simply because they are difficult to attain. 
As one surveys the world today, torn still by conflict and violence, and burdened with want, injustice and the threat of nuclear destruction, these goals must surely be reaffirmed. Surely too there is evidence enough by now that they cannot be achieved by unilateral action. As we move towards a new millenium, the greatest challenge for nations will be to work together towards those objectives which serve the common, transcendent interests of all. For this, the United Nations, is more than a useful tool; it is an essential and central instrumentality. 
If I speak in these broad terms, it is with practical intent. For the practical reality is that this much needed instrumentality cannot function with adequate effect unless it is financially viable. And financial viability depends on the willingness of Member States to agree on how the purposes of the Organization should be pursued, on the amount of resources required, and, very particularly, on their readiness to contribute their apportioned share of these resources as foreseen in the Charter. 

These are pragmatic requirements for the sustained viability of the United Nations and as such are crucial elements in the political cohesion and substantive strength of the Organization. This session of the Assembly has evidenced its recognition of this vital relationship in the establishment of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts to identify measures for further improving the efficiency of the Organization's administrative and financial functioning which would contribute to its effectiveness in dealing with political, economic and * social issues. 
At its forty—first session, this autumn, the Assembly will need to act on the conclusions and recommendations of the Group and agree on steps through which the disagreement and discontent that have seriously encumbered the budgetary process and the financing of the programmes of the Organization can be diminished. For this an opportunity is at hand, made all the more promising by the evident dangers of failure to utilize it. It would be a tragic repudiation of all the efforts and hopes invested these 40 years in the United Nations if, meanwhile, the Organization were allowed to founder for lack of funds. 
The United Nations must, despite its unprecedented financial difficulties, continue to function effectively and to carry out to the maximum extent possible the programmes and activities mandated by this Assembly under the Charter. The Secretary-General, with the help of the Secretariat, will contribute to the fullest extent possible to the long-term solution of the budgetary problem, just as we seek now to take those steps necessary to deal with the immediate emergency. 
At the end of 1985, total arrears, encompassing both withholdings and late payments, amounted to $242 million. All reserves had been committed to cover that deficit. At the turn of the year indications were received from the largest contributor that it would pay substantially less than its assessed contribution for 1985 and 1986. Under these circumstances a total shortfall for 1986 alone of

$106 million had prudently to be projected. As members know, in December 1985 and in January 1986 I appealed to all Member States in arrears to make early payment. I subsequently called on Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Special Account to help avoid a drastic disruption of our work programme and of the Organization itself. 
Since the beginning of the year economy measures have been instituted which should produce savings of approximately $30 million. The immediate effect of these measures is largely on the Secretariat, entailing as they do the postponement of the promotion process, the deferral of certain scheduled salary increases and a freeze on recruitment. In my report a package of additional measures is now put forward for the information and concurrence of the Assembly which is calculated to produce a further savings of approximately $30 million this year. 
Every effort has been made to follow criteria established by the General Assembly in identifying the additional economy measures now proposed. Of necessity they are concentrated mainly in the areas of construction, documentation and meetings since that is where substantial savings can be made within a brief time frame. The measures, along with those already taken, will inevitably affect the implementation of programmes, the services available to Member States, and the employment conditions and welfare of Secretariat staff. I am convinced, however, that, if taken as a whole, the measures will result in a reasonable apportionment among programmes and activities of the retrenchments which in the present emergency are not avoidable. 
I note with satisfaction that the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, following its review of my report, stated that it shares my conclusions on the severity of the financial crisis and recommends approval as a package of the measures I have proposed to effect savings in expenditures in 1986. 
In the current circumstances, special recognition and appreciation is due to the 25 Member States that have paid their assessed contributions for 1986 and prior years, promptly and in full. Those States are the following: Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brunei Darussalam, Burma, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti, Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sweden and the United Kingdom. 
I am encouraged too by the actions taken by a number of Member States to effect payments in 1986 earlier than they have in the past and by the recent responses of some Member States to my appeal for the payment of arrears and voluntary contributions. Some of these payments have resulted in the elimination of past arrears. Other Member States have expressed their intention to make payments in 1986 to eliminate their arrears. The Soviet Union has pledged a voluntary contribution of $10 million to the Special Account. 
In the midst of crisis, these responses all warrant recognition and appreciation. It would be my earnest hope that additional payments will be made in the next weeks so that by the time the forty-first session of the General Assembly convenes the problem of insufficient funds will, at least for 1986, have been contained. I must caution, however, that even such a positive development would not by any means signal a resolution of the financial crisis. I should like to place particular emphasis on the following considerations in this connection. 

First, the economy measures already taken or now proposed, which should bring $60 million in savings, constitute the main element in reducing the cash deficit this year and are absolutely essential to maintaining solvency of the Organization in 1986. They are, however, emergency measures which cannot be continued indefinitely without damage to the capacity of the Organization to carry out its mandated programmes. 
For example, a prolonged recruitment freeze would impact unevenly on the various entities within the Secretariat and would adversely affect my efforts to achieve a better balance in the composition of the staff in accordance with the objectives expressed by the General Assembly over the years. The emergency economy measures will alleviate the immediate and critical cash situation and thereby provide time for Member States to address the fundamental problems. But they are not intended to, and cannot, solve these problems. 
Secondly, even if sufficient payments are received to cover this year's cash shortfall, there will be little, if any, cash on hand at the beginning of 1987. We must be clear that the cash shortfall problem will not disappear at the end of 1986. This point cannot be over-emphasized. It will persist until payments of assessed contributions are made in full. 
Finally, it must be stressed that the cash shortfall in 1986 could well become larger than projected in my report if the assumptions regarding payments of assessed contributions are not realized or if the United States dollar should continue to depreciate. 
Unless funds are obtained to cover the shortfall, further cost reduction steps will have to be taken with adverse consequences for programmes, staff, and for the rational, systematic consideration of measures which, I believe, must be part of a lasting resolution of the budgetary problem. This situation will need to be closely monitored, in continuing contact with Member States. 

It is ray hope that the Assembly will keep these various considerations in mind as it studies the actions I have taken and the set of proposals contained in the report I have submitted. These measures, like this resumed session, are intended to deal with the present, with an emergency that requires an immediate response, yet our purposes pertain to the future, the future of a United Nations, sound in structure and enjoying the wide confidence and support which it must have to accomplish the great tasks set out in the Charter. 
A lasting resolution of the budgetary problem will require that Member States find a basis of broad agreement on how the Organization should operate. Political attitudes must be brought into sufficient consonance to permit constructive co-operation in deciding the programme agenda. All Member States must comply with the financial obligations defined in the Charter. 
Most importantly, Member States - large, medium, and small - must recognize their commonly shared interest in the existence of a sound, universal Organization, capable of strengthening the prospect of peace and global security. This can be demonstrated now. Member States, through constructive agreement at this session on the necessary emergency actions and through continuing support during these next difficult months, can enhance the opportunity which lies ahead to assure the lasting viability and integrity of the United Nations. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We have heard a very important statement by the Secretary-General in conjunction with his report on the current financial crisis. I understand that Members have already had the opportunity to study the report of the Secretary-General contained in document A/40/1102 and Corr. 1 and 2 and A/40/1102/Add. 1 and 2 and the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in document A/40/1106, which recommends the endorsement of the measures proposed by the Secretary-General. 
Such measures would allow the Organization to meet the immediate difficulties and give the Assembly time to look carefully at possible ways to solve the long-term financial problems of the Organization.
What is needed now is the understanding and full co-operation of all Member States to enable the Organization to overcome the current crisis. This is a moment in time when, on the basis of our commitment to the principles contained in the Charter, we should all join our efforts. I should like to appeal to each Member State to make every effort so that, as a result of this resumed session, we can provide the Organization with the means to bridge its immediate crisis and the possibility to examine carefully the long-term measures to ensure a sound financial foundation.
Therefore, I strongly recommend that the General Assembly endorse the measures contained in the report of the Secretary-General by consensus.
Mr. VAN PER STOEL (Netherlands): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 12 member States of the European Community.
The United Nations plays a unique and crucial role in world affairs. The 12 member States of the European Community are staunch supporters of the Organization, in both political and financial terms. Ever since its founding the United Nations has been a cornerstone of the foreign policy of our respective Governments. The 12 are accordingly deeply concerned about the crisis in which the Organization now finds itself, a crisis caused by the blatant disregard by certain Member States for their financial obligations under the Charter.
That the Organization has none the less been able to carry on until now is to a large extent due to the fact that other Member States have had to bear the consequences of the actions of those who have not complied fully with the financial
(Mr. van der Stoel, Netherlands) obligations of their membership. This is the case for both the regular programme budget and peace-keeping operations financed through assessed contributions. The Twelve deplore the practice of "financing a la carte" which renders these budgets vulnerable. The Twelve are of the view that the current financial crisis caused by such behaviour on the part of a minority of Member States cannot and should not be solved by compensatory payments from those Member States which do fulfil their obligations.

WB
While the crisis has arisen in the realm of the programme budget, the problems of financing peace-keeping are no less serious. In fact, in terms of magnitude, they are greater. With peace-keeping, the financial obligations of the Organization are its liabilities to troop-contributing States. To a large extent those States carry the burden of withholdings in this field. In this respect, the Twelve welcome the improvement in the position of certain Member States, an example we hope will be followed by others. In the meantime, troop-contributor States have not received the full reimbursement to which they are entitled. This should be kept in mind when discussing the current crisis. A shortfall with respect to the programme budget, by contrast, creates immediate cash-flow problems for the Organization, since it must meet the expenses incurred in the implementation of mandated programmes and, more generally, in the day-to-day running of its operations.
The Secretary-General has pointed out in his report that the crisis could have profound implications for the viability of the Organization and its work. It will be crucial for the membership to reach agreement if we are to proceed constructively. The Secretary-General has requested that the current debate focus only on his own evaluation of the immediate financial shortfall. However, the scope of the current crisis is greater than its immediate financial manifestations. We are concerned that, in the near future, the Organization will be faced once again with serious cash-flow problems. The Twelve believe that it is important that any decisions taken during this resumed session should complement, and not conflict with, long-term solutions, which should be consistent with the need to ensure that the United Nations continue to play its role under the Charter. In this respect, the report of the High-Level Group to the forty-first
session of the General Assembly will be of considerable interest, although it does not relieve Member States or the Secretary-General of their own responsibility to explore possible long-term solutions.
In the view of the Twelve, the responsibility for the crisis lies with all those Member States that do not fulfil their financial obligations under the Charter. It is they, first and foremost, who should now act by pronptly paying arrears and by meeting current assessments. We have stressed this point in consultations directly and indirectly with other States Members and with the Secretary-General. We note that several Member States are making an effort in this respect. If all the Member States concerned complied with their obligations, there would be no financial crisis. It goes without saying that we endorse the appeals of the Secretary-General in this regard.
The Secretary-General has stated in report that the present shortfall is in the range of $63.8 million to $75.8 million. Those projections are based mainly on the assumption that virtually all assessments for 1986 will be paid in full. Unfortunately, experience suggests that that assumption is unlikely to be borne out by facts. The Twelve welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative of having introduced a number of economy measures that partly address the immediate shortfall. I refer to paragraphs 16 and 17 of the Secretary-General's report. The Twelve, however, are of the view that there is further scope for the Secretary-General to make savings in this area to the extent that this proves necessary.
With little prospect for a dramatic improvement in the income situation of the Organization, the Secretary-General initiated a thorough review of the 1986 portion of the biennial budget to indentify activities which could be deferred in order to generate additional immediate savings. In recognizing the difficult and sensitive nature of the review, the Twelve have to say that, in their view, the reductions
(He. van dec Stoel, Netherlands) Bust be sufficient to meet the entire shortfall. However, given the current situation, the Twelve, in a spirit of co-operation, hope that the Assembly will be able to concur in the results of that exercise, as detailed in paragraphs 21 to 25 of the Secretary-General's report. Difficult times require assertive and dynamic leadership. The Secretary-General is in the best position to determine the measures necessary to alleviate the immediate crisis, and we expect that he will continue to use his authority to carry them out. In the view of the Twelve, the outcome of this resumed session should determine to what extent the Secretary-General need pursue the exercise of identifying further cost savings in the months ahead. To this end, the Twelve believe that this resumed session of the General Assembly should request the Secretary-General to make proposals through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) for further economies to meet the shortfall, should it prove higher than envisaged in document A/40/1106. It must be pointed out that the responsibility for any possible detrimental effects of such measures must lie with those Member States whose actions have created the crisis. They should ultimately be held accountable.
The Secretary-General in his report also anticipates costs for the Organization caused by the depreciation of the United States dollar. The effects of such currency fluctuations are dealt with at the end of the budget year in the context of the performance report. The projections in the Secretary-General's report, made so early in the budget year, cannot provide an accurate picture of the losses likely to be incurred by the end of the budget period. The Twelve therefore consider it premature to take action on this issue at the present time.
In conclusion, the 12 States Members of the European Community wish to reiterate their commitment to sound financial management and fiscal restraint. They wil continue to co-operate constructively with the Secretary-General and with Member States to safeguard the future of the United Nations.
Mr. FISCHER (Austria): Let Be quote from an editorial entitled "The United Nations Chronic Money Troubles":
■Perhaps the best way of describing the financial situation here is to liken the United Nations to a poverty-stricken family, but a family with any number of wealthy uncles, any one of whom could easily provide the faaily with not only the necessities, but all the luxuries of life. Yet the uncles - not because they are parsimonious, but rather because it suits their purpose - prefer to keep the family poor and weak and beholden to the rich uncles. So the United Nations financial crisis is perpetually bordering on the desperate. The chronic state of fiscal despair is not due to economic factors but rather to political factors. Thus, it poses a problem particularly difficult to solve."
Rs* Floeberg Austria)
That editorial was published in The New York Times 14 years ago, on 25 April 1972. Although the comparison may be somewhat exaggerated, the conclusion drawn is certainly correct. The Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations, the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies, the Special Committee on the Financial Situation of the United Nation and the Negotiating Committee on the Financial Emergency of the United Nations have reviewed the financial situation of the United Nations. An item on the financial emergency has been on the agenda of the General Assembly for almost 10 years.
But to date efforts to solve the fiscal problems of the United Nations have been unavailing. As a result, economic difficulties have sapped the Organization's strength and injured its dignity. Up to now the United Nations has managed to find sufficient funds to make ends meet. There have been times, however, when the till was so empty because of the failure of Member States to pay their assessments that the Secretary-General has had to meet the daily obligations of the Organization with emergency borrowing from funds in his custody - funds, I hasten to add, which are earmarked for other purposes.
If financial collapse has been avoided so far it is because certain Governments - troop-contributing States, to be specific - have provided the United Nations with goods and services without being fully compensated or paid for them. The increased use of peace-keeping funds to meet the United Nations payroll has put an additional burden on troop-contributing States, which have borne the brunt of the United Nations deficit since the 1960s. Owing to reliance on the generosity of a few, rather than on the collective responsibility of all, the crisis has built up over the years. With the financial framework already severely weakened, the decision of the major contributor to withold part of its assessed contribution for 1985-1986 has plunged the United Nations into an acute emergency.
(Me. Fischer, Austria)
In the report before ua, the Secretary-General describes the financial situation of the Organization as he perceives it. He qualifies bls analysis, however, by stating that he has not received definite notification from the major contributor of the exact amount of its witholdings. I do not think, therefore, that we should be overly concerned or mesmerized by the figures provided in the report before us. They are rough estimates, which have already been changed and will probably continue changing.
The essential fact to be retained from the report, however, is the following: With its reserves depleted and its deficit growing rapidly, the United Nations cannot continue to carry on with business as usual. To put it differently, the policy of improvisation, ad hoc solutions and reliance on the generosity of a few rather than on our collective responsibility cannot endure if the United Nations is to function as an effective instrument of international co-operation.
While the current financial crisis can be viewed from many different perspectives, the task assigned to the resumed fortieth session of the General Assembly is clearly defined: to deal with the present cash shortfall and to tide the United Nations over until a lasting solution to its monetary problems can be found.
To that end the Secretary-General has already taken steps within his jurisdiction and has submitted for our approval a savings package composed of three parts: first, postponement of major construction projects; secondly, changes in the calendar of conferences; and, thirdly, suspension of programmes.
We have examined those cutbacks very carefully and have come to the conclusion that the proposed package is on the whole a balanced one. While we do not agree with every action proposed therein, we nevertheless consider it a fair compromise among competing demands, and we therefore favour the adoption of the package as it stands. In the event of the package being opened, however, I have to reserve
(Mr. Fischer, Austria) my delegation's right to subnit alternative savings measures which better reflect our views and priorities. In this context I am thinking particularly of the proposed cutbacks in the field of human rights.
We fully share the view of the Secretary-General that unilateral witholding of assessed contributions by any Member State is contrary to the obligations flowing from the Charter. We therefore endorse his urgent appeal to the Member States concerned, as well as to those which are late in meeting their assessments, to make early payments. Coming myself from a small country that has provided the United Nations with an International Centre, peace-keeping troops and the full payment of its 1986 assessed contribution, I doubt that any Member State would find it difficult to comply with that appeal of the Secretary-General.
My delegation hopes that by adopting the savings proposed and by the payment of outstanding contributions we will have bought enough time to prepare a definite plan of financial recovery without having to worry excessively about the cash flow and end-of-the-month balances. We are confident that the High-level Group of Intergovernmental Experts established to review the functioning of the United Nations will in the meantime agree on solutions and concrete recommendations to the General Assembly at its forty-first session which will ensure the long-term financial viability and effectiveness of our Organization.
As a host country, a troop contributor and a United Nations Member State, Austria has contributed and will continue to contribute its share to making the United Nations a viable and independent instrument of international co-operation.
IMS/	A/40/PV.124
24-25
Mr« MACIEL (Brazil)x The item before the General Assembly at this reconvened session is properly entitled "Current financial crisis of the United Nations"« The description is apt, because this is not a crisis that was created suddenly in 1905 or 1986. Nor is it a new crisis: It is not there, glaring at us, just because either last year or this year one or another Meeber State failed to pay its assessed contribution or because one State or another decided for some reason or other to withold payments that are legally due.
The United Nations has been in financial straits since at least 1963, and in the course of these 20-odd years several crises have arisen as a result. Today, according to the information provided by the Secretary-General, we are faced not with a minor crisis but with a major one, a crisis that could have "profound implications for the viability of the Organization" itself, to use the words of the Secretary-General. (A/40/1102, para. 1)
(Mg. Maciel, Brazil) In the calculations used to explain the current crisis, arrears in payments of assessed contributions appear as one of the elements to be taken into consideration. Actually, the real cause of the crisis is to be found not there, but rather in the enormous withholdings of assessed contributions legally determined by the competent organs of the United Nations. The withholding of these assessed contributions, which are compulsory obligations, is tantamount to violation of the United Nations Charter. It is a sad fact that among the withholding countries even permanent members of the Security Council are to be found.
Arrears are ascribable to many developing countries whose financial difficulties have been fundamentally generated by dismally unfavourable economic conditions on the international scene. These arrears are caused by a liquidity crisis in the developing countries as is the case with my own country, whose arrears accumulated basically between 1980 and 1985. In sum, it appears that the major source of the current financial crisis is to be found in the withholding of assessed contributions. If this is so it may be concluded that the main origin of the problem is one of a political nature, not of financial administration or of the structure of the United Nations budget itself.
The General Assembly, of course, has to take action to correct this financial situation in the short run. But it cannot, it must not, camouflage or shun the very real problem of a lack of basic political agreement, a lack of a general consensus among Member States, that is behind all this and which is a central issue placing in jeopardy the continued useful existence of the United Nations. The short-term action that Member States should take is to pay up, to pay the largest portion possible of their arrears and, above all, their withholdings. The United Nations is not in a situation where loans could be considered a way out; and the cuts and deferrals proposed are small indeed, but they deserve to be favourably considered.
...	(Mr. Maciel, Brazil)
The Brazilian Government is over $15.9 million in arrears. If its assessed contribution to the regular budget for 1986 is included, my country owes the United Nations budget over $25 million. In line with what I said a minute ago, the Brazilian Government is depositing $17.7 million, in round figures, to the credit of the United Nations, bringing our arrears in round figures to $8 million, which is less than our assessed contribution for the current year. It is my pleasure to be able to announce this payment, which will take place shortly. This decision by the Brazilian Government represents a great financial effort for a country whose economy is just beginning to recover from enormous difficulties, but above all this decision represents a meaningful and serious gesture in support of the United Nations at a time when some tend to lose faith in it.
The exact outline and components of the financial crisis do not come out as clearly as would have been desirable from the report presented by the Secretary-General. It would also have been preferable for the proposals for cuts and deferrals to have been made in a more systematic way. None the less, we understand that the urgency of proposing short-term cuts at this reconvened session left the Secretary-General little choice. The Brazilian delegation is therefore in a position to support the Secretary-General's proposals even though we believe that a few changes here and there might improve them.
Having said that, I should like to make it clear that the support we are now giving the proposals in general is without prejudice to other measures, especially medium- and long-term measures that the General Assembly is expected to take after considering the report of the group of high-level intergovernmental experts. It is part of our understanding that when the General Assembly takes these long-term measures it must do so against the background of the political sources of the financial problems that have for the last 20 years been chiefly responsible for
Wio
(Hr. Maciel, Brazil)
this cash crisis. The Brazilian Government will not hesitate to Make every effort in both the financial and political fields to strengthen and inprove the United Nations, because Brazil feels that Member States can and should use this Organization as an instrument effectively to maintain international peace and security and achieve international co-operation in economic and social issues. We hope that the great Powers share our perceptions.
Mr. MUfliz (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): We have listened very carefully and with deep concern to the Secretary-General’s introduction of the agenda item on the financial situation faced by our Organization and we wish to thank him for the information he has furnished.
While this is the first time that this body has been seized of the details of this problem, we cannot say that it has come as a surprise. This question has drawn the attention of missions accredited to the United Nations ever since the suspension of the fortieth session of the General Assembly at the end of last year.
During the time that has elapsed there has been much speculation about the exact size of the problem that we are to resolve as well as the formulas that would be most advisable to put into effect. One thing about which we have not had doubts is that there is a problem and that we must act.
That is why we will be most attentive to any additional information that we may be given in the course of the present meetings and we hope that, with some reasonable suggestions, this document may form the basis of an understanding by the General Assembly to remedy the lack of resources that we will need in 1986.
However, we see clearly that the set of measures adopted by the	'
Secretary-General and proposed for the future are limited to seeking a solution for this year without speculating about their consequences for next year or their impact in the medium- and long-term. We think that this is intentional and we share
JW10	*/WM12<
29-30
'	(wg. Huniz, ntqtnwnij
th* idea of dealing with this crisis only as a probles affecting the current year in the hope that its causes will disappear for the cosing year.
This leads se to an analysis of the causes. They can be attributed to various factors: insufficiency of resources to carry out progressed activities; the questionable way in which resources have been allotted; pressures exerted by sone Hesber countries to obtain the adoption of Measures they consider just.
J
(Mr. MuBiz, Argentina)
Nevertheless, we believe that there is but one solution: all countries must comply with the obligations stewing fro* the Charter, not the least of which is the obligation provided for in Article 17. That Article does not set any condition or provide any exception, and only the General Assembly can determine whether any State's arrears have occurred for reasons beyond that State's control and, hence, whether that State can be excepted from the sanction provided for in Article 19.
We understand that all States are bound by those obligations. Owing to the especially difficult economic circumstances Argentina has been experiencing and continues to experience, one of whose main characteristics - as all representatives know - is the onerous external debt that still requires an appropriate response by the international community, sty country had fallen behind in its payments to the Organization. In the face of the situation described by the Secretary-General, it has, however, considered it its duty to make ewry possible effort. While developing countries cannot be expected to make up for any non-compliance by Members in much better economic situations, we believe that it is necessary for us to make every possible effort to correct the anomaly to which X have just referred. Hence my country has during the first quarter paid approximately $10 million, an amount to be considered in the light of our annual contribution which barely exceeds $4 million, thereby bringing Argentina virtually up to date with regard to its contribution and leaving it with an outstanding balance of only part of its quota for the current year.
We have done this to meet our obligations entered into when ratifying the United Nations Charter and to illustrate our desire to contribute to overcoming the serious crisis faced by the world Organization.
Mr. HUCKE (German Democratic Republic): The German Democratic Republic regrets that serious problems with regard to the financing of the Organization's activities foreseen in the approved biennium programme budget have forced the General Assembly to resume its fortieth session. However, my delegation acknowledges the need to deal with these urgent questions since their settlement is an indispensable political prerequisite for the effective work of the Organization.
My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory statement and also to commend his initiative to discuss measures for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the United Nations. It is prepared to support steps to that end to the best of its ability.
Since the beginning of its membership of the United Nations the German Democratic Republic has contributed its share to help overcome the problems built up in the policy of expenditures and the financing of the Organization through jointly adopted decisions. The German Democratic Republic is also concerned over the question that has been legitimately raised time and again by a large number of Member States: How the growing requirements the Organization is faced with can be met without additional expenditures. It has for many years expressly pointed to the need for a restrained expenditure policy.
My delegation has consistently advocated the prevention of an endless growth of expenditures by focusing on the major programmes, by rationalizing our work and by eliminating all obsolete programmes and programme elements and by excluding all expenditures from the regular budget that are in contradiction to fundamental decisions. These questions have not always been given the required attention, and this neglect has in part contributed to the present difficulties.
The efforts of the United Nations to overcome problems in the fulfilment of its tasks by joint, constructive co-operation are now being inpaired by decisions taken ir"/. laterally by one Member States which, in so doing, seeks to bring its economic weight to bear. The German Democratic Republic shares the view of the
(Mr. Hucke, German Democratic Republic) majority of States Members of the United Nations that such conditions for the payment of contributions that are directed against fundamental principles of the activities of the world Organization cannot be accepted. The German Democratic Republic holds that all States - large and small - are equally called upon to discuss in a constructive manner how the problems the Organization is faced with can best be solved. Unilateral measures taken by one State, such as those that have led to this session, are by no means helpful. The policy of financial diktat and blackmail is directed against all the activities of the Organization, undermining its proper functioning and its authority.
It must be added that, through the establishment of a ceiling for assessed contributions, the United States pays less than if its ability to pay were applied strictly on the basis of its national income. The internal decisions taken for the further reduction of its contributions reveal that economic reasons have obviously not been decisive at all for that step.
If as a result of the new attempts of blackmail there arise liquidity questions for the Organization, they must necessarily affect the implementation of } approved programmes. In my delegation’s view, it is therefore necessary in the first place to secure, through adequate administrative measures, that those programmes that, in conformity with the United Nations Charter, are of the greatest importance for the fulfilment of the Organization's main tasks be continued without any substantive reductions. Then further studies have to be made by competent bodies of the Organization with regard to the scope of the consequences those steps unilaterally taken by one Member State would have on the implementation of the entire work programme of the Organization. Also, the established High-level Group of Intergovernmental Experts will certainly be able to give the General Assembly relevant advice in its decisions.
’'(Mr. Hucke, German Democratic Republic)
A sharper focusing on the organisation's programme objectives, a more rational utilisation of staff resources and a streamlining of its structure and of its operations require a responsible, circumspect review of all circumstances and the constructive co-operation of all Member States as well as of the United Nations
Secretariat under the Secretary-General.
Within the framework of such fundamental reviews it would, however, also be advisable to exclude all expenditures contained in the regular budget for those activities that do not conform with the basic provisions of the United Nations or are not to be financed from that budget. Similarly, the financing of formerly extra-budgetary posts, which, contrary to regulations, were later taken into the budget, should be eliminated.
Through the influence exerted by the Secretary-General, as well as the responsible heads of various units of the Secretariat and staff members, progress has been readied in the effective utilization of all material and personnel resources. Nevertheless, much remains to be done. There remains the job of freeing capacities for the carrying out of the major tasks through a co-ordinated approach in the process of budgetary planning, more rational work, the full use of working time and good organization.
In that connection, the German Democratic Republic thanks the Secretary-General for the elaboration and submission of document A/40/1102 and Md.l and 2. Although there will certainly be different views on a number of proposals made in the document, they are as a whcle useful and constructive.
The serious effort to show ways to overcome '.he difficult situation must be highly appreciated. However, my delegation has doubts and reservations about a number of proposed changes in the conference calendar for 1986, which seriously endanger the substantive work of some General Assembly bodies and the fulfilment of the mandates adopted by the Member States.
Should reductions become necessary, they should be made, above all, for outlived, artificially inflated programmes whose right to exist and conformity with the Charter have long been questioned.
--■	(Mr. Hucke, German Democratic
Republic)
If decisions adopted earlier on the scope and substance of documents and on the holding of sessions and conferences were implemented more consistently, further savings would be possible. No less important is the further utilization of all conference capacities by a still more balanced distribution of sessions to all possible seats of the Organization, and over the whole year, as well as the full use of all scheduled meeting time.
In addition, early and comprehensive preparation of the documents is of high importance. That question, together with all proposals made in document A/40/1102 and Add.l and 2 on savings in the field of conference organization and the production of documents, should be discussed in the relevant organs of the United Nations.
The short-term measures to overcome the present financial situation which the Secretary-General announced with effect on 21 March, and which, in general, are appreciated and supported by the German Democratic Republic, include again a freeze on recruitment and replacements. That step, so it was maintained with a shrug of regret, would affect in the same way nationals of States which are over-represented in the Secretariat and nationals of those States which, like the German Democratic Republic, are highly under-represented. But that is just not true, because that step considerably favours the over-represented countries, since their nationals mainly have permanent contracts and therefore need not be replaced.
The delegation of the German Democratic Republic must express its concern over the renewed freeze, since it is clearly directed against the declared aim to overcome the under-representation of States and constitutes discrimination against staff members with fixed-term contracts. A similar measure taken by the Secretary-General in the fall of 1984 was met with criticism and war rejected by Member States because it did not result in any savings and further worsened the situation of the under-represented and unrepresented States, and was not in
’	(Mr. Hucke, German Democratic
Republic)
conformity with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. A freeze, which ia bound to deprive the Secretariat of new staff members with fresh ideas that would also contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations, means making savings in the wrong place. The German Democratic Republic demands the cancellation of the recruitment freeze for applicants from under-represented and unrepresented countries.
The German Democratic Republic, which, like other States, is interested in a sound financial basis and in effective work by the Organization, welcomes every step to that end. It regards the establishment of the Group of High-level Intergovernmental Experts by the fortieth session of the General Assembly as an opportunity to search for new ways to enhance the effectiveness of the management, budgetary and financial policies of the United Nations. The Group can be very useful in supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General. The German Democratic Republic expects from it recommendations and ideas acceptable to all Member States for the long-term, for improved budgetary and financial policies and for questions of the administration of the material and personnel resources of the Secretariat.
Now, more than ever before, it is the task of every United Nations Member State to support and strengthen the Organization to enable it to play its role in the maintenance of peace and the struggle for disarmament, in promoting a fruitful international co-operation and serving as a forum for dialogue and understanding.
The German Democratic Republic has always actively supported United Nations activities that are guided by the purposes and principles of its Charter, and has met its obligations to pay its contributions in conformity with the Charter, and it will continue to do so.
JP/mAb
(Mr. Hucke, Gertan Democratic < Republic)
To help overcome the Organization's liquidity problems the German Democratic Republic has paid its assessed contributions to the regular budget of 1986 at an earlier date than in previous years. Furthermore, it will take into consideration other steps which may be conducive to supporting the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.