UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVIS IONAL
A/44/PV.43
3 November 1989
ENGLISH
■■■,■™,,■■■,™l',■■,a■■s■■™»■»«■»lM■■M■■^■■■■^■■■ffl■m■«*la■«MBw■■■« ,	Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-THIRD MEETING ■	Held at Headauarters, New York,
‘	on Wednesday, 1 November 1989, at 10 a.m.	.
President»	Mr. SALLAH	(Gambia)
(Vice-President)
The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security [32]
(a)	Report of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
(c)	Report of the Fifth Committee
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments [17] (continued)
(i)	Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme» Note by the Secretary-General
Report of the International Court of Justice [13]	/...
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64344A 4352V (E)
JSM/ras
Achievements of the International Year of Peace [21]
(a)	Report of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
Special session of the General Assembly to consider the Question of international co-operation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs, with a view to expanding the scope and increasing the effectiveness of ^uch co-operation [157]
(a)	Draft resolution
(b)	Draft decision
(c)	Report of the Fifth Committee
In the absence'of the President» Mg. Sallah (Gambia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to ocdeg at 10.45 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 32
THE SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY
(a)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/661)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/44/L.17)
(C) REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/679)
The PRESIDENT? Ambassador Garba has requested me to convey to the General Assembly his regret at not being able, owing to ineluctable commitments outside New York, to be present to introduce the draft resolution which is before the Assembly now.
It is his view that draft resolution A/44/L.17 is a balanced text which duly reflects the concerns of the parties involved and underscores the urgent need for a comprehensive political solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan.
The draft resolution submitted by the President is the result of a consensus of the parties. He trusts that the Assembly, too, will adopt it by consensus.
Before we take action on the draft resolution, I wish to point out that, as part of the understanding between those directly concerned, it was agreed that there should be no debate on the item in the General Assembly, it is therefore suggested that we abide by this understanding,.which is designed to permit the broadest possible support for the draft resolution. If I hear no objections, I shall take it that the General Assembly agrees not to discuss the item under consideration.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT« The report of the Fifth Committee regarding the programme budget implications of the draft resolution is contained in document A/44/679.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/44/L.17?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/15).
The PRESIDENT« The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 32.
AGENDA ITEM 17 (continued)
APPOINTMENTS TO FILL VACANCIES IN SUBSIDIARY ORGANS AND OTHER APPOINTMENTS (i) CONFIRMATION OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME« NOTE BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/108)
The PRESIDENT« In paragraph 22 of part B of its resolution 1240 (XIII), of 14 October 1958, on the establishment of the Special Fund, the General Assembly provided that the Secretary-General, after having consulted the Governing Council of the Special Fund, would appoint the Managing Director, subject to confirmation by the Assembly. This procedure has been construed as applying also to the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme.
By its decision 40/324 of 20 April 1986, the General Assembly confirmed the appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. William H. Draper III as Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme with effect from 1 May 1986, for a term of office ending on 31 December 1989.
Following consultations with members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, the Secretary-General now proposes that the appointment of Mr. William H. Draper III as Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme be extended for a four-year term until 31 December 1993.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves this proposal? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT! We have concluded our consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 17.
AGENDA ITEM 13
REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (A/44/4)
The PRESIDENT: May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of the report of the International Court of Justice?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I am extremely pleased to have this opportunity to announce the creation of the Secretary-General's Trust Fund to assist States in the settlement of disputes through the International Court of Justice.
As the Assembly knows, the settlement of disputes "by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law" constitutes an essential tool for the maintenance of international peace and security. The judgements of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, represent the world's most authoritative pronouncement on international law. The Court is also the principal organ for resolving legal disputes between States, and the Secretary-General therefore has a special responsibility to promote judicial settlement of such disputes through the Court.
When legal disputes arise between States over certain issues there may be instances where the parties concerned are prepared to seek settlement through the Court either of the entire dispute or of a component thereof, but cannot proceed because of a lack of legal expertise or funds. There may also be cases where the parties are unable to implement the Court's judgement for similar reasons. My purpose in creating this Trust Fund is therefore to make financial assistance
available to States where necessary to enable them to use the Court for the settlement of their legal differences. If even one aspect of a dispute is referred to the Court it may bring the whole situation closer to a solution. In this way, it is hoped. States will be encouraged to make even greater use of the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
Over the years various steps have been taken by the United Nations to promote and overcome obstacles to the settlement of disputes. The General Assembly has adopted a number of important instruments in this regard, including the Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning the Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes and, most recently, the Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten International Peace and Security and on the Role of the United Nations in this Field. These landmark instruments incorporate sets of valuable procedures, methods and measures which may be adopted by States, the General Assembly, the Security Council or the Secretary-General for the purpose of the peaceful settlement of disputes. The Trust Fund is intended to provide a practical means of overcoming financial obstacles to the judicial settlement of legal disputes by the Court.
I believe that as a matter of policy at the present stage only two categories of case should be considered as being eligible for financial assistance under the Trust Fund. The first would be cases submitted to the International Court of Justice by joint agreement of the parties concerned. This means that both the applicant and the respondent State must have agreed to submit their dispute to the Court. The Court's jurisdiction in these cases would therefore not be in Question and all parties concerned would be ready to proceed to a settlement. The secondary



category would be cases where both parties are ready to implement a judgement of the Court, hut one or both are unable to do so because of the lack of funds or expertise. 
The basic consideration underlying both categories is the requirement of consent of the parties concerned. In this connection, I note that the bulk of the Court's workload during this decade has been cases brought to it by joint agreement of the parties. I may add that the policy of making available the resources of the  Fund in cases where there is joint agreement is fully supported by the President and Judges of the Court. 
In order to ensure absolute impartiality, I intend to establish a panel of three high-level experts in connection with each request for financial assistance. The panels will examine applications and, where appropriate, make recommendations regarding the types of expenses to be covered and the amount of financial assistance to be awarded. Their work will be conducted with strict confidentiality, and in considering applications they will be guided solely by the financial needs of the requesting State and the availability of funds. Payments from the Fund will be made against receipts showing actual expenditure for approved costs. 
The Fund is established under the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. 

I now turn to the question of the resources for the Fund, which is to he financed by voluntary contributions. I sincerely hope that the Fund will attract as donors, States, intergovernmental organisations, national institutions and non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals and corporations. I should like to appeal to delegations to communicate this initiative to their Governments and to appeal to them to make financial contributions to the Fund. I believe it is a worthy cause and I urge them to do so. In the words of the President of the Court, this is an initiative towards
“the restoration of the Court to its rightful place among the principal organs of the United Nations, as provided by Chapters VI and XIV of the Charter". 
Sir Arthur WATTS (United Kingdom) : We have just heard the Secretary-General announce formally the creation of the Secretary-General's Trust Fund to assist States in their settlement of disputes through the International Court of Justice. When this idea was first mentioned in a press release last August, it was immediately clear that it was one of the most imaginative initiatives to be taken in relation to the International Court of Justice. 
The United Kingdom has been a consistent and staunch supporter of the rule of law in international relations. The rule of law - and the rule of international law, in particular - is indispensable to the maintenance of international peace and security. It is the counterpart to the principle of the non-use of force enshrined in the Charter of this Organization.
That same Charter declares as one of its principles that Meatier States "shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means", establishes the International Court of Justice as "the principal judicial organ of the United Nations", records the "consideration that legal disputes should as a general rule
(Sir Arthur Watts, United KingdoB) be referred by ths parties to the International Court of Justice” and provides that "all Markers of the United Nations are ipso facto parties to the Statute” of the Court.
The international rule of law requires no lassi indeed, it requires note. It requires in particular not only that there should exist a court to which legal disputes can be referred, but that access to that court should in reality be available to all States which seek it for the settlement of their international legal disputes. The international oosmunity still has some way to go in this respect, but it is possible to be optimistic.
Although the jurisdiction of the Court depends on the consent of the parties, it is possible for that consent to be given in advance by a declaration accepting as compulsory the Court’s jurisdiction. The United Kingdom is proud of its record as a State which has always accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, just as it deviously accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court's predecessor under the League of Nations, the Permanent Court of International Justice.
Although less than a third of the Members of the United Nations today accept the Court's compulsory jurisdiction, things are changing. In the last two years three more States have joined those already accepting the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Even at this current session of the Assembly two other States have announced their .intention to accept the Court's compulsory jurisdiction, and yet other States have recently announced their intention to accept the jurisdiction of the Court for the purposes of various multilateral conventions.
It is particularly encouraging that those States newly accepting the Court's jurisdiction come not from just one area of the world or one group of States but from all areas and all groups. This reflects in a very practical way the increasing attention being given to international law in several very constructive
JMM/7
(Sir Arthur Watts, United Kingdom}
proposals which have been put before the Assembly this year, as well as in other recent years. This trend we welcome whole-heartedly.
Having a court with a gradually growing acceptance of its jurisdiction does not fully satisfy the reouirement of the rule of law if other practical constraints on access to that court exist. Bringing a case to the Court, or defending one, and finally implementing its judgement can be a long, complex and very expensive business - and it is one which has to be paid for in often scarce hard currency. We are sure that in somejgkses reluctance to use the Court has been due to the costs involved.	'
The Trust Fund seeks to remedy the problem in a straightforward manner. It will not be a charter for plaintiff States. Assistance from the Fund, at least at first, will be available only in certain limited kinds of cases. This cautious approach is only prudent, and we note the proposals for ensuring absolute impartiality in administering the scheme* this is obviously a most important element of it. Whether the scheme should he developed later will depend on, among other things, how it works in practice. We shall be watching how it progresses and we will give it what help we can to ensure its success.
Of course, the best help that any State can give to the Trust Fund is not just words of support aid encouragement, it is money. I am therefore very pleased to announce that the United Kingdom will be making a significant financial contribiution to the Trust Fund. We are sure our contribution will be only the first of many and we call on other States to give strong support to the Trust Fund and show their commitment to the International Court of Justice and to the cause of international law and justice, and thus to the rule of law in international
relations
Ws*.?.,'-,
JW7
Mr. S. M. SY (Senegal) (interpretation fro* French)« The head of the
Senegalese delegation to this session has already had an opportunity on 4 October to convey to the President of the Asserbly the congratulations of the Head of State of Senegal md the Senegalese people on his unanimous election to the presidency of the General Assembly. However, I wish to reiterate our pleasure that he is guiding our work and to say how happy I a* that relations of brotherhood and co-operation bind his great country, Nigeria, to Senegal.
I take this opportunity also to reiterate to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier I^?es de Cuellar,* the tribute paid to hin by the Senegalese delegation for his tireless efforts to ensure the triumph of the Organisation’s ideals of peace and justice.
The statement just made by the Secretary-Ge. aral concerning the establishment of a Trust Fund to assist States to settle disputes through the International Court of Justice is further proof of his lofty sense of justice and peace.
(Mr. S. M. Sy, Senegal)
Senegal, a country which upholds the primacy of law, warmly welcomes thia commendable initiative which, without any doubt, will contribute to the strengthening of the rule of law in international relations.
^** United Nations has done a great deal since its establishment sore than 40 years ago to pronote an international order in which, through scrupulous respect for the law, the States and peoples of the world will live in peace in a spirit of good-neighbourliness. This objective, which for a long tine was viewed as an ideal to which the international community aspired, now seems to be sore attainable, thanks to the positive changes which have occurred in recent years in the international situation. After decades of confrontation and rivalry, States have realised that the solution of the problens facing then lies not in force but rather in dialogue, tolerance and co-operation.
The United Nations has played an irreplaceable catalysing role in this change by outlawing the threat or use of force and naking available to States th® legal franework within which to seek settlement of their disputes by peaceful means.
Without listing the numerous instruments and mechanisms which exist in this sphere, we wish to emphasize the increasingly important role of the International Court of Justice. The vitality of this body is the truest evidence of the power of law in international relations today. Senegal, which very early recognized the jurisdiction of the Court, in the terms of Article 36, paragraph 2 of its Statute, notes with satisfaction that a large nusber of States have in recent years accepted its rde in the settlement of disputes.
All of us must encourage this positive attitude to the Court, just as we should consider ways of increasing its effectiveness by making it more accessible and by respecting the legal force of its decisions. By making it easier for poorer
PKB/edd
(Mr. S. M. Sy, Sin^iU Stat«* to bring natter* before the Court and applying its decision® through the setting up of the Special TUnd, the Secretary-General has taken an important atop	\
in that direction.
Senegal, for its part, fully supports this welcome initiative, because we have made the primacy of law one ot the fundamental principles of our international end domestic policies. In the international sphere, my country's dedication to the purposes and principles of the Charter explains our practice of good-neighbourlines« and our irreversible commitment to respect the law and ensuring that others do so in the quest for peaceful solutions to our problems with States of the subregion. The well-known attitude of Senegal in support of the cause of human rights, together with our multi-party democratic political system, is the best evidence of the important part that law plays in the domestic policy of my country.
The Secretary-General’# efforts deserve the fullest support from State*. They have aroused great hope among small States and will considerably strengthen the role of the International Court of Justice and the rule of law in international relations. We must work together and pool our resources to ensure that these legitimate hopes are not frustrated and these prospects do not prove illusory.
I should lite to stress the particularly eloquent gesture of the United Kingdom representative in giving effect to this proposal.
The PRESIDENT! The Assembly has concluded its consideration of agenda item 13.
AGENDA ITEM 21 (continued) ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF PEACE (a) REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/615) (b) DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/44/L.16)
The PRESIDENT« I draw the attention of members to the fact that the text of the Declaration of Hunan Responsibilities for Peace and Sustainable Development has been distributed as an annex to document A/44/626.
As representatives may recall» the General Assembly has before it draft resolution A/44/L.16, which was introduced by the representative of Costa Rica at the 37th plenary meeting. I call on the representative of Costa Rica» who wishes to raise a point in connection with the draft resolution.
Mrs. CASTRO de BARISH (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish)« Taking into account the urgings of various delegations, the delegation of Costa Rica would be glad if consideration of draft resolution A/44/L.16 could be postponed. I wish to make it clear that this postponement should not be sine die« we hope that the draft resolution can be taken up very soon, for example next week. My delegation reserves the right to speak on that occasion in order to complete the introduction of the draft resolution, because on 24 October we merely indicated that, at the reauest of certain delegations which needed more time we had agreed to postpone consideration of the draft resolution to a later date, which was fixed for today. We hope very much that this will be the last time we have to ask for postponement of consideration of our proposal.
The PRESIDENT« In the light of the statement by the representative of Costa Rica consideration of draft resolution A/44/L.16 will be postponed to a date to be announced later.
AGENDA HEM 157
SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO CONSIDER THE QUESTION OF INTERNATIONAL	j
CO-OPERATION AGAINST ILLICIT PRODUCTION, SUPPLY, D34AND, TRAFFICKING AND DISTRIBUTION OF NARCOTIC DRUGS, WITH A VIEW TO EXPANDING THE SCOPE AND INCREASING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF SUCH CO-OPERATION
(a)	DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/44/L.12, A/44/L.19)
(b)	DRAFT DECISION (A/44/L.13)
(C) REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/695)
The PRESIDENT« At the request of the sponsors consideration of draft decision A/44/L.13 and drafts resolution A/44/L.19 is being postponed to a later date9 which will be announced in due course.
I call on the representative of Yugoslavia, who will introduce draft resolution A/44/L.12.
Mr. PEJIC (Yugoslavia)« Before I start ray introduction on the draft resolution on the convening of a special session of the General Assembly on narcotic drugs, I have to inform the General Assembly that the following countries have joined the sponsors of this important draft resolution* Belgium, Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Iceland, Japan, Luxembourg, Madagascar, the Netherlands, Oman, the Philippines, Singapore, fogo and TUrkey. The list of sponsors of this important draft resolution now nusbers 121, which in itself demonstrates the importance that the international community attaches to this serious problem of our time.
(Mr. Pejic» Yugoslavia)
Many speakers in the general debate at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly pointed to the more and more dramatic and disastrous effects of the problems caused by the illicit demand for* production of* trafficking in and consumption of narcotic drugs not only for the physical health of individuals but also for the well-being of entire segments of society* threatening the political* economic* cultural and social fabric of individual countries and sometimes even of entire regions. In this context* the current session has confirmed the unanimous assessment that this is a very complex problem of global proportions that requires a global approach and comprehensive measures.
The alarming estimate given in the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization that
"the monetary value of drug trafficking has recently surpassed that of international trade in oil and is second only to the arms trade" (A/44/1* p. 23)
is sufficient reason for deep concern and calls for urgent and resolute international action.
Assessing all the dimensions of this scourge* the non-aligned countries pointed out in the Declaration and the separate document on illicit drug trafficking adopted at their ninth summit Conference, in Belgrade, the dangerous, global proportions of this scourge and stressed that the struggle for its eradication was a coninon responsibility and called for co-operation by the entire international community.
This is a problem that, irrespective of the measures taken and the resolve demonstrated* cannot be stemmed by isolated campaigns on the national level. The struggle can be meaningful and effective only if it is based on effective and constructive measures of international co-operation, taking due account of the
(Mr, Pejic, Yugoslavia)	i
specific waya in which this problem is reflected in various countries and	j
environments. The crucial role in this struggle belongs to the United Nations and its specialized agencies, for, as President Barco of Colombia said in his important and memorable statement before the General Assembly,
"if this effort is not accompanied by a global commitment, then no victory can
be achieved". (A/44/PVo13, p. 6)
Bearing in mind the resolve with which Colombia has approached the eradication of this evil, regardless of threats and victims, President Barco's call for the convening of a special session of the General Assenbly devoted to broader aspects of the global problem of narcotic drugs has found a general positive echo and support.
As the representative of Yugoslavia, which is the current Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and a country that has made and continues to make a major contribution to the suppression and interdiction of illicit drug trafficking, I have been given the special honour of proposing to the General Assembly, on behalf of the now 121 sponsoring countries, the adoption by consensus of draft resolution A/44/L.12 on the convening of a special session of the General Assembly to discuss the question of international co-operation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs, with a view to expanding the scope and increasing the effectiveness of such co-operation.	•
This will testify in the best possible way to our shared concern and interest in putting an end to this dangerous scourge.
In the preambular part of the draft resolution the General Assembly expresses deep concern about the serious problem and the disastrous consequences of drug abuse for individuals and society caused by illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs. It recalls the statements made in
'	(Mr. Pejice Yugoslavia)
plenary meetings of the General Assembly during its forty-fourth session* including the address by the President of Colombia on 29 September, with his call for the convening of a special session of the General Assembly devoted to this problem.
In the operative part the General Assembly decides to hold a special session of the General Assembly* at a high political level* to consider as a matter of urgency the question of international co-operation in the struggle against illicit production* supply* demand* trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs* with a view to expanding the scope and increasing the effectiveness of such co-operation. The Secretary-General of the united Nations is requested to make the necessary administrative arrangements for the purpose of convening such a special session.
The sponsors earnestly hope that the draft resolution will be adopted unanimously.
I have been asked to inform this body - although this has been mentioned already by the President of the Assembly - that* in view of the wide and extensive consultations that are still going on to arrive at a genuine consensus on the preparatory process for the convening of the special session* action on draft decision A/44/L.13 and draft resolution A/44/L.19 will* by agreement* be deferred until a .later date.
Mr. BADMI (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic) t We meet today to consider a matter of grave concern. Narcotics are a scourge that has now spread throughout the world. They not only destroy the lives of individuals but also threaten political regimes* not to mention their economic and social effects on the very existence of society as a whole.
The call for the convening of a special session of the General Assenbly to address the issue of narcotics met with the immediate support of my country) therefore Egypt has joined the sponsors of draft resolution A/44/L.12.
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
Egypt, as a country in which narcotics are consumed and as a transit area, takes a comprehensive and varied approach to this problem. First, the authorities of the Ministry of the Interior are strengthening control over the sea and land borders, ports and airports. Secondly, Egypt has recently promulgated a new law on narcotics which, inter alia, provides for more stringent sanctions against traffickers and traders in drugs. The law decrees the death penalty as just punishment for such destructive acts, which undermine the whole social, political and economic fabric of society. Thirdly, Egypt has established rehabilitation and cure centres for drug addicts, as well as a fund for combating and treating addiction. This fund comes directly under the jurisdiction of the Prime Minister and is drawn from special provisions in the State budget and from fines and money and lands expropriated in lawsuits connected with narcotics. The fund is used to establish, equip and maintain rehabilitation centres and organize medical, psychological and social treatment for drug addicts.
Egypt's interest in narcotics also covers the regional area. It therefore participated in the Sub-Committee to Combat Narcotics in the Middle East. Internationally, Egypt maintains very close relations with the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control (UNFDAC).
(Mg. Badawi, Egypt)
We draw on the experience of the Fund particularly with regard to the monitoring of narcotic substances used for medical purposes. Because of Egypt's interest in the drug issue, it was keen to become a «ember of the Comission on Narcotic Drugs, tMle an Egyptian expert on drugs is a member of the International Narcotics Control Board.
The special session of the General Assembly on the question of drugs will be dealing with a serious issue, and it should be treated accordingly. That is why ay delegation believes that every guarantee should be provided that this is well prepared and will be a successful session. In this connection we make the following suggestions.
First, there should be wide-ranging, in-depth consulcations between the various States and regional groups so that each of then can contribute their own ideas and views on the basis of the experience they have accunulated in combating narcotics. This is indeed an issue of concern to the entire worlds it is not of concern to one State or a United nunber of States only.
Secondly, the preparations for the session should also involve the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the Economic and Social Council, the International Narcotics Control Board and UNFDAC, in view of their roles and experience in this sphere. These international bodies should each contribute to the session on the basis of its own practical experience, if we really want the special session of the General Assembly to be crowned with success and not simply confine itself to repetitive statements.
Thirdly, participation in this session should be at a high level. Participants should include both political decision-makers and those with practical experience in combating drug trafficking and drug addiction. A political decision
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt) is not in itself sufficient to resolve this problem. Rather, the decision should be the outcome of practical experience* it should be grounded on such experience and should take account of the precise data, statistics and information available.
We urge the General Assembly, so that the session may be properly prepared for, to establish the dates for the session on the basis of the practical, pragmatic considerations to which I have referred.
Mr. KHDRO (Pakistan)« Pakistan welcomes the proposal to convene a special session of the General Assembly to consider the question of international co-operation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs, with a view to expanding the scope and increasing the effectiveness of such operation. Pakistan was privileged to sponsor, along with many other countries, the request for the inclusion of an item on this issue in the agenda of the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
The problem of narcotic drugs in its various manifestations has emerged as one of the most dangerous threats to human civilization. This menace respects no boundaries or cultures. It is ruthless and devastating. In his moving address to the General Assembly on 29 September 1989, President Barco of Colombia drew attention to the grim situation created by the Colombian drug barons and the armed mercenaries employed by them. Rich and powerful drug barons pose a serious threat to democracy, not only in Colombia but also in Pakistan. A recent report in the newspaper The Times of London testified that the drug industry in Pakistan is
"a legacy from the era of the late General Zia, who turned a blind eye to drug activities in exchange for loyalty. All 40 of the main drug gangs have members who were senior public figures at that period."
It is beginning to overwhelm entire societies.
(Mr. Khoro, Pakistan)
Hie convening of a special session of the General Assembly to consider this question in its entirety is a timely expression of concern by the international community about the threat it poses to mankind. It is also an expression of the commitment of all States to strengthening and intensifying international co-operation in eradicating this scourge.
The title of the special session is indeed most appropriate. It recognizes the need tc remedy the problem in all its dimensions. It recognizes that the campaign against narcotic drugs has to be all-encompassing. The time has now come for the international community to join hands in launching a co-ordinated and comprehensive strategy to counter and eliminate this menace.
The newly elected Government of Pakistan, under the dynamic leadership of Prine Minister Benazir Bhutto, has launched a ¡aajor campaign against illicit drug abuse, trafficking and distribution. The Prime Minister in her first press conference, on 3 December 1988, expressed her Government's resolve to address this problem forcefully and announced the establishment of a separate Ministry to deal with it. Subsequently, the Narcotics Control Division, in the charge off a Minister of State, was set up in the Federal Government. The Division has been entrusted with the task of achieving the Government's policy objectives in all areas of drug-abuse control.
The Government of Pakistan is committed to achieving a drug—free society. In the past six kwim impressive progress has been made in this direction. During the current crop season the Government's call to poppy-growers voluntarily to destroy the poppy crop received positive response. In areas where persuasion failed to have an impact, stringent law enforcement measures were taken, as a result off which production off opium during the current season is estimated at approximately 100 tons, in contrast to the production figure of 205 tons during the 1987-88 crop season.

(Mr. Khoro, Pakistan)	j
The processing machinery is also being targeted for destruction. Since assuming power the new Government has neutralized 24 heroin laboratories in	i
addition to launching a major offensive against drug traffickers. The Narcotics Control Division is planning to set up a narcotics elite task force to strengthen	j
efforts to bring the traffickers to book.	I
I
we have also become a victim of narcotics addiction. Although Pakistan is a	!
traditional producer of opium and cannabis, the use of heroin was not known in our society until 1980, when the first cases of heroin abuse were reported. Since then the abuse has multiplied and over 1.9 million Pakistanis are currently estimated to be addicted to drugs.
(Mr. Khoro, Pakistan)
The Government is fully conscious of the devastating human and social toll of drug addiction. It has launched major programmes for treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts. An awareness programme has also been launched through the media to alert people to the need for community awareness and action. A Drug Abuse Prevention Resources Centre has also been set up under the Pakistan Narcotics Control Board to provide active support and encouragement to local, provincial and national efforts to free our society of the drug menace. Pakistan is also actively involved in regional efforts to curb illicit trafficking and abuse. On a proposal by Pakistan, the Fourth Summit Conference of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation designated 1989 their Year for Combating Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking.
The convening of the special session would constitute a landmark in the evolving global efforts to contain and eliminate the scourge of drug abuse and trafficking. We expect the special session to focus on the following aspects? first, the need to strengthen the will of the international community to combat the drug menace in all its forms# secondly, enhancing international co-operation in drug abuse control# thirdly, provision of additional resources to accelerate international action against the drug menace, in particular the provision of substantial resources to the developing countri« to strengthen their efforts regarding treatment, rehabilitation, and so on# and fourthly, co-ordination and streamlining of the activities of the United Nations system in this field.
Pakistan supports the proposal for the establishment of a preparatory committee of the whole for the special session to ensure appropriate and effective preparations. We also support the suggestion that the session be held in the third week of February next year.
Pakistan will participate actively in the preparatory process as well as in the special session. It will spare no effort in working for the complete success of that session.
The PRESIDENT» The report of the Fifth Committee regarding the programme budget implications of draft resolution A/44/L.12 is contained in document A/44/695.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A/44/L.12.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/44/L.12?
Draft resolution A/44/L.12 was adopted (resolution 44/16).
The PRESIDENT» We have concluded this stage of our consideration of agenda item 157.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISION.
A/M/PV. 54 16 Noveaber 1989
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session general assembly PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FIFTY-FOURTH MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 14 November 1989, at 10 a.m.
President:
later:
Mr. GARBA
Mr. JAYA (Vice-President)
(Nigeria)
(Brunei Darussalam)
Development and international economic co-operation (82) (continued)
(b) Trade and development: observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: draft resolution (A/44/L.39)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed ^n ^e Official Records of the General Assenbly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within cne week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64411A 4 721V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
AGENDA STEM 82 (continued)
DEVELOPMENT Ab© IN TERN ATONAL ECONOMIC 00-OPERATION
(b) TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT; OBSERVANCE OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE Ab© DEVELOPMENT: DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/44/L. 39)
The PRESIDBIT; This morning the Assembly, in accordance with the decision taken at its 3rd plenary meeting, will devote its meeting to the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade aid Development.
The Assembly has before it draft resolution A/44/L. 39 and a letter dated 13 November 1989 from the Permanent Representative of Mongolia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/44/726).
We meet today to commemorate the twenty-fifth year of the founding of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). TWenty-five years ago, Governments committed themselves to laying the foundations of a better world	j
economic order. Since its mandate was established by General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX), UNCTAD's role has evolved and the institution has responded to changing I conditions, needs and orientations, while maintaining its universal character and its development mission.
(The President)
Important agreements and policy advances have been achieved through intergovernmental negotiation in UNCTAD or by the influence of its work on the thinking and decisions of Governments and other international organizations.
UNCTAD’s achievements are indeed praiseworthy and it is fitting that they be recalled on the occasion of this anniversary. At the same time, however, it is appropriate to reflect on the significance of the commitment made by the founding Member States in the context of today’s world. It is a world in which fundamental changes are taking place and in which rapid progress is being recorded in all areas of human activity. But it is also a world characterised by certain adverse economic trends. Access to opportunities and benefits of economic expansion and technological advance remain unequal. The stagnation and retrogression in most developing countries, particularly the least developed and African countries, is often associated with debt overhang and the net transfer of resources to creditor countries. An international economic environment vitiated by weak multilateral disciplines in the areas of trade, money and finance, by protectionism and by wasteful consumption patterns threatens the resource base for sustainable development. If left unchecked, these trends could easily accentuate retrogression in many developing countries and neutralize hard-won gains in others. Worse still, because of the high degree of interdependence in the world economy, these weaknesses could well undermine the future economic stability of all countries.
The current situation is not devoid of hopeful signs. A number of positive elements are indeed detectable on the political, social and economic levels. They cannot, however, spontaneously coalesce to overwhelm the negative factors that are also present. They need to be managed if the objective of a healthy, secure and
(The President)
equitable world economy is to be attained. In -.his endeavour all countries should contribute, in proportion to their capacities, to the identification and implementation of complementary policies at the national and international levels. A major objective of these policies should be the revival of growth and development in those countries which have been stagnating, not only because it holds out the prospect of mutual benefit but also because equity and justice indeed demand it.
In this common effort UNCTAD, with its universal character and its integrated view of world development, has a prominent role to play. The challenge to UNCTAD has been identified by the Trade and Development Board in its recent Declaration issued on the occasion of this twenty-fifth anniversary. That document underlines the need for UNCTAD to bring
"fresh thinking to bear on long-standing problems and new areas of concern, with a view to promoting innovative policy measures".
This endeavour should contribute to the emergence of a new development consensus which recognizes the importance of the development of the third world for the world economy and for global peace and stability. It will need the continued support of all Member States. In this respect the willingness displayed by Governments to reach consensus at UNCTAD VII and at the recently concluded session of the Trade and Development Board are good omens which augur well for next year's special session of the General Assembly as well as for the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and UNCTAD VIII. I am confident that this same co-operative spirit will continue to prevail as UNCTAD pursues its historic mission into the next decade.
In closing, I wish to pay a particular tribute to His Excellency Mr. Kenneth Dadzie,who was the first Dir«ctor-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation ana is now ...c ~^cretary General of UNCTAD.

(The President) His personal commitment to the principles of UNCTAD has been, to say the least, very remarkable. We thank him for his dedication and selfless service. 
I now have the honour to call upon the Secretary General.
The SECRETARY GENERAL (interpretation from French): It is with great pride that I join in commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). Since its establishment as an organ of the General Assembly in 1964, UNCTAD has been a source of inspiration for the international dialogue on development and a major instrument for intergovernmental deliberation and negotiation on issues of international economic co-operation. The record of UNCTAD's achievements is impressive, testifying to its ability to adapt and respond to changing international realities and needs of Member States, particularly the developing countries.
These qualities which UNCTAD has demonstrated in the past will need to be applied with even greater effectiveness in the years ahead. Over the past few years some positive trends have emerged which, if suitably managed, could improve the functioning of the world economy. Even so, the next decade is likely to be marked by major uncertainties resulting from the rapid changes that have taken place in the structures and patterns of the world economy. The development dialogue, moreover, has suffered from a weakening of the political resolve to address problems on the basis of common interest, mutual benefit and collective responsibility. Most developing countries risk remaining on the periphery of the world economy, in view of their limited capacity to undergo rapid changes and their relatively small influence on the international decision-making process. The disparity between the rich and the poor persists and many developing countries, notably the least developed and the troubled debtor countries, are unable to break out of stagnation and poverty. 


If this course of events is to be reversed, the international community will need to demonstrate a renewed commitment to the ideals which inspired the founding fathers of UNCTAD. The challenge is to move purposefully towards a more healthy, secure and equitable world economy, to strengthen the foundations of development, and to enhance international economic relations for the benefit of all groups of countries through a consensus-building process in a multilateral framework. 
In UNCTAD the international community already possesses the means of identifying the actions that need to be taken if this challenge is to be met. Its mandate enables critical issues to be addressed in an interrelated way within a development perspective. Moreover, UNCTAD, with its universal membership, can bring a truly global viewpoint to bear on international economic questions. It is therefore well placed to contribute, together with the other international economic institutions, to action-oriented multilateral co-operation for development.
Recent developments in UNCTAD suggest that the necessary political will can be mobilized. The Final Act of UNCTAD VII and the Declaration adopted recently by the Trade and Development Board on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of UNCTAD are good examples of wide-ranging and innovative intergovernmental consensus. Such consensus, of course, is valuable only if it provides the basis for the adoption by Governments of concrete policy measures. Member States must therefore step up their collective efforts to meet the challenges inherent in the establishment of UNCTAD - namely, to lay the foundations of a better world economic order. I am confident that Member States will continue to give UNCTAD the political support it must have to fulfil its development mission. 
The PRESIDENT: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Monyane Phoofolo of Lesotho. who will sneak on behalf of the Group of African States. 
Mr. PHOOFOLO (Lesotho)t Mr. President, we continue to be most satisfied with the most able manner in which you steadfastly continue to steer, with grace, the affairs of this Assenbly. We welcome and endorse your praiseworthy statement, as well as that of our revered Secretary-General, on this auspicious occasion.
It is a great honour for me to speak on behalf of the African Group on this special occasion - the celebration of the silver jubilee of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). Let me at the outset express our full support for the statement that will be made by the Chairman of the Group of 77,
At this juncture, we wish to pay a tribute to the Secretary General of UNCTAD, Mr. Kenneth Dadzie, for the able manner in which he has continued to champion the cause of the institution since his appointment. His untiring efforts in this endeavour are a clear demonstration of the trust and confidence placed in him by the international community. In the same breath we wish to pay our homage to UNCTAD's previous leaders - Raul Prebisch, Manuel Perez Guerrero and Gamani Corea -who so excellently guided the affairs of the institution. They have indeed earned their place in the history of the United Nations.
The establishment of UNCTAD in 1964 marked the beginning of a new era in the evolution of international co-operation, particularly in the field of trade and development. Such co-operation was to serve as a decisive instrument for ending the division of the world into areas of affluence and intolerable poverty. The establishment of UNCTAD demonstrated clear recognition by the international community that the time was ripe in the United Nations for the negotiation of new principles and standards to govern relations between developing and industrialized countries.
For Africa, UNCTAD was born a little over a year after the formation of Africa’s continental organization - the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The
(Mg. Phoofolo, Lesotho) OAU was therefore a clear manifestation of recognition of the need for a new international economic order to ensure a rapid pace of development for all developing countries.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of UNCTAD provides us, the Menbers of this Organization, with an opportunity to reflect on the past and, more important, to look to the future.
Since UNCTAD’s founding the international environment has changed dramatically. The 1980s in particular have been a lost decade for the developing countries as a whole, especially for the countries of Africa. Despite this, UNCTAD has demonstrated a capacity for research, conceptual innovation and policy analysis which has enabled the Institution successfully to generate new ideas on international policies for trade, finance and money.
Among UNCTAD's concrete achievements we can refer to the crucial areas of its activities in commodities, notably the Integrated Programme for Commodities, which led to the recent entry into force of the Common Fund for Commodities* in shipping, particularly the Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, the aim of which is to enable developing countries, particularly African countries, to have a fair share of their sea-borne trade* international monetary issues* the debt problem, in particular the initial introduction by UNCTAD of the concept of debt reduction* the Global System of Trade Preferences among developing countries* the Substantial New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries* and a legal agreement on South-South co-operation. Mention must also be made of the contribution of UNCTAD to the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, that is, to next year.
(Mr. Phoofolo, Lesotho)
For Africa the commemoration of the birth of UNCTAD is an opportunity once again to draw the attention of the international community to the worsening and very special problems of development that continue to face Africa. In this connection the relevance and significance of the role of this institution becomes even more apparent.
Recent projections for the world economy for the 1990s present a picture of a decade that is not very different from that of the 1980s. The social and political fabric of most of the developing countries, particularly Africa, could hardly stand another decade of arrested development. To this end UNCTAD should continue to play a leading role in the search for new ideas and solutions to these forthcoming challenges. The international community, for is part, must at this silver jubilee renew its commitment, to the mandate which WCTAD was established to fulfil. The recent faltering of multilateralism and the trend towards bilateralism will have to be reversed if UNCTAD is to face the new challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. UNCTAD will continue to claim its primary legitimacy in shaping international economic relations on the basis of its universality.
We are hopeful, therefore, that blockages by some countries resulting from their reluctance to discuss certain developmental strategies nay be a feature of the past. In this context, we wish to draw the attention of members of the Assembly to the commodity sector in African economies. Most African countries depend very such on primary commodities, but practically all the commodities of particular interest to Africa continue to be subjected to constant pressure in terms of the low prices they fetch in international markets. This has resulted in a deterioration in the terms of trade» hence the continuing balance-of-payments difficulties of the region. In this respect the African countries attach
(Mr. Phoofolo, Lesotho) great importance to the establishment by the Secretary General of UNCTAD, of the expert group on African commoditiy problems. We are hopeful that whatever recommendations the group may come up with will be vigorously pursued by all those concerned in order to resolve the deep-rooted difficulties that confront the African commodity sector.
The external debt problem of the African countries cannot be over-emphasized. In this regard, the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity (ONJ), meeting at its 49th ordinary session in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, last February, adopted a resolution on the convening of at international seminar on Africa’s common position on the external debt crisis. The seminar is intended to map out a common strategy with a view to preparing and guaranteeing the success of an international conference on Africa's external indebtedness, which Africa has been proposing for the some time new. To this end the African region wishes to reiterate its call for such an international conference.
We cannot end this statement without mentioning the least develolped countries, the majority of which are in Africa. These countries continue to face formidable structural handicaps and to experience extreme deterioration in their overall socio-economic situation, in spite of the significant policy measures which they have undertaken pursuant to the Substantial New Program!» of Action for the 1980s. In this context we urge UNCTAD to continue to search for appropriate solutions to the ever mounting problems of the least developed countries. We look forward to the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in 1990, and are grateful to UNCTAD for the role it is playing in the preparations for the Conference. We are hopeful that the Conference will result in new international initiatives through a new programme of action for those countries.
(Mr. Phoofolo, Lesotho)
I conclude by wishing UNCTAD every success in the future, for the challenges that lie ahead are indeed formidable for all Governments and for the Secretariat. We hope that UNCTAD will continue to play its role with dynamism. Together we shall be able to build a better world in which to live.
}^, PRffSI,DENT* I call on His Excellency, Dato Paduka Haji Jaya Bin Abdul Latif, of Brunei Darussalam, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
M£.JAYA (Brunei Darussalam), Chairman of the Group of Asian States: On behalf of the Aslan States, it gives me great pleasure to address this special plenary meeting to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). The Group of Asian States with profound pride joins the entire international community in remembering this occasion. I wish to associate myself with the President of the Assembly and the Secretary-General of the United Nations in their expressions of satisfaction for the work of UNCTAD.
UNCTAD was established 25 years ago with the task of promoting international trade, formulating and implementing principles and policies on international trade and addressing attendant problems, with the objective of accelerating the economic growth of developing countries. The commemoration this year once again stresses the effectiveness of UNCTAD as a major instrument in international economic co-operation. In the existing state of international relations multifaceted in its problems and its ramifications, the inception of UNCTAD illustrated a distinctively creative imagination in the development of a mechanism vital for the enhancement of international co-operation, especially in the field of trade and development. As an institution, UNCTAD has served the world community through studies, reviews and the handling of issues related to trade and development. It has very ably demonstrated a capacity for research, conceptual innovation and policy analysis prescriptions, from which the Asian States have benefited greatly. Asian States have participated actively in the studies and contributed immensely to the policy-making and negotiation at previous conferences of UNCTAD.
MB/jl
(Mr. Jaya, Brunei Darussalam)
The achievements of UNCTAD have been both very impressive and extensive. Significant among them are measures in trade policies, covering areas such as preferential tariffs, non-reciprocity and the generalized system of preferences (GS?| and the global system of trade preferences (GSTP) amoag developing countries. In the area of commodities, concrete action by UNCTAD culminated in the establishment of the Conanon Fund. Other milestones were also attained in the sphere of money and finance, analysis and policy advice in respect of indebtedness as well as technical assistance in the management of debt, codes and regulation in shipping, technology transfer, services, problems of the least developed countries and trade development among developing countries.
The Asian States have strong reasons to count on the dynamism of UNCTAD. The Asian region is vast and populous. It is richly endowed with natural resources, but it also has constraints whether inherent or imposed. While having special problems with special characteristics, as part of a larger community of developing countries the Asian States are by no means insulated from the global economic pattern. In the same landscape the problems of poverty, indebtedness and underdevelopment exist alongside affluence and export-led growth economies depicting a contradictory phenomenon. Therefore, it is hoped that the innovative initiative of UNCTAD in seeing opposing tendencies along the same continuum can contribute to their reconciliation.
Moreover, the changing international environment affects the Asian States in a number of ways; but the most prominent is the imbalance in world economic development. Economic growth in the 1980s has mainly been in the developed countries. Meanwhile, developing countries as a whole have registered only a slight growth in their economies. Except for a few countries and regions which experienced a relatively good economic performance, most developing countries are
(Mr. Jaya, Brunel Darussalam) suffering iron stagnation and severe economic difficulties. This is compounded by a deteriorating external economic environment and the escalation of trade protectionism, the weakening of commodity prices, heavy debt burdens and financial problems. With such a magnitude of problems the work of USICTAD is even greater now. The agenda before UNCTAD remains relevant, especially in an era of imbalances, inequity and growing interdependence and interaction among nations.
In contrast to the positive statements made in the general debate pertaining to the international political climate, the global economic environment as described earlier is still a cause for concern,, It is therefore important that UNCTAD should continue to focus its attention on priority areas that will bring international economic relations among States to a new height of co-operation and harmony. In an era when interdependence is not only a habit of mind but also deeply stratified in a complex web of institutional linkages and personal contacts, the conferences of UNCTAD can productively garner energies and knowledge from these linkages and serve as a conduit for future co-operative endeavours. Problems which persistently afflict the Asian economies such as in commodities - price stabilisation, production, trade protectionism and market access - and the formulation of a development-oriented debt strategy are examples of problems which require a rapid solution if economic imbalances between developing and developed countries are to be effectively remedied.
I should like to conclude by quoting the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency, Javier Perez de Cuellar, in the UNCTAD Bulletin of October 1989. He stated that for UNCTAD,
"The challenge is to improve the health and stability of the world economy, to strengthen the foundations of development and to enhance international economic relations for the benefit of all groups of countries
I
PKB/jl	A/44/PV.54	¡
19	!
(Mr. Jaya, Brunei Darussalam) through a consensus-building process in a multilateral framework. The pursuit of these economic objectives is intertwined with the ongoing search for peace and security in the world; together they form an indivisible whole." (UNCTAD Bulletin, September-October 1989, p. 5)
The task is onerous both for the international community and UNCTAD. However, we believe that UNCTAD will adapt and react to the challenges of realizing the above objectives.
The PRESIDENT; I call on His Excellency Mr. Evzen Zapotocky, of Czechoslovakia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. ZAPOTOCKY (Czechoslovakia), Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States; On behalf of the delegations of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and my own country, it gives me great pleasure to address this commemorative meeting and tc congratulate Mr. Kenneth Dadzie, Secretary General of the United Hâtions Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), and through him the entire secretariat, on the twenty-fifth anniversary of this organization. We cannot fail to mention on this occasion the illustrious contribution to the work of UNCTAD of all the prevous Secretaries General - Raul Prebisch, Manuel Perez-Guerrero and Gamani Corea, who by their work laid the foundation upon which the present development of UNCTAD as an organization has been built.
UNCTAD was set up by the General Assembly in December 1964 as one of its permanent organs mandated to promote international trade, particularly that of developing countries, with a view to accelerating their economic growth and
(Mr. Zapotocky, Czechoslovakia) development. When evaluating its activities over the past quarter of a century we cannot fail to note that UNCTAD has successfully pursued the aims for which it was created.*
Mr. Jaya (Brunei Darussalam), Vice-President, took the Chair,

Its tasks still remain valid, however, especially in view of the complexity of the difficulties facing the international community nowadays. UNCTAD has proved its viability and established itself as the most important organ of the General Assembly for international trade and development issues. UNCTAD’s distinguishing feature is its universality both in terms of the number of participants engaged in its work and in terms of the scope of the problems with which it is called upon to deal.
The universal character of UNCTAD enables the entire range of problems of international trade and economic development to be examined in their close interconnection and interdependence and - what is most important - in the light of the interests of all the participating countries. With the emergence of this organization a fresh page was turned in the conceptual and institutional approach to the development of international economic relations,
UNCTAD has made no small contribution to the constructive discussion of international trade and development issues and the elaboration of effective measures for the resolution of problems in this field. A number of important documents have been adopted under its auspices. Many of its decisions and recommendations are of a practical nature and are furthering the development of international economic relations on the basis of mutual advantage.
The countries for which I am speaking are unanimous in recognizing that UNCTAD plays an important conceptual role in the elaboration of the strategic orientations of international economic development. This was apparent in particular in the elaboration of principles governing international trade relations and trade policies conducive to development which subsequently became the basis for the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States. The Charter, in its turn, showed new ways of reforming international economic relations.
The role of UNCTAD in the elaboration of measures for regulating international commodity trade is indisputable. The adoption of the Integrated Programme for Commodities was an important contribution to that process.
The Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities, which came into force in June of this year, was a practical contribution by UNCTAD to the stabilization of commodity markets and the creation of conditions for safeguarding the economic security of States.
The Conference’s seventh session, at which measures were worked out to overcome critical trends that had begun to emerge in the work of the organization in the first half of the 1980s, was an important stage in the development of UNCTAD. That session confirmed UNCTAD's role in the modern system of international economic organizations and defined a number of new directions for its work.
In view of the fundamentally new stage of development on which the international economy is enbarking, our countries consider that the need is now coming to the fore to internationalize approaches to the solution of the problems that exist here.
Traditionally, in order to resolve differences between States, it has sufficed to find a balance between particularly national interests. Today, however, the balance will be unstable if attempts are made to build it otherwise than on the basis of interests common to all humanity.
Genuine equilibrium and stable interdependence can be achieved only on the basis of mutually complementary action. The objective process of the formation of an integral work economy requires a shift to a qualitatively new level of multilateral economic partnership.
We are in favour of businesslike, unprejudiced co-operation, of resolving global economic problems by joint efforts and of making effective use of the existing machinery for multilateral economic co-operation.
Our countries are convinced that UNCTAD should play a more important role as a forum for universal economic dialogue and the constructive search for optimal solutions to the principal problems of international economic relations.	j
With its experience, its great intellectual potential and its universal
character, UNCTAD can serve towards the management of interdependence with a view	i
to augmenting predictability, stability, reliability and economic ties among States^ guaranteeing mutual benefit in world economic exchanges: accelerating a solution of the global problem of external indebtedness: and, in the final analysis, improving the social conditions of all peoples.
We appreciate the role of UNCTAD in alleviating the difficult situation of the least developed countries. The Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, elaborated under the auspices of UNCTAD, has helped to consolidate the efforts of the world community and of this group of countries. A further impulse to the solution of the problems of the least developed countries should come from the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, which is scheduled for next year and for which extensive preparations are under way in UNCTAD.
UNCTAD has great potential to assist in the elaboration and implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade and should continue to act as a United Nations conceptual centre with regard to questions of international economic co-operation and development.
In addition to issues already mentioned, others, such as invisibles and financing, transfer of technology and shipping, should receive UNCTAD's continued attention.
The successful filfilment of UNCTAD's new tasks is impossible without close co-operation with other international organisations specializing in different	1
aspects of contemporary economic relations, such as the General Agreement on
(Mr. Zapotocky» Czechoslovakia) Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), and with other multilateral forums both within and outside the United Nations system.
Our countries, bearing in mind their social and economic development strategies aimed at more active participation in the international division of labour, are willing, within the framework of UNCTAD, to continue to make a constructive contribution to the solution of the urgent economic problems of the present age.
Our countries hope that the experience UNCTAD has accumulated in the 25 years of its existence will enable the organization to discharge successfully the new tasks arising from the current stage of world economic development.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Charles Flemming, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. FLEMMING (Saint Lucia): We, the States members of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, take particular pleasure in this commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) because we played such a catalytic role in its establishment and then gave of our best minds, in the persons of Raul Prebisch and Manuel Perez-Guerrero, to help sustain it after its nascence.
From the 1962 Cairo Conferenc on Problems of Developing Countries, which for many reasons was attended by only 36 developing countries, to the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 1785 (XVII) in December of the same year calling for the holding of UNCTAD I in 1964, we are quite proud of this now 168-member organization which has played such a dynamic role in world development by giving effect to the basic Prebisch philosophy of "converging measures", that is, the promotion of economic development and trade through international co-operation within the United Nations framework.
(Mr. Flemming, Saint Lucia)
UNCTAD was born 25 years ago, at a time of economic and political reassessment in the developing world, a time when the march of independence was bringing new efforts at changing neo-mercantilistic relationships, a time when we in Latin America and the Caribbean were seeking to redefine and restructure, within the purview of dependencia theory, the traditional core-periphery relationship which seriously impeded our economic growth and potential for capital formation.
As enunciated at the first conference, UNCTAD emerged at a time of great imbalances in the world economy caused by, inter alia, the disparity between the rate of growth of the developing world’s primary products and that of their import of industrial goods. This was further aggravated by a number of factors, including the increased use of synthetics in the industrial centres, thereby lowering demand for primary products# great elasticity of price for raw materials as compared with industrial goods and services; and the rapid modernisation and high protection of agriculture in many developed market economies.
If all of that sounds familiar it is because we have come full circle, or, as we say in French, plus ça change, plus ç*est la même chose. After having made some significant gains in the intervening decades we are again facing the economic problems we faced in 1964. But I hasten to add that the situation would have been far, far bleaker without the Tolystoyan work performed by UNCTAD under the leadership of Gamani Corea and now our good friend Kenneth Dadzie.
It is difficult to overestimate or auantify the contribution of UNCTAD to the developing countries in the areas of trade, money and finance over the past quarter century. In Latin America and the Caribbean we are especially grateful for the , enhanced framework for economic and technical co-operation among developing
I
(Mr. Flemming, Saint Lucia) countries facilitated by UNCTAD -» as, for example, in the current Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations and the preparation for the second round of negotiations in the global system of trade preferences.
Coming as it does at the end of this decade, which has been at best a difficul*- one for the developing countries, the twenty-fifth anniversary of UNCTAD should bring us new hope of a fairer, more eaualitarian economic relationship between North and South.
We in the Latin America and Caribbean Group plan to dedicate ourselves in the 1990s to the principles adopted by the Trade and Development Board in its resolution 376 (XXXVI) - that is, to pledge ourselves to give UNCTAD the necessary political support to make it a more effective and responsive instrument of international co-operation for trade, growth and development, particularly of developing countries.
The PRESIDENT: I now call upon Mr. Erik Tellmann, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. TELLMANN (Norway): On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States permit me to join others in paying tribute to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) on the occasion of its twenty-fifth anniversary.
On occasions like this it is normal to take stock of achievement, to try to see where we are and, not least important, to see where we are going. Let me try to do this, without going too much into detail.
No other organization, inside or outside the United Nations system, has been so intimately connected with what we for some time have been calling the
(Mr. Tellmann, Norway) North-South dialogue. With UNCTAD the notion of development was joined to that of world trade. Its mandate allowed it to treat questions over the whole range of international economic issues, focusing particularly on their relation to the economic and social development of developing countries. It was only natural that UNCTAD as an institution saw it as its role to promote the weaker parties on the world economic scene.
Through the generation of new ideas and perspectives, in focussing international debates, in emphasizing the interdependence of issues, as an important negotiating forum - in all these ways - UNCTAD has played a unique and important role in forging dialogue and co-operation with regard to trade and development in changing economic and political circumstances.
That is not to say that all expectations and aspirations have been fulfilled. That would be impossible. The past decade especially has been a difficult one for a large number of developing countries. Yet today - or rather over the last couple of years since UNCTAD VII - we may discern a growing international convergence of views on central elements of economic policy. It may be that recent developments in international affairs will have a positive influence also in the economic field. In this context we think it worth while to underline the fact that
"more countries in all parts of the world are making use of market signals and competitiveness in promoting entrepreneurial initiative and in optimizing the contributions of the public and private sectors" (A/44/L.39, annex, para.5) as stated in the Declaration of the Trade and Development Board on the occasion of UNCTAD's anniversary a few weeks ago.
(Mr, Tellmann, Norway)
UNCTAD has over the years by and large been able to adapt to changing circumstances. It should be borne in mind, however, that the degree to which UNCTAD can stay in the forefront of these changes is clearly determined by the political will and consensus among Members States.
(Mr. Tellmann, Norway)
Speaking for the industrialized countries, I think this is the occasion to acknowledge that we accept UNCTAD’s preoccupation with the concerns of developing countries. The organization - the only one in its field with universal meirbership - has always been in the forefront in focusing on the interrelationship of issues and interdependence. The need for a forum in which all issues and problems can be regarded and discussed as a tfiole will certainly not diminish in the years ahead of us. Even if there is a certain convergence of views on economic policy, there is an increasing risk that a two-track world economy is being created at a time of rapid technological change and threatening environmental degradation on an unprecedented scale and that some countries will not be able to break the vicious circle of poverty and underdevelopment.
In the same way as we as countries must respond to new challenges and opportunities ahead and adjust to the more competitive and more open international environment that may be discerned, so must UNCTAD. We, the international community as a whole, need UNCTAD to be on top and preferably ahead of developments? both analytically as a forum for the exchange of views and experiences and, when appropriate, as a forum for negotiating concrete solutions to problems falling within its mandate.
We as a group take this opportunity to renew a pledge made in Geneva a few weeks ago to pursue in UNCTAD and elsewhere innovative ways to stimulate sustainable development for all countries and to contribute to accelerating the growth and development of the developing countries. We reaffirm our commitment and political support for the objectives of UNCTAD.
The PRES ID ENT, I call on the representative of Malaysia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and, in the course of his statement, introduce draft resolution A/44/L.39.
Mr. RAZALI (Malaysia): The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) occupies a central position within the Group of 77, not merely as a result of our common birth but more because of UNCTAD’s contributions to the cause of developing countries. Indeed, in recognition of the special relationship and contribution, delegations paid a glowing tribute to UNCTAD during the special ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 held in Caractis in June this year to conmemórate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the Group of 77. UNCTAD has been an ally of the developing countries and we look forward to an enhanced relationship in the years ahead.
We also wish to take this opportunity to record our deep appreciation of the work and efforts undertaken by the present and former Secretaries General of UNCTAD and the menbers of its secretariat. They have all contributed to the successful initiatives and endeavours of UNCTAD with which the Group of 77 has been most closely associated.
As my colleague, Ambassador Barnett, Permanent Representative of Jamaica and Chairman of the Group of 77 in Geneva, recently stated at UNCTAD's twenty-fifth anniversary commemoration in Geneva that 25 yt. rs of work and achievement cannot be recounted here in minutes. Nevertheless, I should like to highlight the hallmark achievements of UNCTAD since its inception, as follows, ground-breaking work in trade, covering areas such as preferential tariffs, non-reciprocity, the Generalized System of Preferences and the Global System of Trade Preferences among developing countries? a significant contribution in the areas of commodities, aptly
(Mr. Razall, Malaysia) reflected in the establishment of the Common Fund) the establishment of a target for official development assistance» analysis and policy recommendations in respect of external debt, and technical assistance in the management of debt; codes and regulations in shipping and trade restrictive business practices» and work in connection with technology transfer, services problems of the least developed countries and economic co-operation among developing countries.
We are now witnessing a changing external environment brought about by, among other things, a lessening of tensions between the super-Powers, regionalization of developed countries and the current developments in the socialist world. The Group of 77 hopes that these developments will bring in their wake conditions conducive to economic growth and development. In this regard, given its 25 years of experience, UNCTAD could certainly make invaluable contributions.
As we prepare to enter a new decade within the next six weeks, we must be aware of the availability of a number of important opportunities for laying a firm foundation for the future. These opportunities include: the special session of the General Assenbly devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular to the revitalization of economic growth and development of the developing countries» the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries» the Uruguay Round, now in its penultimate stages» the fourth international development strategy» and UNCTAD VIII.
The Group of 77 is convinced that UNCTAD, with its multisectoral mandate, must be at the forefront of our collective search to ensure a coherent aid Integrated approach to the issues to be addressed in these and other forums in an era of increasing interdependence.
(Mr. Razall, Malaysia)
UNCTAD and the Group of 77 have closely interacted throughout the last 25 years. The Group of 77 will continue to work closely with UNCTAD and with all others committed and devoted to the cause of economc growth and development, particularly in developing countries.
Finally, on behalf of the Group of 77, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.39, entitled, "Twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development", for consideration by the General Assembly. The thrust of the draft resolution is essentially procedural. It endorses the Declaration adopted by consensus in Geneva chiring the first part of the thirty-sixth session of the Trade and Development Board on the twenty-fifth anniversary of UNCTAD, which was recently adopted by consensus in Geneva during the Board's meeting. The Group of 77 sincerely hopes that our partners will be able to co-operate with us in adopting the draft resolution by consensus.
The PRESIDENT: I call on Ambassador Blanc of France, who will speak on behalf of the States menbers of the European Community.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French)* I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Community and its menber States as we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develpment (UNCTAD).
I wish to affirm the importance that our countries attach to the initiative that led to the establshment of UNCTAD. It seems to us that UNCTAD’s value lies in the dual nature of its activities, which, while essentially based on reflection, also lead to action. In its 25th year UNCTAD is evolving in a period favourable to its role in international economic co-operation.
(Mr. Blancy France)
UNCTAD is a focal point for the discussion of international economic problems. It draws its specific features from its comprehensive, universal and permanent nature.
First, it promotes an awareness of reality in a nunber of a.eas. Thus, in the course of a series of conferences we have seal the emergence of new developments that have called into question ideas that were widely accepted in the 1950s.
Take, for example, the progressive evolution of our approach to development. The exchanges made possible by UNCTAD meetings have enabled us bo harmonize our views on the consistent nature of two phenomena, the growth of newly industrialized countries and the severe handicaps of the least developed countries.
(Mr. Blanc, France)
This economic forum is also conducive to the development of new ideas. I have in mind in particular our consideration, which is only at an initial stage, of economic interdependence, the repercussions of which are still only partially perceived. As the Community has stated on many occasions, this fact of life places constraints on all of us and also inspires unprecedented hopes. In particular, the study of this subject should inspire a new approach to questions related to international economic co-operation. The concept of interdependence has already spawned many discussions, and UNCTAD is a prime forum for more thorough consideration of the matter.
Furthermore, UNCTAD enables us, in the course of the dialogue conducted within it, to dispel certain ambiguities and misunderstandings that hamper development. The last decade, whose disappointing results in this field are bitterly discussed, suffered in that respect from overly ambitious or dogmatic positions on the role and the resources of international organizations. It is also regrettable that these differing approaches have prompted other States to react by rejecting multilateral forums. It seems to us that this stage is being left behind in favour of a new spirit on all sides and that the calmer atmosphere that prevails on this occasion places the institution in a position to play a greater role.
Globally, the progress recorded in recent years seems encouraging. Both the work and the conclusions of the seventh session of UNCTAD and the last session of the Trade and Development Board reflect a relative convergence of views. The fact that the Board succeeded in adopting a joint declaration on the future of UNCTAD is indeed a result to be commended.
In order to draw the greatest possible benefits from this progress, the European Community has affirmed that this twenty-fifth anniversary should be an occasion for reviewing the working methods of the Conference. It should aim at
(Mr. Blanc, France) bringing about a dialogue that is less formal and rigid, one oriented towards specific goals: the success of the newly industrialized economies, the delayed growth of the least developed countries, interdependence, the adjustment experience and so on. Its main contribution would be to go beyond the somewhat bureaucratic setbacks encountered over the years and to avoid making its work unduly solemn and thus creating a tendency to cast positions in stone.
The work of UNCTAD will enable us, if the present spirit of dialogue flourishes, to deal better with international economic problems by learning from our differences. The thrust and the calibre of the thinking in this regard should enable us to obtain valuable results. We are indeed pleased that recent years have brought a better definition of the respective functions of UNCTAD and other bodies. The role of UNCTAD is, above all, to define aspirations and projects the implementation of which is the responsibility of others. In this connection, it has major responsibilities which it must shoulder without hesitation.
The record of UNCTAD activities is already rich and varied. Now we must complete what has been begun and continue on the course that has now been charted. To this end the European Community cannot emphasize too strongly the fact that UNCTAD must be extremely careful in defining its objectives. The effort reflected in the Geneva Declaration of last October, we believe, must be continued. Such consistency will make it possible to avoid both duplication of the work of other organizations and unrealistic statements. If the eighth session of UNCTAD is held on the basis of a clear and unambiguous mandate, it will have concrete, realistic and practical results.
The European Community will maintain its commitments, as it has consistently, with regard to the application of the generalized system of preferences and official development assistance. We hope, as a primary contributor of assistance
■	I
(Mg. Blane, France)
to the developing countries and in particular to the least developed countries,	i
that the future work of UNCTAD will offer a framework in which our Community action and our national policies can fit harmoniously. It will be essential that the	I
roles of the different categories of States, international organizations and non-governmental organizations and the private sector be understood esplicity enough to avoid some of the misunderstandings of the past.
In this new dynamic, we hope that UNCTAD will provide ways of responding practically and effectively to certain major challenges, such as that of the least developed countries. These States, especially those of sub-Saharan Africa, should remain the object of our concern. Furthermore, questions of debt and the environment can be better tackled if the efforts of UNCTAD are joined to those made elsewhere. In the short term the entry into force of the Common Fund for Commodities and its follow-up will provide additional work for UNCTAD, without prejudice to other future work in the same field. Lastly, in the longer term, we must reflect on the modalities of international co-operation which can reduce the present financial and trade imbalances, with all States completely fulfilling their responsibilities.
That is the productive future that the Community and its member States wish UNCTAD on the occasion of its twenty-fifth anniversary. It must remain one of the active and dynamic forums of the United Nations system. We can give an assurance that the members of the European Community are prepared to work towards that end.	।
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of China, His Excellency	’
Ambassador Li Luye.
Mr. LI Luye (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, please allow me to thank the President of the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session and the Secretary-General of the United Nations for their excellent statements.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
.	~	„ _______________d
(Mr. Li Luye, China)
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. We are joyfully gathered here today at this meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate this significant event. I now have the honour to extend, on behalf of the Chinese Government, our warmest congratulations to UNCTAD.
UNCTAD was founded thanks to the active initiative and vigorous promotion of the vast numbers of developing countries and in response to the need of world economic development. An event of major significance in the international economic relations, its inception reflected the strong desire of the developing countries for developing national economies and improving international economic relations following their achievement of political independence. It also marked the beginning of a new stage in the economic co-operation among States.
UNCTAD’s record of the past 25 years is one of growing and maturing, and of making continuous progress with an enterprising spirit. Already the most universal intergovernmental body in the world, UNCTAD has to date held seven conferences, adding illustrious pages to the annals of international development.
(Mr. Li Luye, China)
It has worked tirelessly and made positive contributions to improving international economic relations: fostering world trade and development - especially that of the developing countries, promoting North-South dialogue, strengthening South-South co-operation, and pushing for the establishment of a new international economic order.
In keeping with the mandate given it by General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX), UNCTAD has made outstanding contributions to the formulation and implementation of the principles and policies concerning international trade and relevant development issues. Such principles and policies have found expressions in important documents on international economic relations, which have been widely accepted by the international community, such as the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of the New International Economic Order, the International Development Strategy, and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States. As an organ of negotiations, UNCTAD has formulated, or sponsored the formulation of, the relevant principles, policies and agreements in the fields of commodities, trade, finance, technology transfer, maritime shipping, and economic co-operation between developing countries and the least-developed countries, and has achieved remarkable results. The well-known Generalised System of Preferences (GSP), the Integrated Programme for Commodities, the Common Fund for Commodities, and resolution 165 (S-IX) on debt and development problems of the developing countries are but some of the notable examples.
The history of the past quarter of a century has proved that UNCTAD has become an indispensable forum and a place of negotiations in world economic affairs and its importance has been universally recognized by the international community.
The 1990s are setting in. In the years to come UNCTAD will have to shoulder important and arduous tasks. In recent years the international political scene has witnessed a shift from tension to relaxation and from confrontation to
(Mr. Li Lu ye, China) dialogue, which has created a favourable climate for world economic co-operation. But the world economy, in particular the economy of the developing countries, is still facing serious challenges. Since the beginning of the 1980s, the developed countries have been experiencing the longest continuous economic expansion in the post-War period, while for most developing countries the decade has been a lost one. The external environment for their economic development has worsened with mounting trade protectionism, declining primary commodity prices, a heavy debt burden, a serious reverse flew of financial resources, and an ever-widening gap between the North and the South. It will therefore be the arduous task of the international community in the next decade to step up economic co-operation between States and help the developing countries regain economic growth and development, thereby achieving a steady development in the world economy. Such being the case, the role of UNCTAD, as the intergovernmental body within the United Nations system that considers questions relating to international trade and development and formulates and implements relevant principles and policies for international trade and development, should be further strengthened rather than weakened in any way. It should play its due role more fully in the field of commodities, trade, finance, debt and development and make even greater contributions.
The fulfilment of UNCTAD’s mandate and the realization of its set objectives will require, in addition to the efforts of UNCTAD itself, sufficient political will from its member States and their support for and co-operation with the work of that organization. We hope that all members will support the work of UNCTAD and contribute to the development of the developing countries and to the revitalization of the global economy.
As a menber of UNCTAD, China has all along supported the work of UNCTAD, actively participated in its activities and maintained good relations of co-operation with it. China will, as always, work to strengthen its close
(Mt. Li Luye, China) co-operation with UNCTAD and develop its economic and trade relations with other countries in the world. As a developing country, China has striven consistently and unremittingly, together with the other developing countries, for the establishment of a new international economic order. Reform and opening-up are the fundamental State policy of China. The implementation of that policy over the past 10 years has proved that it is correct and effective. In the years ahead this policy will be firmly pursued rather than changed. We are ready to develop, on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, economic co-operation and trade with all countries and regions in the world for the promotion of our respective development.
Finally, may I wish UNCTAD new and even greater achievements in its future work.
The PRESIDENT? I now call on the representative of the United States,
l Mr. Harry Cahill.
Mr. CAHILL (United States of America): On this day the United States is very happy to join all our colleagues in this Hall and around the world in
i congratulating the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) on
i its twenty-fifth anniversary. These two and a half decades of the life of UNCTAD	i
have been very pressured, very crowded and very full of challenge.	[
Much has been achieved in the efforts to make the world a better place and we thank UNCTAD for this. But making harder the task of making the world a better place is the fact that this world of ours has been evolving and changing rapidly. Some old difficulties and problems persist and they weigh more and more heavily. At the same time, new challenges have arisen - new challenges and new threats. But one thing we believe is certain: UNCTAD has an important role to play. We do believe that and we hope and trust that UNCTAD will perceptively see what is needed in bringing vital growth and development to the developing countries. We, the United States, look forward to UNCTAD’s strong and continuing contribution in
.1
(Mg. Cahill, United States) providing practical assistance and guidance to the developing world. We look forward to UNCTAD helping others learn from the valuable experience of those who have succeeded in advancing their own growth and in bringing well-being to their people.
In sum, we wish UNCTAD every success and we warmly applaud the good work it has done and continues to do.
The PRESIDENT: I request the Assenbly to turn its attention now to draft resolution A/44/U 39.
May I take it that the Assenbly decides to adopt that draft resolution? Draft resolution A/44/L, 39 was adopted (resolution 44/19).
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.
UŒ¥JD
KONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.61
28 November 1W
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FIRST MEETING Held at Readouarters, New York, on Monday, 20 November 1989, at 10 a.m.
Propä,? nt: •W*lawa»-4cs=: 		 g	Mr. GARBA	(Nigeria)
later:	Mr. JAYA (Vice-President)	(Brunei Darussalam)
later:	Mr. GARBA (President)	(Nigeria)
later:	Mr. ABULHASAN (Vice-President)	(Kuwait)
Adoption of a convention on the rights of the child [1081
(a)	Report of the Third Committee
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
a ™T record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and ? *p*®ch®8 in th® other languages. The final text will be printed in tCiG ^ficial Records of the General Assembly.
toerections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be ^LrXLr’nJir^?^ °£ ® member Of the d®le9’tion concerned, within_onejweek, ^^“J Reoord8 Siting Section, Department of Conference Services, room Bio-750, 2 United Nations Plaaa, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-6<JÓS?/A 5142V (E)
EH/rr	A/44/PV.61	i
2
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 108
ADOPTION OF A CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
(a)	REPORT OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE (A/44/736)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH CO-1MITTEE (A/44/743)
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the Rapporteur of the Third Committee, Mr. Wilfried Grolig of the Federal Republic of Germany, to introduce the report of the Third Committee.
Mr. GROLIG (Federal Republic of Germany), Rapporteur of the Third Committees I have the honour to present the report of the Third Committee on agenda item 108, entitled "Adoption of a convention on the rights of the child", allocated to the Third Committee for consideration by the General Assembly.
I	should like to draw attention to paragraph 12 of the report for a technical remark. In that paragraph Zimbabwe should be included among those countries on whose behalf the delegation of Zambia gave an explanation of vote.
The Third Committee recommends the adoption of the draft resolution in pargraph 13 of its report.
The PRESENT: If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Third Committee now before the Assembly.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the various reconnendations of the Third Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work [8] (continued)t sixth report of the General Committee
Law of the Sea [30]
(a)	Reports of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
(The President)
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
"When the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation diould, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee."
The Assenbly will now take a decision cn the draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 13 of its report (A/44/736). The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of this draft resolution is contained in document A/44/743.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/25).
The PRESIDENT, Before calling on members to explain their position, may I remind delegations that in accordance with General Assenbly decision 34/401 such explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. ABOUL HASSAN I (Islamic Republic of Iran) t Although ray delegation attaches great importance to the convention on the rights of the child, I should like to place on record our reservation cn any article that would contradict Islamic beliefs aid values.
Mg.» AL-mukhaini (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic)t In spite of the fact that my country endorsed the convention we have some reservations, which we shall announce later.
Mr. HkMADNEH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic)* We are pleased at the adoption by consensus of the convention on the rights of the child, and we extend our thanks and appreciation to the Commission on Human Rights and to the working group for the efforts made over 10 years to prepare the draft convention.
We should like to place on record our interpretation of three of the articles of the convention.
First, our understanding of article 14, particularly where it deals with the right of the child to freedom of religion, is that it means that the chil'’ ^ the right to practise his religion, not to choose the religion or the belief. If the intention of the article is in contradiction with our understanding we would like our reservations to be placed on record.
(Mg. Hamadneh, Jordan)
Secondly, our understanding of the provisions of articles 20 and 21 is that they are not mandatory for countries that do not legalize the system of adoption tabanni. Therefore, my country, whose system legalizes only the system of bond -kafalah - in consonance with the Islamic sharia, does not feel obliged to act in conformity with the adoption provisions with regard to our children, whether inside or outside the country. If the intention of these two articles is in contradiction with this understanding, we should like to record our reservations.
!h< PJOUDI (Algeria) (interpretation from French)* My delegation is delighted at the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child on this very symbolic day, which is the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child and the tenth anniversary of the International Year of the Child. However, my delegation wishes to make an interpretative statement about some of its provisions to explain why it went along with the consensus adoption of the Convention.
With regard to the fifth paragraph of the preamble, which refers to the concept of the famUy, we interpret this in the light of the definition of the family as established in our code on the family, article 2 of which provides as follows*
"The family is the basic cell of society and is composed of persons united by ties of marriage and kinship.”
With regard to article 1 of the Convention, which relates to the age of a child, my delegation interprets this provision in accordance with paragraph 2 of article 40 of the Algerian civil code, which fixes the age of majority at 19 years.
We interpret paragraph 1 of article 14 in accordance with article 2 of the Algerian Constitution, which provides that Islam is the State religion, and
JSM/sm	A/44/PV.61
7
(Mr. Djoudi* Algeria) article 35 of that text* which states that freedom of conscience end opinion are inviolable.
Regarding article 20* on the protection of a child temporarily or permanently deprived of his or her environ went, my delegation interprets this provision in conformity with our national legislation* in particular article 62 of the family code* which states*
"Custody" - hadana - "consists in the care, schooling and education of the child in the religion of the father and the safeguarding of his or her physical and moral well-being* and the guardian mist fulfil this responsibility."
As regards article 21* which deals with adoption, we have to state that Algeria is not bound by this provision* since article 46 of the Algerian family code states*
"Adoption" - tabanni - "is forbidden by the sharia and the law."
The protection and care of the child until majority is guaranteed within the framework of the application of the kafalah in Islamic law.
Mr, URIARTS (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish)* Last week in the Third Committee we adopted by consensus the convention on the rights of the child, at which time the alternate Permanent Representative of my country made a long statement in explanation of vote and said that we would, of course, sign the convention. We requested that the explanation of vote be made part of the record.
The PRESIDENT* I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL:Today our Organization has taken a most important step towards the realization of our common purpose of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights aid fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. Thirty years after the adoption of the

Declaration of the Rights of the Child the United Nations has given the global community an international instrument of high quality that protects the dignity, equality and basic human rights of the world's children.
This achievement, of which we can be justly proud, rests on more than 10 years of hard effort by the Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights, by Governments and non-governmental organizations, and by specialized agencies and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). The drafting of the Convention was no easy task. In the years since the Declaration of the Rights of the Child was adopted many perceptions have changed and many concepts have evolved, and the Convention had to be shaped accordingly. The process of its drafting was a model of how our Organization can and should strive to achieve common goals. Unproductive political confrontations were set aside while delegates from countries with different social aid economic systems representing the various cultural, ethical and religious approaches to life worked together with non-governmental organizations in a spirit of harmony and mutual respect end with the best interests of the child as their paramount objective. I should like to pay a special tribute to the Government of Poland, which first proposed the drafting of the Convention, and to the Chairman of the Working Group, Professor Adam Lopatka. 
The Convention the Assembly has just adopted constitutes an instrument of far-reaching significance, as visionary as it is timely. First, it addresses the needs of those who are humanity's more vulnerable, as well as its most cherished resource. It is axiomatic that they should be afforded special attention. Secondly, it calls for the development of children through access to information, education, play, leisure and cultural activities, and the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. And, thirdly, it seeks to ensure the entire spectrum of the rights of the child and the direct involvement of children in the

exercise of their rights, while recognizing the equal worth of the diverse cultural values of the human community.
One of the cardinal lessons of the Convention is that the child is not alone. The Convention recognizes the primary role of the family and parents in the care and protection of children, as well as the need for special protection of those who are without families or separated from them. But it also recognizes the role, when necessary, of the community and the State and the crucial contribution that international co-operation and international organizations can make in bringing about conditions in which each child can fully and harmoniously develop his or her personality. Above all, the Convention attempts to provide a framework within which the child, in the light of his or her evolving capacities, can make the difficult transition from infancy to adulthood. It also acknowledges that children are particularly vulnerable to certain kinds of exploitation. In a series of important articles it seeks to protect the child from attacks so prejudicial to his or her welfare as child labour, drug abuse, sexual exploitation and sale, trafficking, and abduction.
The need to furnish the world's children with a means of assuring their fundamental rights is felt with increasing urgency every day. At this meeting the Assembly has taken the first, seminal step. The adoption of the Convention places on the international community, and especially the United Nations, the heavy burden of helping States to implement the promise of the Convention. I wish today to call for States from all regions to ratify the Convention, so that support for the Convention itself and for the committee to be elected by States parties will reflect the wide economic, social and cultural diversity of our membership.



I wish to assure the Assembly of the Secretariat's full commitment to assisting in the implementation of the Convention to the maximum extent allowed by the resources available. I also wish to inform members that during the month of January 1990 there will be a ceremony at which States will be able to sign the text of the Convention.
I congratulate members and urge that we move on to make of the Convention's principles a living reality for each and every child on Earth. In so doing, we shall not only secure the rights of coming generations;we shall also strengthen the foundations of justice, peace and freedom in the world of the future.
The PRESIDENT: Thirty years ago today the General Assembly adopted the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, which in its preamble affirmed that "mankind owes to the child the best it has to give" (resolution 1386 (XIV)). The 10 principles laid down in that Declaration have served as guideposts and objectives for the work of our Organisation since then in promoting and protecting the rights of children throughout the world.
Today, with the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Assembly has taken a new and decisive step along the road towards ensuring respect for the dignity and rights of the child; for the rights of the child have now gone from a declaratory statement of purpose into what will become a binding piece of international legislation.
The Convention is an important achievement by the United Nations and shows the positive and constructive results which international co-operation can yield. It protects a wide range of basic human rights, deals with situations of special concern to children, such as reunification with parents, adoption and foster care, and protects the child from such abuses as exploitation for child labour, sexual purposes and sale, trafficking and abduction and all other forms of exploitation prejudicial to the child's welfare.

^he President)
The Convention we have adopted here today is the result of 10 years of dedicated effort, and I wish to express my profound thanks to all who have contributed to this success - Government representatives, those of specialized agencies and the United Nations Children's Fund and the non-governmental organizations.
The task before us now is to give reality to the promises of the Convention by bringing it into force and applying it world-wide. In this way we can respond and give effect to the statement of the Declaration that mankind owns the child the best it has to give.
We have now concluded our consideration of agenda item 108.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK8 SIXTH REPORT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (A/44/250/Add.5)
The PRESIDENT: The sixth report of the General Committee concerns a reguest by the Secretary-General for the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of an additional sub-item entitled "Financing of the United Nations Observer Group in Central America".
The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the sub-item be included in the agenda. May I take it that the General Assembly decides to include in its agenda the additional sub-item entitled "Financing of the United Nations Observer Group in Central America"?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: The General Committee decided also to recommend to the Assembly that this item be allocated to the Fifth Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt this recommendation?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT^ This report also concerns a reauest by the Secretary-General for the inclusion in the agenda of the current session under an additional sub-item entitled "Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" and for the amendment of the title of agenda item 16 to read "Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections".
The General Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the sub-item be included in the agenda and that the title of agenda item 16 be amended accordingly. May I take it that the General Assembly decides to include in its agenda an additional sub-item entitled "Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" and also to amend the title of agenda item 16 to read "Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections”?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT? The General Committee also decided to recommend to the Assembly that this sub-item be considered directly in plenary meeting. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that recommendation?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 30
LAW OF THE SEA
(a)	REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/461 and Corr.l, A/44/650)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION A/44/L.42
The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, the list of speakers in the debate on this item will be closed today at 1 p.m.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names on the list as soon as possible.
I call on the representative of Cape Verde, who, in his capacity as Chairman of the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, wishes to introduce the draft resolution in the course of his statement.
Mr. JESUS (Cape Verde), Chairman of the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea: One of the most remarkable achievements of the international community in the field of codification and progressive development of international law is undoubtedly the new legal régime applicable to the oceans established in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The negotiations that led to the adoption of the Convention remain a monument to co-operation and the willingness of States to settle their conflicting interests by peaceful means.
Complex as it is, the Convention strikes a balance of different interests of States in the use and exploitation of the oceans' resources. It is this equilibrium of different interests, reflected in the Convention as a whole, that explains the fact that many national legislations are being enacted or updated to take the Convention's provisions into account although it is not yet in force.
At a time when co-operation and peaceful relations among States seem to be a fundamental and an unavoidable driving force in modern-day international politics, to preserve the integrity of the Convention and to strengthen the prospect of its full and effective implementation are, in our view, the obligation of all nations really Interested in shaping a modern world based on co-operation, fairness and peaceful sharing of the planet's resources.
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the ^w the Sea^
As the number of ratifications of the Convention on the Law of the Sea increases, its entry into force, it seems, will be à reality in a matter of a few years from now.	.
Having in mind the enormous contribution of the Convention in establishing agreed rules of conduct for the peaceful use and orderly exploitation of the oceans' resources among States, it is incumbent upon all of us to take all necessary steps to ensure that, by the entry into force of the Convention, all States and the international community in general will lend their support to what has been considered one of the most important multilateral legal instruments ever negotiated.
In this regard, the work of the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International ‘tribunal for the Law of the Sea is of paramount importance. The effectiveness of the Convention goes hand in hand with the work of the Preparatory Commission - so much so that, as we see it, a failure in the implementation of the Preparatory Commission's mandate would immensely jeopardize that effectiveness and would even give grounds for the proliferation of different and conflicting national interpretations of the provisions of the Convention.
The Third Conference on the Law of the Sea, in its resolution I, decided that all possible measures should be taken to ensure the entry into effective operation without undue delay of the Authority and the Tribunal and that all necessary arrangements be made for the commencement of their functions and also decided "that
E^,t	A/44/PV.61
15 (a-z)
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea)
a Preparatory Commission should be established for the fulfilment of these ^eposes”.
It is with this in mind that I, as Chairman of the Preparatory Commission, feather with the Chairmen of the four Special Commissions, have taken steps to ©Eganise our work in the Preparatory Commission in such a way as to enable us to giraish our mandate before the entry into force of the Convention, for I strongly teoSieve that the successful and timely conclusion of our work in the Preparatory Cc/gsiasion would immensely strengthen the prospect for an early and universal cfcirence to the Law of the Sea Convention.,
, Mr. Jaya (Brunei Darussalam), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority aid for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea)
It is my firm conviction that within the time-frame available to us we can properly deal with and solve all issues before us. I say this because past experience in our work in the Preparatory Commission has shown that the pragmatic approach to the ongoing negotiations and the spirit of flexibility have made progress in our work possible.
In effect, not only have we made substantial progress in drafting rules, regulations and procedures that will enable the Sea-Bed Authority and the law of the sea Tribunal to start their functions upon the entry into force of the Convention, but also we have already taken important decisions that led to the registration of France, India, Japan and the Soviet (Inion as pioneer investors, and to the designation of reserved sites for the Enterprise - decisions that are to be seen as landmark achievements in the Preparatory Commission's continuous effort to implement its mandate.
The work of the Preparatory Commission thus augurs well for the future of the Convention. Admittedly, there are difficult issues at hand - difficult yes, but not impossible to deal with if in fact there is a genuine desire to solve them. As Chairman of the Commission, I can assure all members of the Assembly that I shall spare no effort to make sure that by the end of our mandate all issues are addressed and, in the language of resolution I, "all possible measures" are taken to ensure full, effective and universal implementation of the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
In the light of the expressed willingness of States to find solutions to our existing problems, I intend to do whatever it takes to help. I am fully confident that with the understanding and co-operation of all we shall find a way. I have no doubt that the success of our collective endeavour in this regard will, in the end,
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea)
have to rely on a convergence of co-ordinated efforts. Therefore, in the search of solutions to our difficulties, any action or step the nature of which tends to contradict those co-ordinated efforts should be avoided.
Let me seize this opportunity to thank all those who have extended their co-operation to me as I carry out my functions. My country and, surely, the whole of Africa, on whose behalf I hold the post of Chairman of the Preparatory Commission, appreciate that co-operation very much.
In connection with the item now under consideration, I should now like to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.42, on behalf of its original sponsors: Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Denmark, Fiji, Finland, the German Democratic Republic, Iceland, Ireland, Jamaica, Liberia, Malaysia, Mexico, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and Vanuatu. The following countries have also become sponsors: the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Mauritania, Pakistan, Singapore, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, sad Zambia.
In the preparation of this draft resolution, account has been taken of the text of past resolutions adopted by the Assembly on this item. I shall therefore sum up in order to save the Assembly's time.
In the preamble to the draft resolution, the Assembly would recall all the resolutions adopted on this item since the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly} and would recognize that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole.
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the ' International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea) ’
The Assembly would also state - in the third preambular paragraph - that it is important to safeguard the unified character of the Convention and related resolutions and should apply them in a manner consistent with that character and with their object and purpose. Although maintaining the underlying idea in the equivalent paragraph of last year's resolution, this paragraph has been redrafted to reflect a positive approach in the language.
In the preamble, the Assembly would furthermore emphasize the need for States to ensure consistent application of the Convention as well as the need for harmonization of national legislation with the Convention# recall that the Convention provides the regime to be applied to the Area and its resources# welcome - in a new paragraph - the expressions of willingness to explore all possibilities of addressing Issues, as referred to in the statements made at the end of the summer meeting of the Preparatory Commission, in order to secure universal participation in the Convention# recognize the need for co-operation in the early and effective implementation of resolution II# note with satisfaction the registration of the four pioneer investors as well as the designation of reserved areas for the Authority# and note the increasing needs of countries for information, advice and assistance in the implementation of the Convention.
In another new paragraph of the preamble, the Assembly would express concern, owing to the lack of resources, are as yet unable to take effective measures for the full realization of the benefits of the comprehensive legal regime established
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Cotamission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for ^e ^w ^e Sea)
in the Convention? and also in a new paragraph, would recognize the need to enhance and supplement the efforts of States and international organizations to enable developing countries to acquire technological capabilities.
Still in the preamble, the Assembly would recognize that the Convention encompasses all uses and resources of the sea» and - in a new paragraph - would take note of the Secretary-General’s initiative in convening inter-agency consultations on ocean affairs and the law of the sea. It would express deep concern at the current state of the marine environment; and - again in a new paragraph - would point out the importance of the Convention for the protection of the marine environment.
In another new paragraph of the preamble, the Asaerablly would note with concern the use of fishing methods and practices which can have an adverse impact on the conservation and management of marine living resources.
I turn now to the operative part of the draft resolution.
In paragraph 1 the Assembly would recall the historic significance of the Convention. In paragraph 2 it would express satisfaction at the increasing and overwhelming support for the Convention.
In paragraph 3 - a new paragraph - the Asseiibly would invite all States to make renewed efforts to facilitate universal participation in the Convention. Under paragraph 4 the Assembly would call upon all States to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention. Under paragraph 5 it would call upon all States to safeguard the. unified character of the Convention and related resolutions and to apply then in a manner consistent with that character and with their object and
(Mr. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the	I
International Tribunal for	|
the Law of the Sea)	j
purpose. Here again, as is the case with the third preambular paragraph, the text is couched in a positive wy.
In paragraph 6 the Assenbly would call upon States to observe the provisions of the Convention when enacting legislation} and in pagraph 7 it would note the progress being made in the work of the Preparatory Commission.
Paragraph 8 has been redrafted. In it the Assembly would reiterate the conviction that the early, satisfactory and successful conclusion of the ongoing consultations on the implementation of the obligations of the pioneer investors would constitute an important contribution to the overall work of the Preparatory Commission.
In an updated version, paragraph 9 would have the Assenbly express satisfaction at the Secretary-General's efforts to support the Convention and at the effective execution of the major programme on marine affairs. In paragraph 10 the Assembly would express appreciation for the report of the Secretary-General, and in i paragraph 11 would call upon the Secretary-General to continue to assist States in the implementation of the Convention.	'
Paragraph 12 is new. In it the Assembly would request the competent	j
international organizations to intensify financial, techological, organizational and managerial assistance to the developing countries. In paragraph 13 - also new - it would call on the Secretary-General to present a report identifying the needs of States and the measures currently taken in responding to those needs, and to suggest methods and mechanisms for maximizing opportunities for the realization, for all States during the decade 1990 to 2000, of the benefits of the Convention's régime.
MLT/gt
(Kg. Jesus, Chairman, Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea)
In paragraph 14 the Assembly would approve the Preparatory Commission's decision concerning its next meeting. In paragraph 15 which is a new paragraph, it would recognise that the implementation of applicable provisions of the Convention would enhance the protection of the marine environment. In paragraph 16 the Assembly would express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on the marine environment and request him to make the report available to preparatory meetings for the proposed 1992 conference on environment and development. In paragraph 17 it would request the Secretary-General to prepare an updated report on the marine environment as a contribution to that conference. In paragraph 19 it would request the Secretary-General to prepare a study on marine scientific research. Paragraphs 20 and 21 are the usual technical paragraphs.
Finally, the present draft resolution does not Include what was the seventh preambular paragraph of last year's resolution, on the understanding that the underlying idea is implicitly contained in the third preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 5 of the current drift resolution.
To conclude, I would like to state that this draft resolution is the end result of comprehensive consultations among interested delegations. It is a balanced text that takes into account the concerns of all States here represented. We went to great lengths to accommodate everybody's interests, including those of non-signatory States, to rally the support of all States to this draft resolution. I therefore commend it for consideration and approval by all delegations.
Mr. BORG OLIVIER (Malta): Malta participated actively in the 14-year process leading to the adoption, in 1982, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea For the last seven years the Preparatory Commission has been carrying out intensive negotiations on the implementation of that Convention.
^r, Borq Olivier, Malta) Malta's continuing active and constructive participation In many areas of the
7 Preparatory Coanission's work is proof of our unswerving commitment to the successful completion of a process which was launched on Malta's initiative as far back as 1968.
Much is being said of the changes Which the world is witnessing. There is general recognition that the positive political developments in international relations should lead us to search for new avenues of co-operation conducive to a sore relaxed environment, in which the benefits of the common heritage of mankind are exploited and preserved for peaceful purposes. In this respect, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea presents a unique opportunity for all Meaber States to work together in a common endeavour.
Since the adoption of the law of the. sea Convention, in 1982, much progress has been made in negotiations on its implementation. The Preparatory Commission has carried out important work in this regard. We must now make every effort to invigorate negotiations within the Preparatory Commission in order to advance and conclude the deliberations in the time-frame established.
The progress achieved on a nuttber of long-standing issues is commendable. We note in particular the agreement reached on the proposal to establish a training programme for the Enterprise, which, as rightly noted, represented the first concrete preparatory measure taken by the signatories to the Convention "on behalf of and for the benefit of the future Enterprise of the Authority". We strongly believe that with the necessary political will the success achieved in Special Commission 2 could be repeated on the implementation of the obligations of the registered pioneer investors under resolution II and on the remaining crucial issues being considered in the other Special Commissions.
Malta also welcomes with satisfaction the encouraging statements on universal participation made by all groups at the last meeting of the Preparatory Commission.
^r, Borq Olivier, Malta) This trend east be encouraged. We have achieved a common dream of writing a constitution for the oceans. We have declared areas of the sea-bed the common heritage of mankind. Xt must be recognized that without the participation of all key actors in the international community we shall not be able to reap the benefits of the principles embodied in the Convention.
So far X have touched on certain issues which are amply reflected in the report of the Secretary-Gamer al (A/44/650). X should like to express my delegation's appreciation of the comprehensive information provided on developments pertaining to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. We find the information given therein helpful in assessing the many activities being undertaken in various parts of the world and by the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. Many of the sections referred to in the report, particularly those on the protection and preservation of the marine environment, on global climate md sea-level rise and on the Mediterranean, are of special interest to my country and we are pleased that this very useful information has been provided.
When addressing the General Assembly this Septenber Malta's Prime Minister referred to two suggestions made here in 1987. The first concerned the establishment of a global forum on ocean affairs and the second concerned the systematic strengthening of regional institutions, linking initiatives at the national and the global levels. In pursuance of this latter suggestion, my delegation wishes to bring to the attention of the Assembly an important activltiy which has as its main objective the promotion of regional co-operation in the peaceful uses of the Mediterranean Sea, as mandated by General Assembly resolution 43/84, the putting into practice of articles 276 and 277 of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, and encouragement of new forms of scientific-industrial co-operation between developed and developing countries in the Mediterranean region.
(Mr, Borq Olivier, Malta)
In this connection, I wish to refer specifically to paragraph 174 of the Secretary-General's report, which relates to the meeting of experts on the establishment of a Mediterranean regional technology centre. That meeting was held from 18 to 21 April 1989 by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in Vienna. Ten experts from seven Mediterranean countries participated. In addition, the meeting was attended by an observer from Spain, an expert from Bulgaria, three international experts, and representatives from the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNES 00) /Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), together with UNIDO.
There was consensus on the need for the establishment of a regional centre, which would fill a gap that has to be filled, considering the fundamental importance of research and development as the basis for technological innovation, which is the prime motor of economic growth aid sustainable development. The meeting agreed on the centre's objectives, functions, activities, structure and modalities, and proposed that it should be established as a project under the auspices of UNIDO, in co-operation with UNEP and other international and national organizations, and with close links to the Mediterranean Action Plan. Malta has already pledged its support for the creation of such a Mediterranean centre and has offered to provide host facilities.
In our view, the proposal to set up a Mediterranean regional centre for research and development in marine Indus trial technology falls directly under the mandate of part XIV of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and is fully consistent with efforts by the Mediterranean States to strengthen security
(Mr. Borg Olivier, Malta) and co-operation in the Mediterranean region in accordance with General Assembly resolution 43/84.
My delegation therefore urges the Office of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, as well as UNIDO, to continue to co-operate with interested Mediterranean States so that this initiative may be developed further, with tangible results.
I should like to touch briefly on another area which is the subject of the special report by the Secretary-General, namely, the protection and preservation of the marine environment. The report is well documented and highly informative.
I-
I
In fact, it serves to put into perspective not only the efforts made or being made but also our responsibilities in protecting and preserving the marine environment. The areas identified in the report for possible further action offer a challenge which demands an international co-operative effort through which all countries at different levels of development could contribute towards the protection and preservation of the marine environment.
While the contribution of countries is essential, so also is that of international organizations. Their role is in many respects crucial. International organizations should develop links and should function efficiently and effectively to respond to the needs of developing countries which do not have either the technological know-how and eguipment to prevent and combat marine pollution or the enforcement mechanisms to ensure adherence to existing legal instruments.
In this respect it is important that the initiatives which have been taken for regional co-operation should be supported and given their due recognition by all concerned. The law of the sea Convention dedicates one whole part covering 46 articles to the protection and preservation of the marine environment. Among the 11 sections which fall within this chapter, section 2 deals with global and regional co-operation. While global co-operation is important the role of regional co-operation in initiatives for protecting the marine environment cannot be underestimated.
As far back as 1976, with the encouragement and support of UNEP, States of the Mediterranean signed the Barcelona Convention - the legal instrument which put into operation the Mediterranean Action Plan, which had been formulated a year earlier.
The Barcelona Convention brought together for the first time Mediterranean developed and developing countries on a co-operative project for the organization of a system which would permanently monitor the health of the Mediterranean Sea, identify the main environmental problems and their causes, generate practical proposals for solving these problems and harmonize national legislation with the spirit and goals of the Convention. With the eventual adoption of three protocols on the prevention of pollution from dumping - from ships and aircraft, from oil and other harmful substances in cases of emergency, and from land-based sources - and a fourth protocol concerning Mediterranean specially protected areas, the Barcelona Convention was given its dynamism. As a result, this regional initiative in the Mediterranean, which grew into UNEP's Regional Seas Programme Activity Centre in Athens and which co-ordinates the work of the specialized centres of the action plan located in Malta, Sophia Antipolis, Split and Tunis, soon became a model for action plans in other regions. Ten similar regional initiatives have to date been launched in other parts of the globe.
At a recently held workshop by the Mediterranean Marine Pollution Emergency Response Centre for the Mediterranean Sea, based in Malta', which dealt with combating accidental pollution of the Mediterranean Sea, participants nominated by 13 Mediterranean coastal States and by the European Economic Community (EEC) as well as by representatives of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and UNEP, agreed among other things to initiative activities necessary for the future establishment of a computerized marine pollution emergency decision support system which will be operated by the Centre for the benefit of Mediterranean coastal States. This agreement was endorsed by the Contracting Parties to the Barcelona Convention which met in Athens last September.
In support of these activities, we have established in Malta a Europe-Mediterranean centre on Marine Contamination Retard,, which han already organised a number of International meetings and intensive courses in this field, including a European workshop on contamination hasards in the Mediterranean, an intensive training course on the application of toslcity teste in assessing marine contamination hasards In the Mediterranean and an Intensive training course on renote sensing for marine and coastal hasarde monitoring and disaster assessment in the Mediterranean.
The protection of the marine environment has also been given special attention by the participating States of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), m their Vienna concluding document, the participating States agreed to develop and intensify national efforts as well as bilateral and multilateral co-operation in order
-to reduce significantly the pollution of seas and coastal areas, transboundary watercourses and international lakes from all sources of pollution".
Furthermore, the participating States agreed to devote special attention to the development of appropriate alternatives to sea disposal in order to decrease, progressively and substantially, the dumping of harmful wastes and the incineration of noxious liquid wastes at sea, with a view to the early termination of such methods.
It l. appropriât, her. to hlghHghl th. fact that, in accordance ,ith th. mandat. glv.n In th. CSCB Vienna document on gueation. relating to aecurlty and ,■-operation In the Mediterranean, effort, in the protection of the marine environment are to be Intensified on a bilateral and multilateral basin with the
A/44/PV.61
29
(Mr. Borg Olivier, Malta) non-participating Mediterranean States. This subject will form part of the discussions envisaged fo. a CSCE meeting on the Mediterranean to be held in Palma de Mallorca in 1990.
Mention should also be made in this context of the far-reaching Langkawi Declaration on Environment adopted last month by the Commonwealth Heads of Government which, among other matters, devotes attention to the question of marine pollution, including the question of ocean dumping of toxic wastes.
I have touched upon a number of activities undertaken in the global and regional context relevant to the enhancement of co-operation in the protection of the marine environment.
My country has taken and continues to take an active role in these activities, and it is our intention to continue to support those initiatives which are seriously intended to protect our seas and oceans from degradation. Already a ratifying State to the Barcelona Convention and three of its Protocols, Malta will in tha very near future deposit its instruments of accession to the London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter. Furthermore, careful and active consideration is being given by Malta to becoming a party to the MARPOL 73/78 Convention and to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal.
It is recognized that further degradation of our marine environment could have serious and far-reaching implications for all. The excellent report by the Secretary-General provides us with an opportunity to follow up on the issues highlighted therein. Our marine environment should receive increased attention from the United Nations and its specialized agencies and programmes, and Member States should be encouraged and, where appropriate, assisted to combat marine pollution and preserve the health of our oceans.
30
(Mr. Borg Olivier, Malta)
We have a common responsibility to pursue this goal more vigorously in order to preserve and protect the common heritage of mankind.,
In conclusion, allow me to announce that my delelgation would like to join the sponsors of draft resolution A/44/L.42.
Mr. URIARTE (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): The general subject of the law of the sea is of special interest to my country. One needs only to look at a map to realize why; Chile is, after all, as a novelist once said, an "oceanic land". For that reason we have attributed great importance to the long process of developing and codifying the definitions, uses and practices of international maritime law in which the United Nations is now involved. The greatest achievement of that undertaking was the adoption of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, which is now at a decisive stage of ratification. As we hail this achievement we should also remember that that was not the end of it. The reports presented to us by the Secretary-General year after year for the past six years are clear proof of this.
These annual reports relate to the great work being done by the international community to translate into national legislation the various provisions of the many chapters of the Convention on the Law of the Sea and to deal with the new problems and uses of the oceans, thus demonstrating the dynamic approach taken by States with regard to these problems.
The President returned to the Chair.
AP/rr
(Mt. Uriarte, Chile)
From the international point of view, an extraordinarily dynamic aspect of the Preparatory Commission's work is the progress made in respect of the international sea-bed régime and the organization of the international sea-bed authority. Today, the Commission is at the beginning of a process that could lead to universal acceptance of the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
There are few items that more clearly reflect the role the United Nations should play as an Organization than the one now before us. The law of the sea, because it involves so many subjects and because so many countries are directly concerned in it, has been and continues to be a fertile ground for the guest for lasting international agreements that could craete a generally accepted universal maritime system conciernenting other, independent international legal instruments that are fully in force.
The annual debate in the General Assembly is of great importance and has much merit, since it serves not only to inform Governments about fulfilment of the tasks they have given the Secretariat, but also to evaluate the conceptual and legal framework within which these tasks were assigned and are being carried out. The Organization is uneoualled as a forum for this kind of work. It is the only body where the technical expertise of the Secretariat can be combined, at the same level, with the political expertise of Governments.
May I now make a few comments on the report on the law of the sea that the Secretary-General has submitted to this session of the General Assembly.
As usual, the Secretariat has prepared a detailed and informative report on developments concerning this item both within the context of the Convention on the Law of the Sea and outside it.
We have an additional document (A/44/461 and Corr.l) before us this year devoted exclusively to the problem of the protection and preservation of the marine environment. We think this is an interesting contribution deserving of study and thought on the part of Member States.
Nevertheless, I must express ray delegation's surprise at seeing included in the report a reference to the Preparatory Meeting of the fifteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The Consultative Parties have already agreed to submit to the Secretary-General the final reports on such meetings, in accordance with our obligation to keep the Organization and its Mentoer States informed of agreements reached within the Antarctic Treaty system. That should suffice. These random references in the report suggest that the Organization has the role of a guardian, as it were, in respect of the Antarctic Treaty system. My delegation feels that this is not acceptable, for the Treaty is in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and is indeed the most extraordinary system of international co-operation existing in the world today.
We have studied the chapter of the Secretary-General's report (A/44/650) dealing with State practice and national policy in ocean matters. We take note that some 74 countries have claimed exclusive economic zones and have incorporated in their national legislation the provisions on this subject contained in the law-of-the-sea Convention. It might be of interest for the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea to consider including in its excellent publication programme a compilation of national legislation on the exclusive economic zone. I am not referring to general laws on that ocean space. Such work has already been done in that field. I am referring specifically to complementary legislation on uses allowed and rights conferred by the exclusive economic zone. Such a document
(Mr. Uriarte, Chile) would help ub determine how much uniformity there is in State practice in the interpretation and application of the specific provisions of the components of the exclusive economic zone.
In the chapter on the management and exploitation of fishing resources, two natters are of concern to us.
First, we are disturbed at the growing tonnage of fish caught during this decade. The figure is now approaching 100 million tons annually. This endangers the resources that should be left for future generations. It could also have a serious effect not only on the species themselves but also on their function within the ocean chain.
In this respect, Chile has adamantly opposed the use of drift-net fishing and is one of the sponsors of the relevant draft resolution submitted in the General Assenbly's Second Committee at this session. Similarly, we are concerned over the problem of the species found in the exclusive economic zones and the adjacent high seas. In Chile's case, a fleet of processing vessels has for years been fishing these species indiscriminately within the 200-mile zone, without submitting to any plan for their protection or preservation. In the case of other countries, the situation is even more serious. They have agreements with fishermen from far-off areas granting them access to the resources within the exclusive zone. These fishermen are Increasing their catches within those countries' 200-mlle zone. The Convention on the Law of the Sea deals with this matter rather timidly. It might be desirable to explore the possibility of reaching conservation agreements on these species in regard to areas beyond the exclusive economic zone.
We have carefully considered the part of the report that deals with the activities of the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Lav of the Sea. TO our knowledge, it is the only Office that has a unified approach to ocean and marine affairs. The report presented to us by the Secretary-General is very detailed in this sphere; it covers all the Office's functions, which are important and should be highlighted. In this connection we should mention the work related to the Convention on the Law of the Sea. This work is being carried out by means of replies to recuests for assistance and the preparation of studies by groups of experts on specific subjects. So far there have been two meetings on this matter -one on baselines, and the other on marine scientific research. We urge the Office to pursue the approach of using groups of experts. Thia not only contributes to the uniform application of the Convention but also promotes the exchange of practical experience, especially between experts from developing countries, and is of great benefit to that group of countries.
The services extended to the Preparatory Commission have been very important and have greatly facilitated its work.
It is also important that the Office continue and even broaden its publications programme, in regard to analytical studies, State practice and technical guidelines for the implementation of the Convention. All this documentation is very useful in the study of the marine policies of Member States. That is true also of the Law of the Sea Bulletin, and of the data base so carefully prepared by the Office.
(Mt, Uriartet Chile)
The Government of Chile is very interested in developments regarding the system of acouiring oceanic data, There is a brief general reference to this in the report. Since 1972 there has been a gradual development in the formulation off provisions to govern such instruments. But this process was interrupted while we awaited the adoption off the law-of-the-sea Convention. We shall be greatly interested in the results obtained at the forthcoming meeting of the inter-secretariat Committee on Scientific Programmes relating to Oceanographic (ICSPRO) in so far as they concern the possibility of starting negotiations on the preparation of an international instrument to govern this activity. One of the problems caused by drift buoys is that of jurisdiction. That is why we urge participation by the Office in the preparation of the relevant technical reports based on info mation from the specialised agencies.

My delegation is particularly grateful to the Office for its support and for organizing the forthcoming meeting on sea-use planning and the fixing of coastal zones for the Latin American and Caribbean States, a meeting organized jointly by the Office and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). The advice and substantive assistance given to States by the Office of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for the Law of the Sea are most valuable and welcome. Wa particularly appreciate the fact that this assistance has been given to developing countries in Asia and Africa as well as in the Latin American and Caribbean region. This meeting of experts, which will be held in Santiago between 28 November and 1 December of this year, is an excellent example of the kind of regional co-operation that is stressed in the Convention. Such co-operation can, of course, lead to better understanding and wider acceptance and more effective implementation of the Convention.
The work of the Office, in particular its programme of advice and assistance in the area of marine matters and the law of the sea, are of direct relevance to countries, especially developing countries. The assistance given by the Office in the form of studies, guidelines with respect to the implementation of complex technical aspects of the Convention, and, above all, information on the activities and actions of other States directly benefits States as they endeavour to put the Convention into practice.
It need hardly be said that the assistance needed by States will increase as the number of ratifications grows and as the tine for entry into force approaches. Therefore, Chile believes that the United Nations must continue and, indeed, expand its activities in the area of marine matters and the law of the sea, especially in connection with developing countries. This need is recognized in the draft resolution before the Assembly, of which Chile is a sponsor. We hope that these activities will constitute an important part of the future medium-term plan.
I cannot conclude this part of my statement without saying that it is a great honour for Chile that this year the Amerasinghe Fellowship has been awarded, as mentioned in the report, to a most competent citizen of my country, who performs certain functions in one of the units our Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This is for us a source of special pride and we are confident that Miss Maria taisa Carvallo will justify the honour accorded to her.
We attribute great importance to the work being done by the Preparatory Commission tor the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the taw of the Sea, which carried out valuable work at its seventh session, which took place in August of this year.
There were two significant developments. First, agreement was reached, after arduous negotiations during various sessions of the Commission, on the programme for training staff for the Enterprise. As the report brings out very clearly, many delegations, including the delegation of Chile, believe that this agreement is the first concrete measure for the benefit of the future international Enterprise adopted by the signatories to the Convention. This shows that it is possible to achieve a broad and satisfactory consensus within the Commission. It can serve as an example for Special Commission 3, where there is still no sign of a solution to the problems connected with the mining code, the debate on which is proving similar to the debate on this matter at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
The second most important development, in our opinion, was the statement by the representative of Zambia, in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of 77. He reiterated, inter alia, the willingness of the developing countries to engage in open dialogue in the Preparatory Commission with signatory and non-signatory
(Mg. Urtarte, Chile) countries to explore the possibilities of obtaining universal acceptance of the Convention on the Law of the Sea. This is undeniable proof of the flexibility of the Group of 77, flexibility that has been clearly manifested on other matters in the Preparatory Commission, in particular in connection with resolution XI. We feel that this offer deserves serious consideration. This flexibility is proof of unconditional good faith and denotes a positive attitude to useful negotiations, as the Chairman said himself of the Group of 77. Consideration of the various substantive aspects of this dialogue, followed by negotiations, could lead to a process that in turn could lead to co-operaticn in these areas. We must move away from the confrontations that all too often have characterized debates in the Preparatory Commission.
There is also now an unequalled opportunity to arrive at agreement on general acceptance of the Convention on the Law of the Sea - which is at present not the case - and not only transfer the document into lex lata but have a single regime, namely, the common heritage of mankind, applicable to the sea-bed beyond national jurisdiction, for the benefit of the international community as a whole.
Furthermore, this exercise is in consonance with the positive development of the North-South dialogue, whose oceanic expression, as it were, has been the negotiations concerning the sea-bed and the ocean floor, for the purpose of co-operation and the solution of problems, without diluting or impairing the particular characteristics of the negotiating parties. We believe this to be a very positive development that may help to cut the Gordian knot in the negotiations on the mining code in the Preparatory Commission. It is clear that matters must proceed by stages.
The Secretary-General's report shows clearly the dynamism that exists in connection with oceanic matters and the law of the .,a at the national, regional and world levels. This is a positive development, although of course there are
(Mr. Uriarte, Chile) problems, and the United Nations, the Secretariat, through the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, and States Members, have a very important role to Play.
My country, an ocean land, as has been said, continues to be keenly interested in these matters and win continue to make its contribution as a developing country and an essentially maritime land.
— m”§ (United States of America) i The United States views the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as a major accomplishment in the development of the international Iw of the oceans. The Convention has many positive aspects aid the United States has actively supported aid proofed observance of the vast majority of its provisions.
Unfortunately, the Convention also contains provisions on deep-sea-bed mining that are fundamentally unacceptable to the United States. Our concerns were clearly stated in 1982, when we announced our decision not to sign the Convention. We have followed closely developments regarding sea-bed mining since 1982 and we are aware that there has been an evolution in the thiricing of son of the other Governments. We are encouraged by the recognition by many States that a re-evaluation of the sea-bed regime is necessary and we have noted with interest the recent statement of the Chairman of the Group of 77 expressing readiness for a dialogue and the Group’s support for efficiency and cost-effectiveness In the sea-bed regime. The draft resolution removes thinly veiled criticisms of the United States contained in earlier resolutions. It welcomes the willingness of States to explore all possibilities of addressing outstanding Issues and invites States to renew efforts to facilitate universal participation in the Convention.
We view these changes as positive developments. They suggest that there is a growing awareness of the need to address the concerns of the United States and other industrial States involved in deep-sea-bed mining.
The United States shares the desire for a universally acceptable convention. We are concerned that, notwithstanding what appears to be a genuine desire for dialogue, many countries do not understand that from the Uhited States perspective the sea-bed regime remains seriously flawed. We do not believe that a dialogue can succeed unless it is based on an mderstanding of this point. We therefore believe
(Mr. Pickering, United States) it would be premature nor to consider negotiations. We believe that fundamental reform is a task that exceeds the capabilities of the Preparatory Commission and for this reason we do not participate in the Commission. Nevertheless, we continue to be willing to exchange views with any State in the interests of determining whether circumstances exist for a dialogue that will lead to a universally acceptable convention.
Notwithstanding the improvement in the draft resolution, the United States continues to object to certain aspects of it. In particular we cannot join in the call for all States to consider early ratification of or accession to the Convention to allow entry into force of the sea-bed régine, when we have objections to that régime. In addition we continue to object to the funding of the Preparatory Commission from the general budget of the United Nations. We believe it should be funded by those States participating in it.
For these reasons, regrettably, we must oppose the draft resolution.
Having expressed our concerns regarding the sea-bed regime, I should like now to express my Government's support for the emphasis placed on efforts to encourage States to bring their national laws into conformity with international law, as reflected in the provisions of the Convention concerning traditional uses of the oceans. My Government has been active in supporting and promoting compliance with these provisions and discouraging claims that are inconsistent with international law. In particular we welcome the action by many States to revise their laws and regulations to ensure conformity with international law and encourage others to do likewise.
I should like to take this opportunity to point out that the United States does not view the call upon all States to safeguard the unity of the Convention as a limitation on either the right or the duty of all States to act in accordance with those portions of the Convention which reflect customary international law.
EH/rr
(Mr. Pickering, United States)
My delegation would like to join in the expressions of appreciation of the cretary-General s initiative in convening inter-agency consultations on international and regional developments in ocean affairs and the law of the sea and supports the request for the Secretary-General to prepare a study on marine scientific research. We share the concern expressed for the protection of the •arine environment and support the draft resolution's emphasis cm the central role of scientific research as a basis for environmental decision-making, as well as its recognition of the importance of enhancing the marine scientific capabilities of developing countries.
We are also pleased that the draft resolution emphasizes the role of the specialised United nations organizations nd the importance oe co-operation and co-ordination among them.
Mr. GOERNER (German Democratic Republic), I consider today's debate as, in a way, a follow-up of the discussion on the agenda item "Decade of International law" in the plenary meeting on 17 Novenber.
The strengthening of the rule of law in international relations requires not only the elaboration of new legal instruments but also reconsideration of already existing conventions of a globabl nature which a considerable nunber of States have not acceded to, for various reasons, and which therefore have not yet become universally acceptable.
The most important of those legal instruments is, in our opinion, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. There is no need for me to dwell on the historic importance of that Convention as an important contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and progress for all peoples of the world. Yet we are all ware of the fact that quite a few States have not found themselves in a position to become parties to the Convention, since soma of the provisions of
part XI - the deep-sea-bed mining part of the Convention - formulated, as they were, a decade ago, are no longer on a par with the changing world economic conditions and thus stand in the way of economically somd sea-bed mining. A dialogue is therefore required on those five or six provisions on which parties are in disagreement, so that these obstacles to a universal participation in the Convention may be overcome. That discussion should be conducted now, before the entry into force of the Convention, for it easier to find practical solutions now than it would be afterwards when its institutional and other arrangements became effective.
Another important reason for pleading for early negotiations on these problems is to be seen in what the Secretary-General has rightly pointed out in paragraph 2 of his report on the law of the sea (A/44/650), namely, that in the light of the significant change in the international political climate, in which confrontation has given way to oo-operation in many areas of conflict and competition, it should be possible for all States to make a renewed effort to ensure universal participation in tbo Convention.
JSM/cw
A/44/PV. 61
(Mr. Goernet» German Democratic Republic)
Such new political climate was even perceptible during the recent session o£ the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the law of the Sea. At the end of that session» all groups of States declared their preparedness to explore all possibilities of addressing those issues preventing States from ratifying or acceding to the Convention.
My delegation would like particularly to commend the Group of 77 for having taken the initiative in the pursuit of the necessary dialogue on the issue. My delegation wishes to call upon those States» which so far have not participated in the work of the Preparatory Commission» to play an active part in this dialogue so that agreements can be reached that make it possible also for them to become Parties to the Convention. The negotiations in the Preparatory Commission that led to the registration of the first group of pioneer investors have shown that States are able to find pragmatic and flexible solutions to difficult problems as regards the legal regime for deep sea-bed mining. It is now imperative for all States to display the requisite political willingness actively to contribute towards resolving the existing disagreement in respect of a few specific provisions of part XI of the Convention. These provisions have not yet been the subject of debate within the framework of the Preparatory Commission.
I should like to iake this opportunity to express our thanks to the Secretary-General for the preparation of the report on the law of the sea (A/44/650) and the report entitled "Protection and preservation of the marine environment, (A/44/461) ,> These reports provide us with a wealth of useful information. The material is up-to-date and the presentation is concise and authoritative on developments relating to the law of the sea.
The reports also set out the activities of the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. With its various publications, the Office continues to provide valuable assistance to Member States. Let me mention here as an example the law of the sea bibliographies which have continued to keep us up-to-date on recent publications in the field of the law of the sea and marine affairs. Also, the Law of the Sea Bulletin is a most useful tool, and we look forward with anticipation to the presentation of future volumes. The Office also continues to provide valuable assistance in servicing the Preparatory Commission. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Law of the Sea, Mr. Satya Nandan, and his team have provided extremely useful reports, studies, draft texts and working papers of a very high standard.
My delegation also wishes to express its appreciation to the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for the important contribution it makes to marine-related activities that take place regionally and globally, under the auspices of the United Nations agencies and bodies, and other conferences and meetings. We deem it necessary for the Office continue to make its effective contribution to creating favourable conditions for universal participation in the Convention. We also think that the Office should prepare itself properly for the Convention's entry into force. We believe that with the Convention entering into force, the States Parties will doubtless need more support in the implementation of the Convention.
The practice of a nunber of coastal States in protecting their national interests in relation to the management of adjacent maritime areas - I am referring to the territorial seas and the exclusive economic zones - shows that it often goes beyond what is permitted by the law of the Sea Convention. Xn his report, the Secretary-General pointed out that the balance reached in the Convention between the rights and duties of States in the different uses of the sea must not be
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library .	.	■	....	.....	.	4
jeopardized even if new challenges should arise for States, such as the necessity of increased protection of the marine environment, the interdiction of the transboundary movement of hazardous wastes or drug trafficking by sea vessels.
There is indeed a danger of this balance being eroded by increasingly divergent State practice. It is therefore imperative to apply in a uniform and consistent manner the comprehensive legal regime set out in the Convention.
This can only be achieved if generally acceptable, practical solutions to the few controversial issues pertaining to the sea-bed mining part of the Convention can be found as early as possible so that all States will be enabled to become parties to the Convention. Universal participation in the Convention on the Law of the Sea and strict compliance by all States would be the most effective contribution towards strengthening the rule of law on the seas and oceans and, thus, towards attaining the goals proclaimed for the Decade of International Law.
The present draft resolution, which is co-sponsored by the German Democratic Republic, focuses on the concrete steps necessary for that purpose. I therefore wish to voice the hope that it will meet with the full approval of the General Assembly.
Mr. ABDELLAH (Tunisia) (interpretation from French)i In speaking on agenda item 30, the Tunisian delegation wishes to express the great importance it attaches to the law of the sea and its development under the aegis of the United Nations and within the context of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Tunisia ratified the Convention as early as 1985, and accordingly introduced relevant provisions into its domestic law. In all areas covered by the Convention, my country, when and where necessary, made legislative changes to align our
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library ....	a-,..	.	.	_
<Mg. Abdellah» Tunisia) domestic law with the text of the Convention. This shows our commmitment to that instrument and to its unity.	■
We have been following closely the work of the Preparatory Commission and we believe that progress has been made in several areas within its purview» for example» the finalization of the document on training during the summer 1989 session» which we welcome with interest and believe to be a positive sign of the ability of the Preparatory Commission to discharge its mandate successfully. Other questions remain outstanding. We believe that the question concerning the obligations of the pioneer investors is one of the most critical. It must be resolved in a satisfactory manner» in keeping with the provisions of the Convention» particularly resolution II and the relevant documents. Accordingly» each partner has to shoulder its responsibilities and do its part under the contract.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library .......................
(Mr» Abdellah, Tunisia)
Some have said that they see signs of some development in the work of the iteparatory Commission and in attitudes outside the Commission - certain new approaches to problems» in other words, a wind of change in regard to the law of the sea, an indication that there may be new initiatives that coranand universal support.
The Group of 77, to which my country has the honour of belonging, at the last session of the Preparatory Commission once again demonstrated its willingness to negotiate with all groups on all questions giving rise to problems, in order to reach solutions that are acceptable to all and that respect the positions of all menbers of the international community. Thus we expressed our willingness to discuss with any State or group of States questions that might obstruct the universality of the Convention.
These discussions, these exchanges of view, will take place within the framework of the Convention and in compliance with its provisions. They will take place with the prospect of preparing a document whose unified nature can never be challenged for any reason.
The draft resolution before us today is the outcome of intensive negotiations and a laboriously reached compromise» it cannot give entire satisfaction to everyone. However, it takes up the signal that the Group of 77 intended to send to all interested parties in the statement made at the end of the summer session of the Preparatory Commission. The point of that signal was clearly to state once again our desire to make sure that the Convention would command as such support as possible. That is a goal we have been seeking for so long. We are calmly awaiting a signal in response, which we hope will be, like the one sent by the Group of 77, respectful of the Convention and within the context of its relevant provisions.
For those reasons we shall support the draft resolution.
Mg. RANASINGHE (Srl Lanka), Srl Lanka takes much pleasure in co-sponsoring draft resolution A/44/L. 42, on the law of the sea. As members know, when the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka, the Honourable Ranjan Wijeratne, addressed the General Assembly on 2 October 1989, he informed the Assembly of an initiative that Sri Lanka would take at the current session with the objective of launching an endeavour at the global level for the early realization of the benefits of the legal regime for the oceans.
The new ocean regime contained in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea offers rich promise for all countries, especially the developing countries, which are increasingly looking to the resources of the oceans in their efforts to eradicate malnutrition, alleviate poverty and raise the living standards of the poorest of their poor. Unfortunately, many developing countries have been as yet unable to reap the regime's full potential in ocean resources development, because of insufficient awareness as well as the lack of national capabilities in the ocean sector. This vacuum must be filled, and it must be filled soon.
The Sri Lankan initiative is directed at, first, identifying the needs of States in regard to ocean resource development and management, secondly, examining the measures currently taken by States and by competent international organizations in response to these needs, and, thirdly, utilizing the resources of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in assisting all States to maximize opportunities for the early realization of the benefits of the new ocean régime during the decade 1990 to 2000.
My delegation is confident that the full support and co-operation that this initiative has received, from developed aid developing countries alike, augurs well for the strengthening of global efforts to galvanize the human, financial and technical resources necessary for the early realization of the vast potential and enormous promise of the ocean's resources.
(Mr. Ranasinghe, Sri Lanka)
It will give a signal to specialized agencies and international organizations concerned with narine affairs that, nearly eight years after the Convention was signed, it is tine to step up activities to help all States to derive the maximum benefits from this global achievement for all States of the world. It will provide a basis for specialized agencies and other international organizations in this field to allocate adequate funds - additional funds if necessary - within the framework of their own autonomous Constitutions, towards the urgent promotion of ocean resource management and development. It will forge bonds of mutual understanding and accommodation among developed and developing countries in the orderly development and management of ocean resources. It will reflect, particularly at this point in time, the warmth, trust and friendship - the "new wind" which has been referred to with much promise and enthusiasm during the negotiations on this draft resolution - which have emerged as particularly propitious features of current international relations, moving away from conflict and confrontation to consultation, compromise and consensus. My delegation hopes that one of the consequences of this new international environment will be the early coming into effect of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and its universal acceptance.
For those reasons my delegation feels particularly hopeful that the draft resolution on the law of the sea now before the Assembly will help advance current international co-operation in the field of marine affairs and promote the active participation of all States, rich and poor, powerful and weak, in the orderly and mutually beneficial development and management of ocean resources.
(Mr, Ranasinqhe, Sri Lanka)
My delegation has this year, as in previous years, received the report of the Secretary-General on the law of the sea. Again we express our appreciation to the Special Representative for the excellent report. The report comprehensively covers, in a succinct form, a vast array of developments in the field of the lew of the sea. The report is of special interest to my delegation, and we consider the information to be extremely important in keeping abreast of the activities of States and intergovernmental bodies in ocean affairs.
We also note with great satisfaction the work that has been effectively carried out by the Office in supporting, advising and assisting the efforts of Governments and of regional and global co-operative ventures in ocean affairs. In particular, my delegation wishes to express its thanks to the Office for the co-operation and assistance it has provided to the initiative taken originally by Sri Lanka, which has now developed into the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Conference on Economic, Scientific and Technical Co-operation in Marine Affairs in the Indian Ocean in the context of the new ocean reg lice (IOMAC). The second IOMAC Conference is scheduled to take place in 1990 in Tanzania. While much preparatory work has already been completed, more has yet to be done in preparation for the second Conference. The Office for Ocean Affairs has continued to lend advice and assistance to these co-operative efforts, for the benefit of a large nunber of Asian and African countries of the Indian Ocean region.
To developing countries such as mine, the immediate priorities are to secure the benefits that accrue to them in terms of the extended areas of national jurisdiction and sovereignty under the adjacent ocean space. We thus recognize the work of the Office in areas dealing with the traditional uses of the seas. We have greatly benefited from the series of publications presented by the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, which analyse provisions of the Convention, facilitate its interpretation and implementation, and review the activities of States as developments relating to the Convention. I refer in this context to the series of law of the sea studies, comprising analytical studies and studies of State practice. I also refer to the Law of the Sea Bulletin that is periodically issued. The recent study on baselines constitutes a useful guide to the implications of the very technical provisions of the Convention, and the Annual Review of Ocean Affairs contains a wealth of information in documentary form.
(Mr. Ranasinqhe, Sri Lanka)
My delegation makes special reference to the need for the Office to plan for the future, and particularly for the decade 1990-2000, when the Convention is likely to enter into force, aid when the needs of developing countries will be greater than they are today. We also look forward in anticipation to the r^ults to be achieved by the constructive approach taken in ths draft resolution. We shall welcome the efforts of all Menber States, whether developed or developing, to bring about a universally acceptable Convention that is applied globally. The United Nations has a significant role to play in achieving these ends.
Hence X reiterate that my delegation, as a co-sponsor of the draft resolution, will vote in favour.
Mr. STEPANOV (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian), This year we are discussing the item on the law of the sea at a time when promising changes are taking place in international relations, gaining ground and becoming more truly tangible. As is noted in the report of the Secretary-General on this agenda items
"There has been a significant change in the international political climate. Confrontation has given way to co-operation in many areas of conflicts and competition. The international community must direct its attention to those areas where this new spirit has not yet manifested Itself." (A/44/650, para. 2)
The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic supports this appeal. It is tine for a productive dialogue to make the ttiited Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea a truly universal instrument of international law. This idea was the leitmotiv of interventions made ^ the representatives of all groups of States at the final meeting of the summer session of the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law
(Mr. Stepanov, Ukrainian SSR) of the Sea. That idea is also expressed in preambular paragraph 7 of the draft resolution on this item.
The Convention on the Law of the Sea contains enormous potential for the maintenance of the rule of law in the world’s oceans, for the development of international co-operation for the benefit of all peoples of the world and for security on a global scale.
However, this potential can be fulfilled only if the Convention becomes a universal treaty binding on all States, and this can be attained only if the effectiveness of the Convention is based on political agreements reflecting modern realities and the balance of interests of various groups of States.
The changes that have occurred since the signing of the Convention in 1982 require that soma of its provisions be adapted to the different conditions of the day. Hence the need to work out a new legal mechanism, which in the foture would align economic and financial provisions of the Convention with the development trends in the world economy and the commodities market.
The present situation in which the Convention cannot become a universal instrument is fraught with a real dangeri that it may lend itself to imprecise interpretations and applications. Different interpretations of its provisions could damage the development of co-operation among States in the exploitation of the resources and spaces of the world's oceans.
Accordingly, the Ukrainian is prepared to support any positive step to overcome the current difficulties towards universality for the Convention by means of a constructive dialogue between all interested parties both within and outside the Preparatory Commission. We welcome the efforts made by the Secretary-General in trying to find a solution to this problem.
(Mr. Stepanov, Ukrainian SSR)
At the current session of the General Assembly, apart from the b,ic report of the Secretary-General on the law of the sea, for the first time a report has been submitted on the protection and preservation of the marine environment (A/4V461).
This document contains, in a systematized form, information on the present status of the world’s oceans. It also suggests concrete, real areas for further action to be taken by the international coounity. This document could be useful in the preparations for the Conference on Environment and Development planned for 1992. it should be noted that the Convention on the law of the Sea contains the basis for a number of new concepts and principles that could facilitate a more effective consideration of global ecological problems as a whole.
(Mr. Stepanov» Ukrainian SSR)
We have every reason to expect that a concrete contribution to developing this legal potential of the Convention will be made by the Preparatory Commission. I have in mind the consideration next,year in Special Commission 3 of the draft articles on the prevention of pollution of the marine environment by mining for polymetallic nodules. This work has not yet started but it is expected to be of major importance. A code governing the exploration of deep-sea resources should contain clear legal norms that would provide reliable protection for the integrity of the marine environment and its living resources during the carrying out of these activities.
My country views the Convention on the Law of the Sea not only as a charter of the seas but as a unique programme for international co-operation in regard to the marine environment at various levels - bilateral» regional and multilateral» and through international organizations.
A number of the provisions of the Convention can be implemented only through interstate co-operation in one form or another. In this respect we support the programme for inter-organizational and other forms of co-operation contained in the medium-term plan of the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea» headed by Under-Secretary-General Nandan.
The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic can also make a contribution to the implementation of the programme of co-operation in regard to the seas. Our schools have the capacity to educate people about virtually all aspects of the science of the world's oceans and the development of their resources. Apart from this, Ukrainian academic establishments have experience in organizing and building marine research centres in coastal States. We are prepared to consider any requests to provide these kinds of services, both through the United Nations and on a regional or bilateral basis, and also by concluding agreements for joint ventures.
,Wo»
(Mr. Stepanov, Ukrainian SSR) Today it cannot yet be said that the Preparatory Commission has achieved a compromise making possible implementation of the provisions of the resolution on the pioneer activities relating to polymetallic nodules. We believe that the reason for this is not a lack of political will by the parties to the negotiations, but the complex welter of problems that require patience to sort out.
' The draft resolution on this item was agreed during lengthy, complicated consultations. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR wishes to take note of two important, positive factors. First, this draft is much broader than previous resolutions. Along with the traditional provisions on exploitation of deep sea resources and the activities of the Preparatory Commission, it contains a larger number of provisions than before on protection and preservation of the marine environment and its living resources and on machinery for co-operation in regard to the marine environment. Concrete provisions have been included that provide guidance to the international community on how to solve practical problems connected with the Convention's entry into force. Secondly - and this is the most important point - the draft resolution contains a provision on the need to enbark on a dialogue to obtain universal participation in the Convention.
Like other delegations, we express the hope that the message sent by this draft resolution will be heard and that dialogue between all interested parties will get under way.
Mr. TUERK (Austria)t The Austrian delegation is pleased to be able to make a modest contribution to the debate on the highly important question of the law of the sea. Let me first of all express my profound gratitude to the Office for Ocean Affairs and the law of the Sea and in particular to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Law of the Sea, Under-Secretary-General Satya Nand an, for the preparation of the reports now before
us in documents A/44/650 and V44/461, relating respectively to the law of the sea and the protection and preservation of the marine environment. These reports are commendable for, on the one hand, their thoroughness and precision and, on the other, the succinct presentations they contain. They constitute a highly valuable contribution to the continuing discussion of the questions concerned, in general, and to the present deliberations in the Assembly, in particular. For Austria, as certainly for other land-locked countries not extensively involved in uses of the seas, these comprehensive documents, giving a detailed overview of all present marl tine activities, are also an important source of information.
The oceans, covering approximately 70 per cent of the surface of the earth, have always played a significant role in mankind's development, particularly as a vast area of communication but also for satisfying the nutritional needs of coastal populations. Since the beginning of this century the necessity of exploiting the marine resources, whether living or non-living, has intensified in order to keep pace with the increasing needs of a steadily growing world population. At the same time, the possible uses of marine spaces and resources for the benefit of mankind have been greatly extended by technological progress.
These developments have resulted in an increasing tendency on the part of coastal States to assert sovereign rights over resources in maritime zones far beyond their coasts. The growing awareness by States that all the necfaers of the international community, regardless of their stage of development or their geographical location, should be able to benefit from the exploitation of ocean resources led eventually to the preparation, under the auspices of the United Nations, of a comprehensive international legal instrument: the 1982 United Nations Convention on the taw of the Sea. It took the international- community 15 years to establish this new international maritime order, an all-encompassing
(Mr. Tuerk, Austria) regime designed to govern all maritime uses and to take into account the close interrelationship of all maritime phenomena as well as the interconnection of land and sea.
However, during the long and difficult negotiations at the third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea it turned out that it was impossible to satisfy entirely the often-conflicting desires of all the menbers of the international community. In particular, the land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States had to reduce their expectations about the benefits they might derive from the Convention, as they could not offer anything in exchange at the negotiating table except their agreement to a new legal regime for the oceans.
Thus, it was possible for all, or nearly all, States to accept the solutions which the Conference finally worked out, regardless of whether those solutions were always the best ones. The compensation for the latter situation was the enormous advantage constituted by the dispelling of possible doubts as to the legal norms to be applied to the oceans. A major contribution to the removal of legal instability in this area was thereby made.,
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is based on two main concepts.
The first is the submission of vast ocean areas to the national regimes of the coastal States» enabling these States to benefit from the resources therein in an undisputed manner. This extension of coastal States’ rights is» however» balanced by duties regarding the exploitation of those resources. Cental States are thus obliged to maintain the optimum sustainable yield and to prevent overfishing. Furthermore» coastal and port States have assumed important responsibilities as to the protection of the marine environment and they are obliged to grant access to the international scientific community in their respective maritime zones. Secondly» the Convention is based on the concept of internationalising that part of the sea-bed that is beyond national jurisdiction by declaring it and its resources the common heritage of mankind. Rights of exploration and exploitation of these resources are balanced by corresponding duties to carry out such activities in a manner beneficial to humankind as a whole,
Seven years have passed since the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, a monumental work of codification aid progressive development of international law unique in our time. During those years the Convention has already proved its enormous value. The fact that its rules have to a certain extent become customary international law is evidence of this. In particular, I wish to mention the very widespread acceptance by States of the limiting of the territorial sea to 12 nautical miles. As can also be seen from the report (A/44/650), the United Republic of Tanzania has reduced its territorial sea claim from 50 nautical miles to 12 nautical miles. This is an example which, in the view of the Austrian delegation, merits commendation and which it is hoped will be followed by other coastal States at present considering claims beyond that conventional limit.
Furthermore, a wide range of legislative activity has been initiated and stimulated by the adoption of the Convention. In this context my delegation wishes to praise the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the United Nations Secretariat for advising and assisting States, at their request, in connection with the implementation of the Convention and for compiling and regularly publishing all relevant national and international legislation. The consolidation, in 1987, of marine affairs activities at United Nations Headquarters in the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea has certainly resulted in enhancing the efficiency of the United Nations in these areas.
Austria has noted with concern that national legislation does not always conform to the Convention. This may upset the delicate balance which has been established by the provisions of the Convention and which formed the basis for its acceptance by land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States. It should be noted in particular that the rights of land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States enshrined in the Convention are not always fully reflected in national legislative acts, such as their rights relating to marine scientific research.
Furthermore, we consider it a matter for concern that States are often tempted to rely only on those parts of the Convention that suit their interests. In the view of the Austria) delegation, this practice may disturb the equilibrium between the conflicting interests of various States achieved by the Convention and, in the long run, endanger its effectiveness.
Issues relating to the protection and preservation of the marine environment will be among the principal future challenges to the comprehensive legal system established by the Convention. The report on the protection and preservation of the marine environment (A/44/461 and Corr.l) reflects in a clear and comprehensive manner the actual legal and factual status of the protection of the marine
(Mr. Tuerk, Austria) environment and indicates the problems with which t» are faced. The international conwunity increasingly recognizes the primordial importance of the oceans in maintaining the global ecological balance and in controlling and moderating the world's climate. Increased attention must therefore be paid to the legal framework the Convention provides for the marine environment in trying to establish a balance between the rights and freedoms set forth therein, relating, inter alia, to exploration and exploitation of maritime resources, navigation and marine scientific research on the one hand and the protection of the marine environment on the other.
In spite of the relevant legal regime enshrined in the Convention, in particular in articles 192 to 196, laying down the obligation of States to protect and preserve the marine environment, we must acknowledge the existence of grave deficiencies with regard to the prevention of maritime pollution, in particular in coastal areas. Austria deplores the fact that coastal States have not yet taken efficient measures to eliminate land-generated sources of marine pollution, such as sewage or industrial sediments, as well as fertiliser and sediment deriving from agricultural and development activities. In our view, the elaboration of legal rules to deal with these problems is a matter of urgency. This could be done on the basis of the Montreal Guidelines for the Protection of the Marine Environment against Pollution from Land-Based Sources.
At the same time, further enhancement and development of the mechanisms, provided for by the Convention in article 297, concerning the settlement of disputes in cases of coastal States contravening international rules and standards concerning the protection and preservation of the marine environment is necessary. This would have to include the resolution of the question, also raised by the International Law Commission, in connection with "damages to the commons", as to
(Mr. Tuerk, Austria) who might engage in a dispute-settlement procedure against such a State on behalf of the international connunity.
I also wish to underline the Austrian view that the rules of international law on liability regarding activities causing maritime pollution require further development, in particular as regards civil liability.
Let me finally express the deep concern of my delegation regarding the state of conservation of maritime living resources. Some States, while benefiting from the achievements of the Convention, do not seem to be sufficiently prepared also to incur the duties flowing from it. Thus, the use of new fishing techniques may threaten the survival of certain living resources - a situation which the Convention aims at preventing. Austria therefore hopes that States will refrain from activities, including fishing methods, that might lead to over-exploitation endangering the very existence of maritime living resources.
The Austrian delegation whole-heartedly subscribes to the view expressed by Under-Secretary-General Nandan that
"we cannot allow the world to go back to the instability and disorder that had developed in the law of the sea and had precipitated the convening of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea."
The significant change in the international political climate, reflected in many of the debates at the current session of the General Assenbly, should make it possible for all States to renew their efforts to achieve universal participation in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea - as also pointed out in the report of the Secretary-General (A/44/650).
Bearing this in mind, the Austrian delegation wishes to emphasize that it is our common task to search all the more actively for solutions to those problems which have so far impeded general acceptance of the Convention. In addressing
PRB/dr
these questions we have to face the fact that commercial sea-bed mining now seems a distant prospect - contrary to what we thought when negotiating the relevant provisions of the Convention. Our aim must be to ensure a feasible, universally acceptable system of deep-sea-bed mining that will truly put into practice the principle of the common heritage of mankind by providing benefits for all the menbers of the international community and, in particular, for the least developed and the land-locked among the developing countries. The Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea has already resolved several difficult issues and thereby laid a solid basis for further endeavours in this direction.
My delegation wishes in this connection to thank the Chairman of the Commission, Ambassador Jose Jesus, for his outstanding contributions to the work of that body. His unrelenting and energetic efforts, including his efforts relating to draft resolution A/44/L. 42, now before us, merit particular praise. I wish to assure him of the continued and wholehearted support of the Austrian delegation as he carries out his difficult task. In particular, we share his view that efforts should be made to conclude the work of the Preparatory Commission - hopefully -approximately two years from now.
My delegation was gratified to note that at this year's summer session of the Preparatory Commission the Chairman of the Group of 77 and speakers from the other important interest groups expressed their support for universal participation in the Convention and reaffirmed their willingness to enter into renewed dialogue on the outstanding issues with any delegation, whether or not currently involved in the work of the Preparatory Commission, whether or not a signatory to the Convention. Let me express the sincere hope of the Austrian delegation that this new attitude will enable us to achieve generally acceptable solutions to these issues. The present draft resolution, of which Austria is a co-sponsor, contains an express reference to this willingness to explore all possibilities of addressing issues in order to ensure universal participation in the Convention.
We way hope that the signal sent by this draft resolution to those at present outside the ongoing negotiation process will be understood as a clear, an unequivocal, indication of the desire to achieve a viable and universal deep sea-bed regime. A convention not adhered to also by the major industrialized countries would, in the view of my delegation, remain a mere torso and could not fulfil the aspirations which originally generated its preparation - that is, to form a just and equitable legal basis for the use of the seas by all the members of
(Mr, TueEk» Austria) the international community for the benefit of mankind. Thus, we shall have to consider ways and means of adapting certain provisions of the Convention in a pragmatic aid flexible manner, taking into account, in particular, the changed economic circumstances since these provisions were drafted. In our view, only such an approach might be able to achieve the goal of participation in the Convention by all States.
Finally, I should like to point out that quite a number of countries do not seem to be ready to ratify the Convention at the present stage, as the precise financial implications of menbership are not yet clear to them. Austria was pleased to note the decision of tie Preparatory Commission that the initial secretariat of the Sea-Bed Authority would be lean and cost-effective. That decision, in our view, constitutes a step in the right direction and should contribute to allaying apprehensions in connection with the financing of the Convention's organs. It would seem to us that the Preparatory Commission should in the future devote even greater attention to these issues.
Let us all work together to achieve the noble goals of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea by establishing an effective and universal legal order of the seas. The draft resolution now before us might provide a valuable stepping-stone in that direction.
Mr. TEIIMRNN (Norway): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland, Sweden, Finland and Norway.
The Nordic countries followed with great interest and satisfaction the developments which took place within the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-bed Authority and the international Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. The statements made on 1 September 1989 during that session attested to the expressed readiness for a constructive dialogue in order to ensure that the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea could one day become universally acceptable. The
(Mg. Tellmann, Norway) willingness to engage in dialogue has continued to be expressed in the General Assenbly during the current session. We have witnessed delegations making important efforts in order to open the door to a constructive discussion regarding the problems related to some provisions in the Convention. We hope that these efforts will facilitate full participation in the work of the Preparatory Commission. The Secretariat deserves much credit for its untiring work to bring about that positive development.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is a major achievement, to which all the Nordic countries pay tribute. The Convention codifies existing customary rules and constitute as well as an important development of the law of the sea. Though it has not entered into force, it has had an important impact on the development of customary law. The Convention as a whole represents aspirations to a fair and just order. It is of crucial importance that the Convention enter into force one day on a universal basis.
The Nordic countries have during recent years been concerned at the fact that the Convention has still not been universally accepted owing to the fact that some of its provisions are still considered to be problematic. The Nordic countries have been particularly concerned at the fact that until quite recently there was little or no discussion on hew to address the still-outstanding issues, regarding a workable deep-sea mining regime. Therefore, we are particularly pleased to welcome this new opening reflected in draft resolution A/44/L. 42, which is before the Assembly today. We regret that the draft resolution, which reflects this new development, cannot be adopted by consensus. None the less, we urge all States, whether or not they have participated so far in the Preparatory Commission - and indeed we urge the Preparatory Commission itself - to take advantage of this momentum in order to seek ways to ensure the universal acceptance of the Convention as a whole.
Mr. MOHIUDDIN (Bangladesh), Bangladesh is taking part in the deliberations on the item at hand with keen interest. That is because for my country, a developing coastal State with limited resources, both land-based and marine, this matter has become increasingly significant for the well-being of the people, for which we maintain the widest possible support.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has been appropriately hailed as not only the constitution for the oceans of the world but also the blueprint for ocean development. The Convention is a momentous achievement by the international community in that by establishing a legal order for the seas and oceans it promotes - aid here I quote from the preamble to the Convention,
"the equitable and efficient utilization of their resources, the conservation of their living resources, and the study, protection and preservation of the marine environment".
(Mg. Mohiuddin, Bangladesh) In this context, my delegation is pleased to note that the Secretary-General, in his comprehensive report on the item, addresses in great earnest the developments not only with regard to the legal order of the oceans but also with regard to ocean development, marine resource conservation and marine environment. In fact, in view of the importance Bangladesh places on ocem development and management, my delegation is particularly appreciative of the leading section of the report on integrated management of coastal and ocean resources ad new challenges and opportunities for the 1990s.
Bangladesh is eager to seize upon the new opportunities that are amply evident in this sphere. The priorities of my country, as in the case of other developing coastal States, are in the traditional non-sea-bed related parts of marine affairs. For example, we believe that baselines need to be established, maritime zones - territorial sea, contiguous zone, exclusive economic zone, continental shelf - need to be demarcated precisely with co-ordinates, delimitations need to be worked out, national legislation and regulation need to be aligned with the Convention, new projects must be formulated for coastal and marine resource development, requisite scientific and technological capabilities are to be strengthened, required human skills have to be developed, md financial resources must be mobilized. All these are to be carried out In an Integrated management approach within the framework of an overall maritime policy which, in turn, should be an integral part of national development policy.
Bangladesh accords special emphasis to food and energy production, industrialization and natural disaster prevention and control. Thus, my Government is expending utmost efforts sectorally. My Government is also paying attention to the integrated management approach towards coastal and ocean development. Currently, in addition to the sectoral programmes, Bangladesh is carrying out a
(Mr. Mohiuddin, Bangladesh) project on coastal zone management with assistance from the United Nations aid the United Nations Development Programme.
We believe that international co-operation is the most effect means for ocean development. Bangladesh therefore urges such intensified co-operation so that the new opportunities in the 1990s can be realized and the new challenges met. In my delegation s view, the international community has the potential for unique success in dealing with issues of marine affairs.
The Convention is a testimony to the success of the collective efforts of the Member States channelled through the United Nations. In our view, following the precedent of the Convention, the United Nations can be particularly effective in meeting the needs of the Member States.
In this context, we take special note of the activities of the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. A review of the second part of the Secretary-General's report demonstrates that he is already carrying out activities to assist developing coastal States. We see that a number of Asian, African aid Latin American States would be beneficiaries of that assistance, either at the national level or within regional or subregional groups, with the relevant global, regional and subregional organizations, to strengthen and intensify such assistance activities addressing the opportunities of the 1990s.
I should like also to extend my congratulations to the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea and its dedicated and efficient staff, headed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Satya Nandan, for their numerous and extremely helpful activities. We would like to request that Office to continue in its endeavours, specially taking into account the needs of developing coastal States.
(Mr. Mohiuddin, Bangladesh)
Bangladesh welcomes the efforts aimed at the realization of benefits from the non-sea-bed related parts of the Convention and urges the strengthening of such efforts at the international level. We are at the same time heartened by the new opportunities provided in the draft resolution to resolve sea-bed related matters of the Convention. Resolution of these latter matters would not only preserve the package constituting the Convention but also provide much-needed impetus for the fullest realization of benefits from the non-sea-bed related parts of the Convention.
My delegation is ready and willing to contribute to any constructive dialogue and urges Member States to take advantage of the new opportunities that resolution would open up, so that sea-bed related matters could be resolved satisfactorily, thereby ensuring universal acceptability of the whole package constituting the Convention. All efforts at all levels and in all forums leading to such resolution, while preserving the integrity of the Convention, are wholeheartedly welcome to my delegation. Undivided attention could then be paid to the urgent needs of developing coastal States for coastal and marine development and management.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate what my country’s representative stated while signing the Convention in Montego Bay in 1982:
,We have to acknowledge that not all our hopes have been realized in this Convention. Yet the Convention, with all its imperfections, offers a viable package deal which must be taken as a whole in the spirit of mutual co-operation and friendship".
My delegation calls upon all Member States to keep in view this give-and-take approach. In a spirit of mutual co-operation, we urge all to accept the	j
'I Convention, the product of years of tireless toil.	I
Mr. TREVES (Italy)» The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has been open for signature» ratification or accession for almost seven years. Although it is not in force, it exerts - to borrow the Secretary-General’s words in his report:
"a dominant influence on the maritime practices of States". (A/44/650, para.8) Whenever States meet with a problem concerning activities at sea, they look to the Convention for guidance. They may, after consideration, come to the oonclusion that the particular provision that envisages their problem does not correspond to customary law» but it is a fact that the first text they consider is the Convention and that in most cases they find that its provisions give expression to rules that are applicable and appropriate. The experience of all Governments confirms this truth. Similar conclusions may be drawn from the relatively limited amount of documents of State practice published by the Secretariat or available from other sources.
As the representative of France remarked on behalf of the States menbers of the European Community in speaking at the Preparatory Commission on 1 September this year, this positive influence on practice has resulted in the Convention already
"forming an essential element in- the maintenance of legal order in the seas and oceans".
That notwithstanding, it seems obvious to us that the Convention's influence and its function of strengthening world order would be enhanced and guaranteed for the future if the Convention were to become a binding instrument. We consider important that the written rules, adequately guaranteed by compulsory mechanisms for the settlement of disputes, regulate relations between States as regards	j
activities at sea. Such rules would be more efficient in restraining States from	J
I
adopting legislation and practices divergent from the rules of the Convention and would channel the growth of the law in the safe direction of generally agreed evolutionary interpretations of the Convention or of generally agreed revisions thereof »
Those positive effects cannot, however, be obtained by the mere entry into force of the Convention. It is necessary that the Convention become a universally binding instruments in other words, that it become a treaty in force for the overwhelming majority of the international community, including the States most active in utilizing the seas. A convention in force for a group of States whose composition would not reflect adequately the wide variety of interests, geographical situations, social and political structures, or degrees of development that characterize the contemporary international community would not be sufficient to maintain world order in the oceans. Its function of constituting a framework and a guide for States in developing their activities at sea without interfering with one another and solving their conflicts by peaceful means would be jeopardized.
A convention in force to which important sectors of the international community could not become parties might involve certain risks for the orderly development of international relations. The world would become divided between States for which the convention was a binding instrument and States for which it would constitute, at least in part, mere guidance, subject to verification of the correspondence with customary law of the specific rules to be applied. The way would be opened for divergent practice and for an evolution of the law that would not be the sane for every State. The Convention on the Law of the Sea might not, in that situation, be able to continue to fulfil the function it is fulfilling now, pending its entry into force.
It is well known that the main reason for the rather dismal prospect I have just evoked being a possibility is that a sizeable group of States - to which Italy belongs - have difficulties in becoming bound by the Convention because of certain
(Mr. Treves, Italy) provisions contained in part XI, which concerns sea-bed mining. Other States hesitate to become bound by the Convention until they see serious prospects of its becoming acceptable to that group of States also.
It is, however, our firm conviction that, seen in the context of the law of the sea as a whole, deep-sea-bed mining occupies a rather small place. Deep-sea-bed mining is just one marine activity among many. Moreover, the ideas entertained during the negotiation of the Convention, according to which deep-sea-bed mining activity could be started soon and be profitable in commercial terms, have proved to be illusions. Deep-sea-bed mining is not for today, or tomorrow. Consequently, the problem that precludes the universality of the Convention is relatively minor, at least in comparison with the rewards its solution would bring.
We are firmly convinced that this problem can be solved and that the time is ripe foe attempting to address it. We know we are not alone in this conviction. We were particularly pleased to hear, at the final meeting of the Preparatory Commission this summer, the representative of the Group of 77 proclaim the willingness of his Group to open dialogue with
"any delegation, or group of delegations, be they currently involved in the work of the Preparatory Commission or not, whether signatories or non-signatories of the Convention".
We did not hesitate to recognize an important signal in those words. In his statement at the same meeting of the Preparatory Commission the representative of Italy, Minister Ramiro Ruggiero, speaking on behalf of th# Group of Six - Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and Italy - welcomed the statement of the representative of the Group of 77 and saidi "We are convinced that the United Nations law of the sea Convention constitutes a major achievement of the United Nations and of the process of
EH/sm
codification and progressive development of international law. But the Jtates
belonging to the Group of Six hold the view that part XI presents some serious problems which if left unresolved might jeopardize this achievement. We have therefore worked tirelessly in this forum to find appropriate solutions to the above-mentioned difficulties so as to pave the way for a universally acceptable Convention. We strongly believe that the achieving of this lofty objective might be greatly facilitated should all States agree to the launching of a dialogue, without pre-conditions and in the appropriate framework, aimed at achieving better understanding of those problems and solutions to them."
At this plenary meeting of the General Assembly my delegation would like to confirm that it continues to hold that position and to indicate its satisfaction at seeing similar concepts incorporated in the draft resolution on the item on the law of the sea submitted to the Assembly for approval. Although the seventh preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 3 could have been more explicit, they signal, in our opinion, the wish to foster the atmosphere favourable to a dialogue aimed at ensuring the universality of the Convention - an atmosphere inaugurated by the statements made at the meeting of the Preparatory Commission on 1 September. We for our part are ready to make our contribution.
It is of course difficult to say in what such a dialogue should consist. We are perfectly aware that to certain delegations certain modalities are more acceptable than others, while to other delegations other modalities are more acceptable. It seems to us that it would be premature to present now a blueprint for the structure of the dialogue} not all States on the various sides are ready for that.
What should be clear from the outset is the objective of the dialogue, namely, the creation of the conditions necessary for making the Convention a universally
accepted instrument. Provided they help in the attainment of that objective, all means that diplomats and lawyers can imagine should be considered. All the help that can be mustered, including that of the Secretary-General, should be welcomed. The beginnings should be very cautious: much mistrust has to be removed» many ties have to be restored.
Even though the willingness to engage in dialogue without pre-conditions is certainly a very positive element, it seems to-us that, at least in the initial stages, to go too quickly would be even more dangerous than to go too slowly. We must however start moving. Tine is not unlimited and advantage should be taken of the favourable atmosphere now prevailing and reflected in the draft resolution.
The important events and prospects I have just mentioned should now allow us to forget that the law of the sea is a vast area of international law in which many important developments take place every year. The Secretary-General's valuable reports are an important reminder and an accurate reflection of this fact. This year we have	before us	two reports: the usual	one on the	law of the sea and a
special one,	requested	by the General Assembly	last year,	on the protection and
preservation of the marine environment.
We wish	to say at	the outset that both reports meet the high standards to
which previous reports	have accustomed us. We	welcome in	particular the report on
the marine environment. Its production is extremely timely and we are certain that when further updated and revised it will make an important contribution to the work of the 1992 United Nations conference on environment and development. It contains an extremely valuable analysis of the rules in the Wilted Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea concerning the marine environment, as well as of all other bodies of international law relevant to the subject. It emerges from that analysis that
"It is already becoming apparent that the provisions of the Convention are providing guidance on the fundamental rules relating to State obligations to protect and preserve their own and the wider environment." (A/44/461 and Corr.l, para. 15)
It emerges, too, that they also provide the framework for other specialized conventions, whether regional or universal in character.
One observation in the report seems to us to be very important, namely, that "the Convention as a whole has struck an important balance between the protection of the marine environment and use of the ocean and its resources", and that it is consequently important
"that the issue relating to the protection and preservation of the marine environment should not be dealt with in isolation from other aspects of the law of the sea if the balance achieved is to be maintained.” (ibid., para. 9) This observation must be kept in mind in commenting on two recent developments mentioned - although not from the point of view that we shall adopt - in the Secretary-General's reports.
The first is the observation made in the Brundtland report (A/42/427) on the future of the environment and reproduced in the report on the marine environment -namely, that
"the most significant initial action that nations can take in the interests of the oceans' threatened life-support system, (A/44/461, para. 136) is to ratify the Convention on the Law of the Sea. It is clear that, as the draft resolution we are going to adopt recognizes
"the protection of the marine environment will be significantly enhanced by the implementation of the applicable provisions of the Convention”.
(A/44/L.42, para. 15)
But is is also clear that what is needed is universal application of these provisions. Even though it emerges from the report that this is already happening, it follows from the foregoing observation that environmental protection is a good argument for trying to remove obstacles to the universality of the Convention.
The second development on which we wish to cement is that during the year that has elapsed since the General Assembly last discussed the law of the sea, difficulties emerged in two major international negotiations about striking the right balance between protection of the environmental or other interests of coastal States and protection of the interests of navigation. These were the negotiations that led to the adoption on 19 December 1988 of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, and to the adoption on 22 March 1989 of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal. In both negotiations certain States argued that particular powers should be recognized for the coastal States. As regards the negotiations on the drug Convention, it was argued that permission should be requested not only of the flag State but also of the coastal State in
(Mr. Treves, Italy) order to take measures regarding a vessel suspected of being engaged in illicit traffic of drugs when it is exercising freedom of navigation in the exclusive economic zone. In the hazardous-wastes negotiations it was argued that the coastal State enjoys the right of giving permission for transit in its territorial waters to ships carrying hazardous wastes. In both cases these positions met with strong resistance: the right of innocent passage was invoked in the hazardous-wastes negotiations# and freedom of navigation in the economic zone was insisted upon in the drugs negotiations. In both cases the problem was solved with provisions that recall the relevant rules of International law, indirectly quoting the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Thesa episodes confirm once more the problem-solving function of the Convention. They indicate also, however, that the balance struck in the Convention is under the pressure of new problems and concerns. This is another indication that the entry into force of the Convention vis-à-vis the widest and most representative group of States is of the utmost importance for preserving such balance. This is confirmed by the fact that certain reservations which are highly questionable in the light of the Convention on the Law of the Sea, have been made to the other Conventions to which I have referred.
The report on the law of the sea contains interesting material that confirms, on the one hand, the dominant influence of the Convention on the practice of States and, on the other hand, that the delicate balance struck in the Convention between various interests is always at risk.
Particularly interesting indications of the influence of the Convention on practice can be found in the fact that Tanzania has reduced its territorial sea from 50 to 12 miles, and in the joint communique Issued by the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on 23 September 1985 stating that
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library J

(Me. Treves, Italy) "Governments are guided by the provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which, with respect to traditional uses of the seas, generally constitute international law and practice and balance fairly the interests of all States".
To those and other elements contained in the report one should add the Declaration adopted by France and the United Kingdom on 2 November 1988 which recognizes as existing law the right of transit passage through the Straits of Dover in terms very close to those set forth in the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
As regards the risks facing the balance of interests struck in the Convention, apart from the already-considered episodes concerning the Conventions on drugs and hazardous wastes, the report mentions in paragraph 57 the discussion now under way on including in a draft protocol concerning specially protected areas and wild life in the Caribbean a rule which would authorize States to take measures to regulate passage, anchoring and stopping of vessels. Here again environmental interests exert pressure on the principles concerning navigation.
The trend evidenced by the Soviet-United States agreement of 23 September 1989 on uniform interpretation of rules of international law governing innocent passage - that is, to resort to agreed interpretations or to unilateral interpretations of the Convention while the mechanisms for dispute settlement provided for in the Convention are not in place - as well as the other elements of practice to which I have already referred, seem to confirm that a universally applicable convention would perform its task of guiding States and preserving world order much better than a convention not in force or a convention in force for only a part of the international community.
Before concluding, I should like to emphasize once again my Government's deep appreciation for the many activities of the Office for Ocean Affairs aid the Law of
(Mr. Treves, Italy) the Sea and for the dedication, competence and high political skill of its leader, Mr. Satya Nandan, and all the staff working with him. We particularly welcome initiatives aimed at facilitating the application of the Convention. The booklet on baselines is a primary example here, and a further important development took place a few months ago with the meeting of experts on marine scientific research. The publications of the Office, and in particular the yearly report, the Bulletin, the collections of State practice, and the newly born Annual Review of Ocean Affairs constitute invaluable instruments to increase the knowledge of States and scholars as well. They contribute greatly to the development of the law in a field where, together with the Convention, practice is decisive.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.63
1 December 1989
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REOORD OF THE SIXTY-THIRD MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 22 November 1989, at 3 p.m.
President:	Mr. GARBA	(Nigeria)
laters	Mr. HURST	(Antigua and Barbuda)
-	Tribute to the memory of René Moawad, President of the Lebanese Republic
-	Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa [28] (continued)
(a)	Draft resolutions
(b)	Report of the Fifth Committee
-	Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency: report of the Fifth Committee [126]
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64465/A 5244V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF RENE MOAWAD, PRESIDENT OF THE LEBANESE REPUBLIC
The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding with the consideration of the items on the agenda for this afternoon, I should like to invite the General Assembly to join in a tribute to the memory of Mr. René Moawad, President of the Lebanese Republic.
It was with deep sorrow that I learnt this morning of the tragic death of President Moawad. President Moawad had been a Member of Parliament over three decades and symbolized the highest qualities of public service. He worked tirelessly, with vision and remarkable human qualities, for peace and social justice in Lebanon. His death is a tragic loss to his country.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the representative of Lebanon to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of Lebanon and to the bereaved family.
I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): This is a day of mourning for Lebanon and a day of consternation for the entire international community. A cowardly and terrible attack has cost the life of President René Moawad, whose election we had just welcomed. We condemn most energetically this hateful crime.
President Moawad was a Lebanese patriot who shouldered his responsibilities in full awareness of the danger and the challenge involved, and that is not the least of the reasons why he attracted so much respect and admiration. This tragedy occurred on the day on which Lebanon was commemorating its independence, and at a time when it was hoped that the acts of violence which for so long had ravaged that country were a thing of the past.
At this moment of tragedy, I appeal to the Lebanese people to renounce violence and unite in determination to restore the values which made Lebanon
great. They owe it to the memory of President Moawad and the other Lebanese leaders who sacrificed their lives in the service of their country to continue with courage the process of national reconciliation and reconstruction of the legal institutions of Lebanon.
The PRESIDENT: I invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of President Moawad.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence..
The PRESIDENT: I new call on Mr. Phoofolo, representative of Lesotho, who will speak on behalf of the African Group of States.
Mr. PHJOFOLO (Lesotho); In the current international political climate the international community is distancing itself from the use of violence as a means of resolving political conflicts and differences. The new international mood continues to evoke new hope for all members of the international community.
Just as we hope for the definitive settlement of all regional conflicts, so it has been our fervent hope that an end to the suffering which the people of Lebanon have endured for more than a decade was in sight. The commendable initiative carried out by our brothers in the Middle East was welcomed and hailed as a positive and very constructive contribution towards a return to normality in Lebanon.
It is indeed incomprehensible that the forces of darkness and mischief maintain their shameless and inhuman selfishness in order to attain their personal ends, at the expense of the general welfare, peace and tranquillity so longed for by the Lebanese people and the international community.
On behalf of the African Group and of my country, I must say that we learnt with a great sense of shock of the dastardly and cowardly act that resulted in the untimely death of the President of Lebanon, Mr. René Moawad. The leadership of the
late President was a product of the intense efforts peace and the ideals of democracy. He was the hope
(Mr. Phoofolo, Lesotho) of all those people who cherish of the new Lebanon, which was
striving for the happiness and' joy of all its people.
The untimely death of President René Hoaxed is, regrettably, a temporary setbaok for aU the foroes of peace, justice and freedom in Lebanon, but the forces of darkness should not deceive themselves, their cowardly act, which was a short-sighted act of frustration and defeat, will bring them no success.
Africa shares the grief of the Government and people of Lebanon. We convey to them, and particularly to the next of kin of the late President, our sincere sympathy and condolences.
We say to the people of Lebanon, draw fortitude and strength from the ideals principles that guided and made President René Hoawad the leader he was, continue to be inspired by all that he stood for and valued.
May his soul rest in peace.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Brunei Darussalam, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. JAYA (Brunei Darussalam): On behalf of the menbers of the Group of Asian States, I wish to associate myself with the other speakers in expressing our immense sorrow on the tragic demise of His Excellency President Rene Moawad of Lebanon.	,
I sincerely extend to the Lebanese delegation, to the people and the Government of Lebanon aid to the bereaved family of the late President our condolences and heartfelt sympathy for the loss of their leader.
May I also appeal to all concerned to remain calm and exercise restraint during this moment of sadness. It is hoped that all parties will continue to co-operate and extend their indulgence in the interest of peace and stability in that area.
At this hour of grief, I request, on behalf of the Group of Asian States, that this message be conveyed to the Government of Lebanon and to the late President's family.
The PRESIDENT? I call on the representative of Antigua and Barbuda, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. HURST (Antigua and Barbuda)s On behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean Spates, I wish to convey our heartfelt sympathy to the people and the Government of Lebanon. The acts of violence which have racked that country will only make more difficult the solution of what appears to be intractable problems. I wish to convey to the Lebanese delegation and to the family of the late President that Latin America and the Caribbean share their loss, and we shall continue to act in this forum to promote peace in that region.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Norway, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States.
MM/sm
Mr. TE UM ANN (Norway) : It was with shock and grief that the delegations of the Group of Western European and Other States learned of the tragic news of the assassination of President René Moawad and his compatriots. Scarcely more than a fortnight has passed since Mr. Moawad was elected President of Lebanon, end his untimely death thus coincided with the accomplishment of an important stage on the road to restoring peace and unity in Lebanon and rejuvenating its institutions.
This heinous deed has left the world with a sense of great loss and outrage and the Lebanese people without an inspiring leader who had raised expectations and hope of bringing unity to that war-torn country so that the Lebanese people could achieve peace, dignity and harmony.
In this dark hour we pledge our support to the people of Lebanon and appeal to all sectors of the Lebanese people to keep alive the hope and the vision of President Moawad for a peaceful end to the tragic situation in Lebanon.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I should like to convey our most sincere condolences to the bereaved families, to the people and the Government of Lebanon and to our colleagues in the Lebanese délégation.
The PRESIDENT, I call on the representative of Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): It was with extreme shock that the Arab Group in New York received the news of brotherly-Lebanon's loss of its President, René Moawad, as a result of a hateful criminal act. That loss is not Lebanon's alone, it is the Arab nation's as well. He was a President in whom many hopes had been placed to extricate Lebanon from the plight in which it has found itself for so many years.
If the loss of any President is a grave loss, that of the President of brotherly Lebanon, in the context of the circumstances besetting that Arab country, is indeed so catastrophic that its consequences cannot be predicted.	s
The late President, who was a man of moderation and justice, from the very first moments of his election attempted the monumental task of ridding Lebanon of its plight, stemming the bloodshed and achieving national reconciliation. The steps he took testify to the purity of his objectives and were a genuine expression of the wishes of the Lebanese people. However, the criminal hand of blind violence has extinguished that torch of hope in Lebanon.
Death is an act of God, an act we must accept. It is the inevitable fate of every human being. However, the motives behind the assassination must always be denounced and condemned. Truth will always prevail; and the truth of Lebanon is that its people is creative and faithful to its true Arab identity in defending its territorial integrity, sovereignty and institutions and in working for national reconciliation. These qualities have characterized the Lebanese nation and have earned it the admiration of the world. The Lebanese people, which have given their country great leaders such as the late President Moawad, will undoubtedly be able to find a worthy successor through the exercise of its legitimate constitutional process and by upholding the principle of legitimacy. It will thus be able to renew its institutions.
The international community is called upon not to stop short at expressing its feelings of regret for Lebanon and its people. What Lebanon needs under the circumstances is continuing support for its legitimacy, its territorial integrity and the restoration of its sovereignty and stability. It is that kind of ongoing support Members are called upon to extend.
On behalf of the Group of Arab States, which I have the honour of chairing this month, I wish to express our condolences to the Lebanese delegation, hoping that this expression of solidarity will be conveyed to the people and the Government of Lebanon aid to the bereaved family.
MLT/gt
The Arab Group is particularly appreciative of and grateful for the feelings of the international community expressed by all the speakers who have preceded me in expressing condolences to Lebanon and its people. Wb fully appreciate these condolences and the expressions of support by you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General and the Chairmen of the regional groups.
Ashes to ashes» dust to dust.
'	The’ PRESIDENT» I now call upon the representative of Yugoslavia, who
will speak on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Mr; PEJIC (Yugoslavia)» In my capacity as Chairman of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries at the United Nations in New York I wish to express profound shock and outrage at the tragic news of the assassination of the newly elected President of Lebanon, His Excellency Mr. René Moawad. Allow me to take this opportunity to convey our most sincere sympathy and condolences to the Government and people of Lebanon and the bereaved family at this tragic death.
The late President Moawad will be remenbered for his courage and dedication to the cause of the restoration of the national unity and reconciliation in his country, which has suffered for so long. He had assumed his responsible duties at a crucial time for the fate of his country and in full knowledge of the dangers and challenges involved. We join in the condemnation of this senseless and brutal murder, committed by those who have been blinded by short-sightedness and who act against the interests of the Lebanese people and their desire to live in a unified and peaceful country, after long years of bloodshed and destruction.
This criminal act was clearly aimed against the implementation of the Taif Agreements, reached as a result of the tireless efforts by the Tripartite High Committee of the Arab League - efforts which enjoy the full support of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Security Council and the entire international community.
l i Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia)
We believe that in this tragic moment of grief and mourning the Lebanese	I
people will lend its full support to the Taif Agreements, which are widely	|
recognized as the only basis that can guarantee the restoration of the Lebanese State and the establishment of renewal institutions, thus supporting the process that started with the election of the late President Moawad.
We trust that the Lebanese people will overcome the tragic experiences of the past, caused by the national division, and unite in an effort to bring about national reconciliation.
On those lines, we join in the appeal by the Secretary-General to the Lebanese people not to resort to further violence but to unite in their determination to restore the values for which Lebanon was once known and respected. At the same time, we call upon the international community to continue its support of the	i
efforts of the Arab League and the United Nations to ensure the restoration of the national integrity, sovereignty and unity of Lebanon, making their contribution to	।
the establishment of peace and prosperity for that country and region.
The non-aligned countries will spare no effort to contribute to the accomplishment of that goal, for ^»ich President Moawad has given his life.
The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of France, who will speak on behalf of the States members of the European Community.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French): The Twelve heard with great dismay the news of the despicable assault that cost the life of the President of Lebanon, Mr. René Moawad. At this tragic tine, they express their condolences to the family of the late President and all the Lebanese people.
The Twelve pay a tribute to this ,•>■’"., devoted to dialogue, who having been elected to the highest office and fully aware of the difficulties facing him,
(Mr. Blanc, France) placed his patriotism and his experience at the service of his country. He undertook to act prudently and with clear-sightedness.
The IVelve categorically condemn this cowardly attack, which has occurred at a time when the recent election of a President of the Republic offered Lebanon a chance for a fresh start.
The Twelve reaffirm the need to keep going the peace process begun in Taif -an initiative under the auspices of the Tripartite Arab Committee - in order to set up renewed structures and restore full sovereignty to Lebanon throughout its territory, free of any non-Lebanese presence.
The Twelve appeal to all Lebanese to exert joint efforts in order to enable the process of national reconciliation to succeed, affirming the existence of an independent, united and sovereign Lebanon, whose territorial Integrity is respected. The Twelve express their readiness, mote than ever, to stend side by side with Lebanon, once again sorely tried.
The ERESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of Czechoslovakia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. ZAPOTOCKY (Czechoslovakia): I should like on behalf of the Eastern European countries to express deep condolences to the Lebanese people on the recent tragic terrorist act. We trust that act will not end the hopes, linked with the	I
election of the President of Lebanon, for a solution of the internal conflicts which have led to the loss of so many human lives.
I should like to emphasize on this occasion the necessity of the practical	j
implementation of the decision of the Tripartite Committee of the League of Arab	i
States on Lebanon.
Once again I should like to express our condolences to the Lebanese people on this sad occasion.
The PRESIDENT» I now call upon the representative of the United States, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. PICKERING (United States of America): On behalf of the people and Government of the United States, I should like to express our heartfelt condolences to the families of the assassinated Lebanese President, Sene Moawad, and those who were so brutally murdered with him.
The United States condenns in the strongest possible terms this cowardly assault on the leader of, and the process of national reconciliation in, Lebanon. We believe that the courage which this constitutionally elected President of Lebanon demonstrated throughout his life should strengthen the resolve of all Lebanese, as well as of the Arab League, in their efforts to continue the democratic process and to restore the unity, territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon.
The PRESIDENT» I now call upon the Alternate Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations.
Mr. CHOUERI (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic), I should like to extend my delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General, and to the Chairmen of the regional groups, as well as to the representative of the host country. We are grateful for the expression, on behalf of all Member States, of these feelings towards wy country on the occasion of this tragedy which has stricken Lebanon and its people as a result of the criminal act of which our President, Professor Rene Moawad, was the victim.
(Mr. Chouerif Lebanon)
I shall not fail to convey these expressions of sympathy to my people and to the family of the deceased President. The tragic loss suffered by Lebanon and its people during its national holiday is another liric in the chain of trials and tribulations that have afflicted this small country and its martyred people for more than 15 years now.
The election of President Moawad on the fifth of this month and the support he obtained from Lebanon, the Arab countries and internationally was an opportunity that is hardly likely to present itself again for the initiation of a rescue process for Lebanon and support of the efforts to ensure reconstruction, unity and sovereignty of the country. This man’s death is a great setback for the Lebanese people’s hopes and expectations of achieving their national aspirations. For many the question is whether Lebanon has lost the only possible chance of saving itself?
It need hardly be said that there is deep sadness in Lebanon today at the loss of its new President, who, because of his patriotism, experience and moderation, represented the hopes and aspirations of the people of Lebanon. This is why today there is a prevailing sense of despair and loss in Lebanon.
The friends of Lebanon may experience now a sense of confusion and anxiety over the future of the country. This affects all of us in the difficult, ominous times through which Lebanon is now passing. That is why today Lebanon needs the support of the United Nations and the international community. I hope that Lebanon will continue to have the sustained support of the brother Arab countries, the international community, the United Nations ~ of which Lebanon was one of the founding Members - and the Secretary-General, who has always been tireless in his efforts on behalf of Lebanon. We hope for the assistance we need, because we know, in spite of all the sadness and tribulation, that the salvation of Lebanon is a responsibility accepted by the international community and those that work for international peace and justice.
JW6	A/44/PV. 63
17
A(£NDA ITEM 28 (continued)
SOLICIT OF APARTHEID OF THE GDVERIWENT OF SOUTH AFRICA
(a)	DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/44/L, 26 to A/44/L. 30, A/44/L. 31 and Corr.l, A/44/L. 32, ' A/44/L. 33, A/44A.34/Rev.l, A/44/L.35, A/44/L.36 and A/44/L. 40)
(b)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/758)
The PRESIDENT» I remind representatives that the debate on this item was concluded at the 52nd plenary meeting, on Friday 10 November 1989,
I draw the attention of representatives to the amendment to draft resolution A/44/L. 34/Rev.l contained in document A/44/L.46.
I call on the representative of Nigeria, who will Introduce four draft resolutions» A/44/L.26, L.27, L.28 and L.30.
Mr. ANKA (Nigeria), On behalf of the sponsors, which include ray own delegation, I have the honour to introduce draft resolutions A/44/L.26, entitled "International solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa"» A/44/L.27, entitled "International support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations"» A/44/L. 28, entitled “Comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa"» and A/44/L.30, entitled "International financial pressure on the apartheid economy of South Africa".
I would like at the outset to bring to the General Assembly's attention the efforts made by the sponsors of these draft resolutions to ensure that they are very clear and succinct. The length of the draft resolutions has been deliberately kept short. Where a Member State has been mentioned by name, it is merely in the process of giving a true and factual account of the existing reality.
I introduce first draft resolution A/44/L.26 on international solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa.
This draft resolution is similar to that which the General Assembly adopted last year under the same heading. In expressing its concern about South Africa's
(Mr. Anka, Nigeria)
internal situation, its acts of aggression and destabilization against independent African States, and the continuing practice of arbitrary detentions and trials, including those of women and children and executions of political prisoners, the ongoing use of vigilante groups and the stifling of the press, the General Assentoly would reaffirm its full support for the majority of the South African people in their struggle to eradicate apartheid totally. It would reaffirm further that, under the leadership of the national liberation movements, the people of South Africa have the right to choose whatever means they deem necessary in order to attain their objective of establishing a free, democratic, unfragmented and non—racial South Africa.
In operative paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, the General Assenbly would list a catalogue of demands the, implementation of which it regards as creating appropriate conditions for free consultations among the people of South Africa with a view to negotiating a just and luting solution to the conflict in that country.
AE/bg	A/44/PV. 63
21
(Mr. Anka। Nigeria)
Moreover, the General Assembly, in operative paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, would appeal to all States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals to extend all possible assistance to the struggling people of South Africa, to step up material, financial and other forms of support to the front-line and other neighbouring independent States that are subject to South Africa’s destabilization activities, and, in particular, to contribute generously to the Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund.
Finally, in operative paragraph 8 the General Assembly would decide to continue the authorization of adequate financial provision in the regular budget of the United Nations to enable the South African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to maintain offices in New York in order to participate actively in the deliberations of the Special Committee against Apartheid and other appropriate bodies.
With regard to draft resolution A/44/L.27, entitled "International support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations", the General Assembly would express its conviction that the system of apartheid cannot be reformed but must be eliminated. Furthermore, the General Assembly would take note of the declaration of the OAU Ad Hoc Committee on Southern Africa adopted at Harare on 21 August 1989. The draft resolution emphasizes the need for support for the efforts of the South African people to arrive at a peaceful settlement of the conflict in their country through genuine negotiations.
Similarly, in particular in operative paragraph 3, the General Assembly would recognize the urgent need for the lifting of the state of emergency, the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners and detainees, the withdrawal of the troops from black townships, the cessation of all political trials and executions, and, lastly, the lifting of the ban on all
(Mr. Anka, Nigeria) individuals and political organizations opposing apartheid, and the repeal of restrictions on the press.
On behalf of the sponsors, I wish to express our collective hope, and our desire, that this draft resolution will be adopted unanimously. But, more important, it is our hope that member States, in truly following up the provisions of the draft resolution, will contribute to giving effect to its operative paragraphs 4 and 5.
My delegation is eaually pleased to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.28, entitled "Comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist régime of South Africa".
Under this draft resolution the General Assembly would reaffirm that apartheid is a crime against humanity and a threat to international peace and security, and that it is a primary responsibility of the United Nations to assist in efforts towards its elimination without further delay.
The crux of the draft resolution is that it expresses the General Assembly's	!
conviction that the imposition by the Security Council of comprehensive and	j
mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations remains the most appropriate and effective means of bringing about a peaceful end to	i
apartheid.	1
In this connection, the Assembly would also call upon those States that are still opposed to the application by the international community of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa to reassess their policies and cease their opposition to the application of such sanctions by the Security Council. The Assembly wou^d also urge the Security Council to consider immediate action under Chapter VII of the Charter with a view to applying comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist régime of south Africa for as long as it continues to ■	I
(Mg, Anka, Nigeria) disregard the demaids of the majority of the people of South Africa and of the international community that it eradicate apartheid»
Finally, the Assembly would call upon those States that have increased their trade with South Africa to sever those trade relations.
In submitting draft resolution A/44/L.30, on international financial pressure on the apartheid economy of South Africa, the sponsors wish to reiterate that the financial support given to the apartheid régime by some member States constitutes an affront to the international community and defiance of the United Nations General Assembly. The General Assembly, therefore, calls on Member States that continue to maintain trade and financial links with South Africa to restrict the provisions of the trade and to cease such collaboration with South Africa. It would also rail on Governments and other bodies to take adequate measures to give effect to the draft resolution. We urge Member States to vote unanimously for	!
adoption of the draft resolution.	1
Considering the importance of the question of apartheid, which has been declared a crime against humanity, and the progressively deteriorating situation in	1
South Africa, I wish, on behalf of the sponsors, to take this opportunity to appeal to all delegations to give this draft resolution their maximum support. It is necessary at this juncture that the General Assembly indicate to South Africa in very clear terms that the international community will no longer tolerate the abhorrent system of apartheid.
On behalf of the sponsors of these draft resolutions, I ask menbers of the	1
Assembly to show their support, individually and collectively, for the anti-apartheid struggle by voting for the draft resolutions. In doing so, we shall be lending our support to resolution of the crisis in South Africa by peaceful means.
^e PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of India, who will introduce draft resolution A/44/L.29, entitled "Imposition, co-ordination and strict monitoring of measures against racist South Africa".
Mr. DAMODARAN (India): On behalf of the sponsors, which include my country, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.29, entitled "Imposition, co-ordination and strict monitoring of measures against racist South Africa". In this context, I should like to add that Barbados, Haiti, Jamaica, Myanmar, Pakistan and Suriname have also become sponsors.
This draft resolution recalls previous resolutions ok. sanctions against South Africa, but also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on restrictive measures affecting externally dependent areas of the South African economy and of the recommendations contained in the report of the Panel of Eminent Persons, which held public hearings on the activities of transnational corporations in South Africa and Namibia at Geneva from 4 to 6 September 1989. It is pointed out in the fifth preambular paragraph that:
"measures taken by States individually or collectively, while commendable, vary in coverage and degree of enforcement and monitoring".
In this connection, the General Assembly would, under operative paragraph 1, urge all States that have not yet done so, pending the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions, to adopt legislation and/or comparable measures to impose effective sanctions, and would list the measures that need to be implemented.
’	(Mr. Damodaran, India)
It would also call upon Governments, intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies of the United Nations, non-governmental organizations and the public at large to take full account of the recommendations of the Panel of Eminent Persons that held hearings on transnational corporations, and request the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly at its forty-fifth session.
I hope that the menbers of the Assembly will vote in favour of draft resolution A/44/L.29.
The PRESIDENT: I now have pleasure in calling on the representative of Kuwait, who will introduce draft resolution A/44/31 and Corr.l, entitled "Relations between South Africa and Israel".
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): I have pleasure in introducing, on behalf of the sponsors, draft resolution A/44/L.31 and Corr.l. There are 54 sponsors in all, including two States which have recently joined the list, Morocco and Mongolia. The draft resolution deals with relations between South Africa and Israel, which, no matter how hard Israel tries to hide them, keep a low profile on them, or understate, them, and no matter what justifications it tries to find for them, continue and, indeed, escalate. Through those relations Israel continues to feed that inhuman regime, which must be fully eradicated.
The co-operation between South Africa and Israel is not limited to trade or economic co-operation. Deserving of condemnation and denunciation as that co-operation is, it has now spread to encompass both military and nuclear co-operation. The aim of this expanded co-operation, which is undeniably important, is ultimately the use of the consequent military and nuclear capability against the people of South Africa, the neighbouring African peoples, the people of Palestine and the neighbouring Arab peoples, and against their just struggle for freedom and emancipation.
AP/gt
(Mg. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
For those reasons, under operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution the General Assembly would conde rm the collaboration between the two régimes.
Under operative paragraph 2 it would reiterate its demand it Israel desist forthwith from all forms of collaboration with South Africa, p. ocularly in the military and nuclear fields.
I hope that the draft resolution will enjoy the support of the General Assembly.
æhg J^fS ID ENT: I call new on the representative of Nepal, who will introduce draft resolution A/44/L.32.
Mr. RANA (Nepal): On behalf of the sponsors, which include my own delegation, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.32, entitled ■Programme of work of the Special Committee against Apartheid".. In this context I wish to inform the Assembly that Haiti, Mongolia, Myanmar, Pakistan and Peru have joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
Under the draft resolution, the General Assembly would command the Special Committee against Apartheid for its work in the discharge of its nendate, in particular in promoting international action against apartheid. In taking note of the annual report of the Special Committee, it would endorse the recommendations in paragraph 274 of the report, relating to the Special Committee’s programme of work for 1990.
The financial request in operative paragraph 8 is the minimum amount that would allow the Special Committee to fulfil its responsibilities and carry out the 1990 programme effectively. Therefore, this year the Special Committee, consistent with its self-imposed austerity measures, requests an amount of $430,000 for the budget. I should like to state clearly that this amount for 1990 should in no way be understood as indicating a reduction in the activities of the Special Committee.
(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
Ws plan to carry out our programmes with effectiveness, especially at this juncture when serious developments are taking place in South Africa. The resources will be used to the maximum to increase pressure and to mobilize action against apartheid.	|
Under the draft resolution the General Assembly would also request Governments and organizations to provide financial and other assistance for the special projects of the Special Committee and to make generous contributions to the Trust i Fund for Publicity against Apartheid.	j
Finally, it would appeal to all Governments, intergovernmental organizations,	\
information media, non-governmental organizations and individuals to co-operate with the Centre against Apartheid and the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat in their activities relating to apartheid and, in particular, in disseminating information on the situation in South Africa, in order to mitigate the effects of the restraints on the press in South Africa and effectively counteract South African propaganda.
The'PRES IDEM Tt I call on the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, who will introduce draft resolution A/44/L.33, entitled "Oil embargo against South Africa".
Mr. NYAKYI (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr. President, as the representative of Nigeria, which is an active and committed member of the Intergovernmental Group to Monitor the Supply and Shipping of Oil and Petroleum Products to South Africa, and as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, you will understand the satisfaction that I feel at seeing you presiding over the debate at this time. The emergence of the consensus represented in the draft resolution I have the honour to introduce to the Assembly was in no small measure due to your personal contribution in both capacities as well as in your capacity as President of the General Assembly.
For a long time the General Assembly has recognized the importance of an effective oil embargo in the international effort to eradicate the abhorrent system °^ apartheid. Directly or indirectly, virtually every human activity is dependent on oil. There is, therefore, a sense in which oil can be characterized as the oxygen of the apartheid machine. If we were able completely to deny the régime the oil supplies it reauires, the whole system would grind to a halt. Its security forces would be virtually grounded and, with them, much of its ability to oppress and repress its people and to commit acts of aggression and destabilization against front-line and other neighbouring States. This reality is, of course, also known to the régime and to the Governments and oil and shipping companies which share a common desire with the régime to frustrate the embargo - which explains to a great extent the immense difficulties the Intergovernmental Group faces in carrying out its mandate to investigate and expose violations of the oil embargo.
Monitoring the supply and shipping of oil and petroleum products to South Africa is one of the most difficult tasks in the enforcement of sanctions against apartheid. The absence of mandatory action by the Security Council constitutes the most serious obstacle. But, additionally, certain Governments, as well as the oil
and shipping industries, are not co-operative in taking effective and concrete measures to enforce the embargo. In spite of these difficulties, the Intergovernmental Group has been able to make some progress in its work.
Draft resolution A/44/L.33 is the result of a consensus reached by the Intergovernmental Group to Monitor the Supply and Shipping of Oil and Petroleum Products to South Africa after thorough consideration of all aspects of our mandate and our work. This draft resolution, which is essentially the same as resolution 43/50 J, adopted by this body last year, contains three new elements, which I should like to explain briefly.
There are three new operative paragraphs, namely, paragraphs 2, 3 and 6. In operative paragraph 5, subparagraphs (g) and (h) have been rephrased.
Operative paragraph 2 addresses itself to the work of the Intergovernmental Group in a new area of possible violation of the embargo. This new area of inauiry is the monitoring of port calls which may have resulted in possible clandestine deliveries of oil to South Africa. The number of such calls over three years, from 1986 through 1988, was no less than 474, and the number of Governments from which information has had to be requested for thorough clarification of those 474 cases was no less than 57. The information necessary for evaluating these cases is often available in the records of harbour authorities, maritime ministries or the like and must be obtained and analysed before the results can be communicated back to the Intergovernmental Group. This, of necessity, requires time. Therefore the Intergovernmental Group felt it necessary to postpone reporting on this matter for another six months in order to give Governments adequate time to compile and analyse the required information. The area is new and technically complex. Before making its final judgement, the Intergovernmental Group felt it would also benefit from further consultations.
In operative paragraph 3 note is taken of the report of the Panel on the Hearings on the Oil Embargo against South Africa, which met in New York on 12 and 13 April 1989. This was a special event in this year's work in discharging the mandate contained in resolution 43/50 J.
In operative paragraph 5, subparagraphs (g) and (h), the words "petroleum products" have been added to make it clear that what is ' ,d about oil, that is, petroleum in its crude form, also applies to refined petroleum products. These words were not contained in the eouivalent subparagraphs of last year's resolution. However, this year's hearings on the oil embargo have led to a greater aPPr®ciation of the importance of shipments of petroleum products to the apartheid régime. In addition, the words "petroleum products, were included alongside the word "oil" in subparagraph (b) of the same paragraph last year, and the discrepancy in the wording of these subparagraphs could have led to a misunderstanding that the words "petroleum products" applied only to trade in oil and not to its transportation. This not being the case, it was decided to standardize the terminology in all relevant subparagraphs.
Finally, operative paragraph 6 makes provision for enhancing public awareness of the oil embargo against South Africa. Specifically, it provides for the Intergovernmental Group, when necessary, to consider participating in meetings of other relevant international forums. The Intergovernmental Group has not so far initiated missions of its own, and it has no plans to do so. Last year the Group was invited to attend meetings away from Headouarters. When necessary, the Group would like to take advantage of such invitations in the future. Operative paragraph 6 makes provision for this.
I commend the draft resolution to the General Assembly for adoption and hope it will be adopted by consensus, as was the case in the Intergovernmental Group.
(Mr. Nyakyi, United Republic of Tanzania)
I an pleased to announce that since the draft resolution was circulated three more countries have added their names to the list of sponsors} Haiti, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Venezuela.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Zambia, who wishes to introduce ciraft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l, entitled "Military collaboration with South Africa".
Mr. ZUZE (Zambia)t It is a great honour and privilege for me, aa a representative of one of the front-line States, to introduce the draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l, entitled "Military collaboration with South Africa".
I wish to emphasize that the independent African countries of southern Africa view with deep concern the collaboration of States and organizations with South Africa in the military, nuclear, intelligence and technological fields, which has over the years strengthened the military machine of the racist Pretoria régime.
(Mr. fa»,, Sarabia)
To a large extent» this collaboration has contributed to the repression off the black majority in South Africa by the racist regime and to its committing acts of aggression and destabilization against the front-line and other independent African Î	States in the region. The draft resolution ï have the privilege to introduce
।	reiterates the need for the full implementation of an arras enbargo against South
Africa» and expresses serious concern at the increasing nunber of violations of the mandatory arras embargo against South Africa.
Operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution strongly deplores the actions of those States which directly or indirectly continue to violate the arras erabargo against South Africa. I wish to emphasize that the text before the Assenbly represents the barest minims we can denand of those who continue to violate the mandatory arms ezbargo. In the vi? ’ of the sponsors it does not fully reflect the outrage and the indignation of the international community at large against the violators of the arms ezbargo against South Africa.
On behalf of its sponsors» I request the Assembly take action on the draft resolution as a Oide. In this regard I appeal to all Menber States to extend their support to the draft resolution» so that the Assembly can send a unanimous and unequivocal message to the violators of the arms enbargo against South Africa.
I wish to inform the Assembly that the delegation of Vanuatu has just joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
ÏÏ>eJgBSlDB8T» I now call on the representative of Pakistan» who will introduce draft resolution A/44/U35, entitled ’United Nations Trust Find for South Africa".	'
Mr. AIMED (Pakistan), I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/44/L. 35 an the United Nations Trust Find for South Africa. The draft resolution is sponsored by 31 Nesber States. ?n addition to the States whose names have already been circulated, Antigua and Barbuda, Haiti, Tunisia and Vanuatu, have joined the sponsors of the draft resolution.
As the Assembly is aware, the Trust Fund was established in 1965 to provide humnitarian, legal and relief assistance to persons persecuted for their opposition to apartheid and to their dependants. Over the years, the Fund has enjoyed the strong support of Master States, which have contributed a total of $35 million to this humanitarian effort and thereby demonstrated in concrete terras their concern and solidarity nith the plight of the victims of apartheid, as well as their support for international efforts for the peaceful elimination of apartheid.
As we meet hare today, repression of opponents of apartheid in South Africa continues, despite repeated calls by the international community for the release of all political prisoners, the lifting of the state of emergency and the repeal of th, apartheid legislation. Recent developments indicate that the international and domestic pressure brought to bear on the apartheid régime did result in the release of nom political pris loners and the dismissal of legal proceedings in so» cases of political dissent, as well as in the de facto authorisation of a few anti-apartheid political gatherings.
It must be pointed out, however, that pressure has to be sustained so as to bring about a speedy end to apartheid. Over the years, the resources from the Trust Fund have helped finance the legal defence of large numbers of political prisoners who otherwise would have been deprived of access to adequate legal assistance. In many cases this year detainees have been released, sentences
(Me» Ahmed, Pakistan) reduced and dependants allowed access, with legal assistance provided by the Fund, furthermore, lawyers have been able in some instances successfully to challenge repressive apartheid legislation, thereby making a tangible contribution to the cause of human rights and the establishment of a democratic and non-racial society in South Africa.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/44/556) provides an account of the activities of the Trust Fund since the last session of the General Assembly. The Committee of Trustees of the Trust Fund has been making every effort to meet, to the extent possible, the ever increasing needs for assistance from the Trust Find. Voluntary organizations involved in assistance to the victims of apartheid have reported increases in the number and extent of reguests for assistance.
The draft resolution before the Assembly calls for increased contributions to both the Trust Fund and to the voluntary organizations involved in providing assistance to the victims of apartheid. It has long been recognized that the legal and humanitarian assistanoe from the Trust Find represents a tangible contribution to the elimination of apartheid through peaceful means. It is therefore of the utmost importance that the Committee be able to provide assistance commensurate with the ever increasing demand on its limited resources. Therefore, I should like on behalf of the Committee of Trustees to take this opportunity to appeal to Member States, and particularly to those that have not yet contributed to the Trust Fund, to consider the special circumstancs and translate their solidarity with the plight of the victims of apartheid, so eloquently expressed from this rostrum in the last few days, into a generous contribution to this international humanitarian effort.
(Mr. Ahmed, Pakistan)
On behalf of the sponsors of draft resolution A/44/L.35, I express the hope that this year, as in the past, the General Assembly will adopt the draft resolution without a vote.
ThePRESIDBiT: I now call on the representative of Denmark, who wishes	i
to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.36, entitled "Concerted international action for the elimination of apartheid".
Mr. MORïEKSBi (Denmark)> I have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.36 entitled "Concerted international action for the elimination of apartheid".
For the last six years a similar text has been submitted as the result of a joint effort by a number of countries, with the aim of rallying as broad as possible support of the international community on ways and means finally to persuade South Africa of the necessity to abolish apartheid.
The draft resolution emphasizes the responsibility of the United Nations and the international community to co-ordinate and render more effective its pressure on South Africa as a way of achieving the immediate abolition of apartheid by peaceful means. It urges the Security Council to consider without delay the adoption of effective mandatory sections against South Africa.
Similarly, the draft resolution recognizes the urgent need for assistance both to the oppressed people of South Africa end to the neighbouring States. This is reflected in appeals to increase humanitarian, legal and educational assistance to the victims of apartheid, as well as assistance to the front-line States and to the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC).
While continuing to favour effective mandatory sanctions by the Security Council, the draft resolution, pending such action, contains an appeal to increase the pressure on the apartheid regime by implementing a large number of voluntary measures listed in operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution.
The present text is sponsored by a wide group of countries, Angola, Australia, Austria, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, Ghana, Greece, Iceland, India, Irelaid, Madagascar, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Sweden, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In addition, the following States have today joined us as sponsors, Antigua and Barbuda, the Congo, Haiti, Jamaica, Pakistan and Peru.
(Mr. Mortensen, Denmark)
It is in the light of the manifest need for joint international action that we now urge all Member States to support the just aspirations of the South African people by casting a positive vote on this draft resolution.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Ghana, who wishes to introduce draft resolution A/44/L.40, entitled "Support for the work of the Commission against Apartheid in Sports".
Mr. GBEHO (Ghana): I have the honour and the pleasure to introduce to the General Assembly draft resolution A/44/L.40, entitled "Support for the work of the Commission against Apartheid in Sports", and the first report of the Commission against Apartheid in Sports, contained in document A/44/47, dated 27 October 1989. Both documents represent a landmark in a sequence of events stretching as far back as 1977. As members recall, the General Assembly at its thirty-second session adopted and proclaimed the International Declaration against Apartheid in Sports. An M^E Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports was set up and worked continuously on the Declaration, and in 1985 it submitted the final text of the International Convention against Apartheid in Sports to the General Assembly for adoption. Since then it has become an important instrument in the struggle against apartheid, ratified or acceded to by 43 States to date. It is the Commission’s hope that those States which have as of now only signed but not ratified the Convention will soon do so and that those States which have not yet acceded to it will also proceed to do so.
It will further be recalled that the Convention also made provision for the establishment of a Commission mandated to assist in achieving the objectives of the instrument. The Commission held its first session this year in New York, during which it deliberated on various issues connected with apartheid, in sports. I have the honour therefore to present the Commission’s report to the General Assembly.
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana)
It is important to stress that in the performance of its mandate the Commission will continue to work closely with the Special Committee against Apartheid and with the International Olympic Committee and other sporting organizations. This co-operation is vital to the successful performance of our mandate. The Commission hopes to expand its co-operation with national and international sporting organizations in the future.
On behalf of the Commission and on behalf of the sponsors of draft resolution A/44/L.40, I wish to remind those States which have not yet submitted national reports on the implementation of the Convention to do so. Guidelines for reporting on implementation are contained in annex 5 of the report of the Commission, which the Commission hopes will help States submit reports.
An extremely important instrument for the practical implementation of the international community's endeavours to eliminate apartheid in sports and to help isolate the apartheid regime is the Register of Sports Contacts with South Africa, which is issued annually by the Special Committee Against Apartheid.
I wish also to recall that the Assembly has urged sports organizations and athletes to adhere to the boycott of apartheid sports. May I therefore take this opportunity again to call on all those sportsmen and women whose names are currently included in the Register to terminate their sports contact with South Africa and to give assurance that they will abide by the boycott of apartheid sports by refraining from engaging in any sporting activities in or contacts with South Africa while the system of apartheid still prevails in that country.
In its report the Commission calls upon all Governments, sports organizations and individual sports persons to observe the policy of sports isolation of apartheid South Africa and to consult the Register, which the Special Committee
!
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana) against Apartheid will continue to issue. The Register has proved most effective. An increasingly large number of sportsmen and women have, at their individual request, been deleted from the Register. This bold stand against apartheid is an appreciated step, it means that more and more athletes, sportsmen and women are accepting the principles the States parties have incorporated in the Convention. Indeed, it also means that, despite enormous pressures being exerted on them, increasing numbers of sportsmen and women who pledge to boycott sporting contacts with South Africa until apartheid is eradicated are making a public moral choice against racism, racial discrimination and apartheid in sports. Finally, it testifies to the increasing political sensitivity of the world sporting community towards the overwhelming majority of South Africans who are denied their human and political rights because of their colour.
The Commission's repot„ consists of five sections which highlight the work of the Commission. Emphasis has been placed on the importance of holding consultations with international and national sporting organizations and on their vital role in the isolation of apartheid in sports. As I have mentioned earlier, the report stresses the importance of the continued issuance of the Register by the Special Committee.
(Mr. Gbeho, Ghana)
While expressing appreciation of the action taken by the International Olympic Committee and other sports organizations, as well as by individual sportsmen and sportswomen, to ensure the total isolation of South Africa, we call for more action to that end, particularly by those federations which continue to actait South Africa to their membership or allo-.' sports contacts with South Africa.
Our task represents an affirmation of the Olympic principles, which stipulate that there should be no discrimination in the field of sports on account of colour, race or ethnic origin. Furthermore, apartheid represents an affront to humanity, therefore there can be no moral sports contacts with an abnormal society.
We hope that the work of the Commission will expedite the eradication of apartheid from sports and the society in South Africa.
The co-sponsors of draft resolution A/44/L.40 therefore request menbers of the General Assembly to give that draft resolution enthusiastic support.
The ERBSIDaiTi I call on the representative of Chile, who wishes to introduce an amendment (A/44/L.46) to draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l.
Mr, DAZA (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): My country is requesting an amendment to draft resolution A/44/L. 34/Rev.l entitled "Military collaboration with South Africa", because it contains a reference which is not in accordance with fact. Chile is not an outlet for the sale of South Africa's military hardware. The report of the Special Committee against Apartheid refers to South Africa's participation in an international air show held in Santiago in March 1988. That statement is correct.
The Chilean Mission received twunications concerning that event from the competent bodies of the United Nations active in this area when the air show was under way. It responded immediately last year to the concerns expressed and stated the following t
(Me. Daza, Chile)
“My Government wishes to reaffirm to the Committee that it pays the greatest attention to and fully respects the various Security Council resolutions and intends to comply with them in its international relations. It wishes to reaffirm that it will instruct the competent agencies to pay special attention to the points that have been made »dien future events of this kind are organized."
As a result of this demonstration of its position, there is no question of South Africa participating in the forthcoming international air show, which will take place in Santiago next March.
We do not wish the paragraph to be eliminated from the draft resolution because we do not wish to imply that we oppose the concepts referred to therein. Wb simply request that Chile’s name be eliminated and that operative paragraph 2 be drafted as follows,
"Further deplores the actions of certain countries which have become important outlets for the sale of South Africa's military hardware and strongly urges them to refrain forthwith from such acts." Our position of opposition to apartheid has been clearly established in statements made by successive Ministers for External Relations of my country in the Assembly and also by Chile’s stance on this issue at the present session. For these reasons, we believe that the new language that we are proposing for operative paragraph 2 better reflects the concern of the international community and will be a greater contribution to the cause of opposition to apartheid.
I ask the Assembly and especially the Group of African States, and the countries sponsoring the draft resolution to demonstrate the necessary objectivity by adopting my country's amendment.
The PRESIDSJT» I have to inform the Assembly that the lists of additional sponsors of the draft resolutions before us will be issued as addenda to the respective draft resolutions.
Before the Assembly begins its consideration of the 12 draft resolutions before it, which have just been introduced, I wish to draw the attention of members to the fact that the revised version of the draft resolution on military collaboration with South Africa - draft resolution A/44/L. 34/Rev.l - and the proposed amendment thereto (A/44/L. 46) have been circulated only today. It has been requested that, if possible, the revised ¿raft resolution and the amendment thereto be consider? J at this meeting together with the other draft resolutions. With regard to the proposals before the Assembly rule 78 of the rules of procedure reads, in part, as follows»
"As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed or put to the vote at any meeting of the General Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated to all delegations not later than the day preceding the meeting. The President may, however, permit the discussion and consideration of amendments, or of	-
motions as to procedure, even though such amendments and motions have not been circulated or have only been circulated the same day."
In view of the limited time available and the desire of menbers to dispose off this item expeditiously, I suggest that, with the Assembly's concurrence, it proceed to take a decision today on draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l and the amendment thereto (A/44/L.46). If I hear no objections, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees to this proposal.
It was so decided.
The~PRESIDENT» We shall now turn to consideration of the draft' resolutions before the Assembly.
I call first on representatives who wish to explain their votes before the voting on any or all of the draft resolutions. X remind members that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr » BROCHAND (France) (interpretation from French)» The twelve menfoer States of the European Community, on whose behalf I have the honour of speaking, have strongly reaffirmed during the debate their total rejection of the apartheid system. Our objective remains the abolition, pure and simple, of that odious system. In this, the United Nations has a crucial role to play.
Ely and large, the draft resolutions submitted to us differ little from those adopted by the Assembly at it” forty-third session.
(Mr. Brochand, France)
The adoption this year of a new draft resolution by consensus demonstrates, however, that a constructive approach to the elimination of apartheid is possible. The Shelve would like to see in future a larger number of draft resolutions being adopted by consensus. Indeed we believe that a unanimous vote in the General Assembly would help to strengthen the urgent appeal the international community is making to South Africa with a view to the total and final elimination of the system of apartheid.
Furthermore, the Twelve regret that some of the texts currently before the Assembly contain elements which give rise to reservations in principle on their part. They therefore believe that the distribution of powers between the General Assembly and the Security Council as provided for in the Charter Should be strictly complied with. In particular, only the Security Council is authorized to adopt decisions that are binding upon Member States.
Similarly, the TVelve would like to reiterate their dedication to the principle of universality of the United Nations. We cannot support appeals for the total isolation of South Africa, which would not serve our common objective - the abolition of apartheid. The TWelve are especially of the view that the means of communication should remain open so that the outside world might effectively exert pressure on the South African Government with a view to the dawning of a free, democratic society without racial discrimination.
During the debate the IWelve expressed grave concern over the continued violence and repression in South Africa, while noting with interest the developments which are under way. We remain convinced that peaceful change is	>
still .possible and that the United Nations should encourage it, as recommended by the Charter. Even though we do understand the helplessness of the majority of the people of South Africa, we cannot agree that draft resolutions adopted by the General Assembly should approve the use of force or armed struggle.
(Mr. Brochand, France)
The Twelve reaffirm that they are firmly opposed to having, in an arbitrary, selective and unjustified manner, certain Member States or groups of countries mentioned by name, The Twelve deplore that practice especially since this year one State member of the European Community has been implicated by name. That is why we shall vote against draft resolution A/44/L.34, on military co-operation with South Africa, if that implication is maintained. The Twelve continue, however, to support firmly the arms embargo against South Africa, as decided by the Security Council.
The Twelve also remain faithful to the Olympic ideal and reject any form of apartheid, and in sports as well. In their respective countries the organization of sports meetings comes within the sphere of private initiative. The national sports organizations are well aware of the opposition of their Governments to sports competitions which violate the Olympic ideal. The Twelve will continue to discourage firmly any sports contacts which involve racial discrimination.
For all those reasons the Twelve will not be able to vote in favour of all the draft resolutions submitted today. They nevertheless remain firmly committed to act, both collectively and individually, to convince the South African Government of the need to abolish apartheid and to that end to begin basic reforms, as demanded by the international community.
Mr. MORTENSEN (Denmark): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
The Nordic countries have during the general debate expressed their strong condemnation of South Africa's abhorrent policies of apartheid. Apartheid constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security. Consequently the Security Council should adopt, as soon as possible, effective sanctions against
(Mr. Mortensen, Denmark) South Africa aa a means of achieving the peaceful abolition of apartheid. Coaprehensive and mandatory sanctions are the most effective instrument to that end. Pending such sanctions the Nordic countries have» as previously described,, adopted a wide range of unilateral measures against apartheid, including a trade embargo.	'
The Nordic countries agree with the main thrust of the draft resolutions before the Assembly.
We particularly welcome the introduction this year of a new draft resolution on international support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations, which seems likely to be adopted without a vote. This augurs well for the special session on apartheid next month.
Some of the other draft resolutions do, however, continue to raise difficulties with regard to questions of principle important to the Nordic . countries. I shall briefly describe them.	•
First, the Nordic countries consider universality a basic principle of the United Nations and we cannot, therefore, accept formulations that might put that principle in doubt. Secondly, peaceful solutions to conflicts is a fundamental principle enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations; therefore, we cannot accept that the United Nations should directly or indirectly endorse the use of armed struggle. Thirdly, the Nordic countries deplore the continued practice of selectively singling out individual countries and groups of countries. This practice - most evident in the draft resolution on relations between Israel and South Africa - makes it all the more difficult to achieve International concerted action in the struggle against apartheid. For similar reasons the Nordic countries will not be able to support draft resolution A/44/L.34, even though we strongly support the scrupulous and full implementation of the Security Councils arms
BH/ASN	V,/W,63
54
(Me. Mortensen, Denmark) embargo against South Africa. Fourthly, certain formulation# would encroach upon constitutional freedoms and rights of Nordic citizens and private organizations. Thia applies in particular to certain parts of the International Convention for the Prevention of Apartheid in Sports. In view of the strict and active policy of the Nordic'countires against sport contacts with South Africa, they regret that they cannot fully endorse the Convention. Fifthly, because of the strict adherence of the Nordic countries to the provisions of the Charter we must reserve our positions with regard to formulations which fail to take into account the fact that only the Security Council can adopt decisions binding on Member states.	■
The Nordic countries will also this year vote in favour of the draft resolution on the imposition, co-ordination and strict monitoring of measures against racist South Africa in spite of the fact that the text poses a number of difficulties for us. It is well known that the Nordic countries have imposed one of the most comprehensive packages of sanctions against South Africa. We do, however, have reservations on some of the selective sanctions listed in operative paragraph 1, in particular subparagraphs (d), (f), (g) and (h) of draft resolution A/44/L.29.
The situation in southern Africa remains critical. The responsibility for this situation rests with the South African Government and its policy of apartheid, but the world community has moral as well as legal obligations according to the Charter of the United Nations and should therefore maintain its pressure on South Africa by adopting effective sanctions against the apartheid regime. Also, the international community should urgently increase its economic and humanitarian assistance to the Southern African Development Co-operation Conference and to individual countries and persons that are victims of South Africa’s aggressive
(Mr. Mortensen, Denmark) policy. We must all voice our strongest condemnation of apartheid but also strive to agree on concerted international action of effective concrete steps to achieve rapidly the abolition of apartheid.
Mr. KAGAMI (Japan): Japan firmly and steadfastly opposes racial discrimination in all its guises and extends maximum co-operation to United Nations efforts for the elimination of apartheid. It is in this spirit that we will support four draft "resolutions, A/44/L.27, L.32, L.35, and L.36. Indeed, Japan co-sponsored draft resolution A/44/L.35, on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, the efforts of which we value highly.
As for draft resolution A/44/L.36, on concerted international action for the elimination of apartheid, my delegation will support it as a positive effort to achieve unity in the international community, although we have some difficulty with some of the wording. At the same time, my delegation believes that comprehensive and mandatory sanctions and international financial pressure must be considered with the utmost care.
As for the remaining draft resolutions, although my delegation fully supports those elements contained in them that are common to the ones in draft resolutions A/44/L.27 and A/44/L.36, they also contain certain formulations to which we cannot subscribe, such as those commending armed struggle. Furthermore, as a matter of principle, Japan is opposed to the practice of name-calling in resolutions of the United Nations. My delegation will vote on those draft resolutions accordingly.
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom): My delegation is in full agreement with the statement made a few moments ago by the representative of France on behalf of the 12 States members of the European Community, but I should like to add a brief explanation, on a national basis, of the votes which my delegation will cast.
I should emphasize, as we have done on many previous occasions, that my delegation shares the abhorrence of apartheid expressed by all those who have spoken in this debate. We utterly condemn apartheid and we wish to see its total eradication. Only then can all the inhabitants of South Africa live in dignity and play a full part in the political life of their country. The United Nations can play a role in bringing this about.
We therefore share the objective of the sponsors of the draft resolutions before us today. But we believe that the United Nations can play a more positive and constructive role in helping a new South Africa to emerge. Over the last few months there have been important and positive changes in South Africa. The new South African Government is formally committed to the concept of negotiations.
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom) Peaceful political activity by the black majority has been accepted. Eight of the political prisoners whose release has long been a goal of this Organization have been set free.
In these new circumstances the British Government believes that the United Nations should concentrate now on encouraging change rather than on punitive actions against a Government which is already committed to it. The Kuala Lumpur statement on southern Africa issued after the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting last month recognized that important changes were under way in South Africa and that a relaxation of existing sanctions should be considered when there was evidence of clear and irreversible change. We do not believe that the time is right to be considering further measures and shall accordingly vote against several of the draft resolutions before us.
But we shall join the consensus on draft resolution A/44/L.27, on international support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations, as it is consistent with our own approach, and on the understanding that it is intended to help bring about peaceful change. We do not regard our acceptance of operative paragraph 3 (e) of that draft resolution as implying any change in our policy relating to the application of the ordinary	.
criminal law in South Africa.
We shall, as we did last year on a similar text, abstain on draft resolution A/44/L.32, on the programme of work of the Special Committee against Apartheid, even though we do not agree with many of the elements of the Committee's report. The appropriation of a sum of money for unspecified activities is incompatible with the principles of programme budgeting.
Finally, we look forward to participating constructively in the preparatory negotiations leading to the special session against apartheid later this month. We hope that the special session will send an uneauivocal message to the South African
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom) authorities that the international community is determined to help bring about the end of apartheid through peaceful means as soon as possible. As my Prime Minister said in an interview with the black South African newspaper The Sowetan last month, domination of the majority by a minority is practically and morally unacceptable.
Mr. DA COSTA PEREIRA (Portugal)s The Permanent Representative of France has already expressed the common views of the 12 States members of the European Community on the draft resolutions before us. It goes without saying that Portugal fully subscribes to that statement.
Portugal has often expressed, not only in the United Nations but also in other forums, the conviction that the system of apartheid constitutes a violation of basic human rights and human dignity and must be dismantled in order to create a full democracy on a non-racial basis.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal stated during the general debate, the international community demands a change in the situation of polarization that exists between the black majority and the white minority and considers the recent release of eight political prisoners to be an important step towards the establishment of dialogue in South Africa.
Portugal is in favour of the tenor of most of the principles in the draft resolutions before us, but we still have reservations regarding certain aspects. We do not agree that united Nations draft resolutions should endorse violence, as appears to be done in operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution A/44/L.26, referring to the justification for armed struggle. On the contrary, they should encourage peaceful change and national reconciliation.
Furthermore, we do not believe that the imposition of punitive and other measures aimed at the total isolation of South Africa, including provisions to sever all air, sea and other transport links with South Africa - provisions contained in draft resolution A/44/L.29 - will help to dismantle apartheid.
(Mg. Da Costa Pereira, Portugal) We cannot- support the calls for the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions contained in some of the preambular and operative paragraphs of draft resolution A/44/L.28, for we consider that they would militate against the interests of the majority of the South African people.
With respect to draft resolution A/44/L.30, my Government cannot endorse some of its provisions - namely, those contained in operative paragraph 1 - which we believe lie strictly within the competence of the international private banking sector. We shall therefore be forced to abstain in the vote on this draft resolution.
It is our deep conviction that only world-wide consensus can be the basis for effective international pressure to create a free and democratic society in which all South Africans enjoy equal human, political and civil rights.
Mr. NOTERDAEME (Belgium) (interpretation from French): It goes without saying that Belgium fully agrees with the statement just made by the Permanent Representative of France on behalf of the States members of the European Community. I should like, however, to make more specific the reasons for the votes my delegation is about to cast.
Belgium regrets that draft resolution A/44/L.26 this year once again - as corresponding draft resolutions have done in the past - contains a justification for armed struggle. That is not appropriate in this body. It will therefore abstain on that draft resolution.
My delegation has always opposed a selective and discriminatory reference to certain countries or groups or countries. This year one of our partners in the European Community is twice implicated in this way. That is one of the reasons why my country will vote against draft resolutions A/44/L.28 and A/44/L.34 - if this reference is maintained. The same principle will oblige us also to vote against draft resolution A/44/L.31.
(Mr. Notredaeme, Belgium)
My delegation attaches great importance to the distribution of powers provided for by the Charter. That is why we cannot approve of a call, direct or indirect, for comprehensive and mandatory sanctions. That is a matter entirely within the purview of the Security Council. This is another reason why we shall vote against draft resolution A/44/L.28 and shall abstain in the vote on draft resolution A/44/L.33. In this connection, Belgium nevertheless recalls that it continues to carry out the positive but restricted measures adopted by the States members of the European Community and will apply the embargo on the supply of crude oil to South Africa.
Belgium does not believe that the complete isolation of South Africa, which, moreover, is contrary to the United Nations principle of universality, is likely to foster the elimination of apartheid by peaceful means. That is why we cannot support draft resolutions A/44/L.29, A/44/L.30 and A/44/L.32.
As regards draft resolution A/44/L.40, I can only refer to the explanation that has been given on behalf of the Twelve.
Belgium will vote in favour of draft resolutions A/44/L.35 and A/44/L.36 despite its reservations in respect of the ninth preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 4 of the latter.
Finally, Belgium will be pleased to join in the consensus that will no doubt emerge on draft resolution A/44/L.27. We hope that the text of this draft resolution will serve as an example for other draft resolutions submitted to the Assembly in future. Thus, further consensus could become possible.
Those are the reasons for the votes Belgium will cast in a few minutes. My country believes that we should work - still and always - towards a peaceful, rapid transition to the elimination of apartheid once and for all.
Mr. KIRSCH (Canada): There can be no doubt about Canada's unrelenting opposition to apartheid - what Prime Minister Mulroney has called a massive and institutionalized violation of human rights. Canada has fought against apartheid because we know that it is wrong. We also believe that it is an issue where our joining forces with others through the United Nations and the Commonwealth has made a significant difference. These shared efforts have brought us to the point where» with continued steady pressure» we could soon hope to see apartheid in retreat. This vision is now within our reach» but it is not yet within our grasp.
On behalf of the Canadian delegation» I shall explain how Canada will vote on the 12 draft resolutions before us. Some of these draft resolutions are improved» versions of earlier ones as was the case last year also» while others show evidence of new and constructive thinking. I hope that this welcome trend will continue as we approach the special session, for it enables Canada and others to respond more positively and brings our overall message closer to the strength of unanimity.
In draft resolution A/44/L.26, on solidarity with the liberation struggle, there is much that Canada can support. Further releases of political prisoners, the lifting of restrictions on organizations and individuals, and the ending of the state of emergency are goals that we have long pressed for and that would help to create a climate for genuine negotiations. Our assistance to the people of South Africa is already substantial and is growing, and it takes many forms. Our assistance to the front-line States and to the countries of the South African Development Co-ordination Conference that suffer from destabilization is larger still. However, even as we look to the launching of a real dialogue on fundamental change, we should stress that violence from any quarter makes realization of this hope more distant, not closer. We cannot condone the use of violence, whether to maintain apartheid or to oppose it, and thus Canada cannot support language that
(Mr. Kirsch, Canada) seeks to justify armed struggle. At the same time, we have noted and welcomed the newly expressed preference for peaceful means. Canada will therefore abstain on this draft resolution.
Canada this year will move to an abstention on the draft resolution -A/44/L.28 - that deals with comprehensive and mandatory sanctions. We agree that sanctions work and that Pretoria is beginning to feel their effect. We have ourselves implemented many important sanctions, and we agree that pressure should be maintained at this time. We agree also that mandatory sanctions - notably the vital arms embargo - have a role to play, and we could support efforts to make mandatory some of the other widely applied sanctions. We recognise that South Africa's actions in the past have constituted a threat to regional peace and security. None the less, as my Prime Minister has said, the objective of all this pressure is to bring South Africa not to its knees but to its senses. We should not impose a greater toll than is necessary to achieve this objective. The comprehensive approach is a last resort — an admission that all else has failed.
Draft resolution A/44/L.29, on the co-ordination and monitoring of measures, is closer to Canada's approach, and shall support it. Thus we shall be supporting such a draft resolution for the second time. The list of measures includes many that Canada and the Commonwealth have implemented. While there are also a number that we have not implemented, the thrust of this draft resolution, clearly, is effective pressure for peaceful change.
Canada will support draft resolution A/44/L.30. Like the Commonwealth's Kuala Lumpur statement, it stresses the importance of financial sanctions against South Africa and the need for wide international participation. However, Canada has difficulties with some of the language. The preamble goes too far in condemning the banks involved in the renegotiation. While we would have preferred that the
(Mr. Kirsch, Canada) renegotiation not be completed at this time, the timing at least shows that South Africa considers financial sanctions a serious threat. Operative paragraph 1 ignores the fact that tougher terms, as requested by the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers, were obtained by the banks and that South Africa has paid a high price for this agreement. The renegotiation maintains financial pressure on south Africa, which faces significant capital outflow in the next few years. That said, Canada fully supports the important steps outlined in operative paragraphs 2 and 3 and urges all States that have not already done so to implement them.
Draft resolution A/44/L.31 on relations between South Africa and Israel really has no place under this agenda item, and Canada will oppose it for well-known reasons.
On the work programme of the Committee against Apartheid, Canada, as in the case of similar draft resolutions in the past, will support draft resolution A/44/L.32 because we support much of what the Committee does. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to you, Mr. President, for your leadership in this regard. At the same time, I must clarify Canada's understanding of operative paragraph 2. What the General Assembly is endorsing, in its own words, are those recommendations relating to the Committee's work programme, and only those recommendations.
Canada is, with some regret, unable to support draft resolution A/44/L.33, on an oil embargo. Our own voluntary embargo on oil supply is effective, and we recognize this as a potential area for further international cu-operation. None	i
the less, a mandatory embargo on both supply and shipping raises the problem of	j
extraterritoriality of laws and other issues of long-standing concern and	j
particular sensitivity for Canada, and perhaps for others.	j
AE/dr
(Mr. Kirsch, Canada)
In the vote on draft resolution A/44/L.34, on military collaboration, Canada will abstain. It is unfortunate that language that would have enabled ue to support this draft resolution did not come forward and that, by engaging in gratuitous and largely unsubstantiated name-calling rather than looking for ways to make the embargo more effective, the present text detracts from universal support for the arms embargo.
AP/rr
(Mr. Kirsch, Canada)
Draft resolution A/44/L.36, on concerted action, is traditionally supported by	1
Canada and we shall do so again. Canada has implemented all the measures in paragraph 7 and also provides substantial assistance to the front-line States, as urged in paragraph 8.
Finally, on draft resolution A/44/L.40, dealing with apartheid in sports, Canada is obliged to abstain. We have difficulty about ratifying the United Nations International Convention on this subject, given our legal, constitutional and human right, 'ramework. Moreover, we do not agree with the principle of secondary boycotts and thus cannot support the United Nations Register of Sports Contacts. That said, Canada has this year further tightened its policy of sports contacts with South Africa - a policy that is already among the toughest in the world. Our objective remains the effective elimination of all sports contacts between Canada and South Africa pending the end of apartheid.
We must all do our part to encourage peaceful change in South Africa. The statements we have heard in the debate and the draft resolutions before us are, taken together, a clear message to the Government of South Africa that it must take more concrete action. South Africa itself knows what it has to do. Let us hope, as we move on to the special session and shortly into a new decade, that Pretoria can find the courage and wisdom to turn over a new leaf. Let us also be ready, while maintaining effective pressure, to recognize progress when it comes and to assist in overcoming difficulties when this would be appropriate.
Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): My delegation will vote in favour of all the draft resolutions under agenda item 28, entitled "Policies of Apartheid of the Government of South Africa". My delegation recognizes that, in an effort to increase support for these draft resolutions, many of them this year are shorter and milder in tone than the corresponding draft resolutions were in previous
(Mr. Mudenge, Ziababw) years. ‘ly delegation therefore hopes that today ,embers of this body will vindicate and encourage the wisdom of this approach through their increased support.
The draft resolutions before us strike the correct balance. They are brief, without losing content, factual without being tendentious, balanced and moderate but not banal and irrelevant. They call for a negotiated settlement to eliminate apartheid> reaffirm the importance of maintaining pressure by intensifying sanctions and other measures to persuade the South African régime to begin negotiations with the genuine leaders of the majority population in that country) stress the need to give assistance to the victims of apartheid wherever they may he? and urge some of Pretoria's key collaborators to eschew self-interest and join
I the international community's concerted efforts to persuade South Africa to abandon its apartheid policies.
Some countries which have shown little restraint in exploiting the miseries of apartheid are being asked to control their appetite for profit. None of these countries has been condemned. Nor have offensive names or language been used to refer to them; name-calling has been strictly avoided. What we have here, however, is this: some of them have been mentioned by name in order to identify them. In English, that is not "name-calling": it is the mentioning of a name for the sake of identification. Of course, by appealing to these countries by name we hope to bring moral pressure on them to help us in eradicating apartheid by peaceful means. It is true that there are other countries too which in varying degrees are guilty of similar faults. Our hope is that by mentioning the names of the players in the "A Team", we are also sending messages to those in the minor league. The sponsors have not deliberately singled out some countries selectively; these countries have selected themselves by their outstanding achievement in collaboration with apartheid South Africa. The texts merely recognize this reality.
AP/rr	A/44/PV.63
68-70	‘
^r, Mudenge, Zimbabwe)
It is our earnest wish that this year's leaders will do their best to avoid excelling in the apartheid league table once again next year. It has happened once before.
My delegation's affirmative votes on all the apartheid draft resolutions before the Assembly are directed against no country represented in this body. They reflect my country's strenuous efforts to gain the release of Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners, to assist all the victims of apartheid, and to ensure the elimination of apartheid. They are an affirmation in favour of peace, progress, justice and development in southern Africa. With the support of all members of the Assembly, these noble goals can be achieved.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now take decisions on the various draft resolutions before it. The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme-budget implications of these draft resolutions has been issued as document A/44/758.
I call on the representative of Zambia on a point of order.
Mr. ZUZE (Zambia): I wish humbly to remind the Assembly that my delegation has made a formal proposal regarding draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l. In this regard, my delegation will reject any reouest for division under rule 89 of the General Assembly's rules of procedure. Similarly, my delegation wishes to propose formally, in accordance with rule 74 of the General Assembly's rules of procedure, that the Assembly take no action on the amendment submitted by Chile,
i which has been circulated in document A/44/L.46.

The PRESIDENT, I c&n say to the representative of Zambia that the Assembly will deal with that when the draft resolution in question comes up for discussion.
The General Assent»ly will now begin the voting process and take a decision first on draft resolution A/44/L.26, entitled "International solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa".
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour, Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,_ Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad aid Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against, Israel, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Fln\,d’a PrTan°®\ ---------Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden
Draft resolution A/44/L.26 was adopted by 129 votes to 4, with 21 abstentions (resolution 44/27 A).,
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
TheJPRKWENTt We now turn to draft resolution A/44/L. 27, entitled ,International support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations".
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/44/L. 27? Draft resolution A/44/L, 27 was adopted (resolution 44/27 B).
Ih£SESnM»Tl Next, we turn to draft resolution A/44/L. 28, entitled "Comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa". A separate vote has been requested on the words "and, particularly, the Federal Republic of Germany, which recently emerged as the leading trading partner of South Africa," in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution. If there is no objection to that request, I shall put those words to the vote first.
A separate, recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour,
Against;?
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Barbados, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, ®9ypt» Ethiopia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chad, Chile, Denmark, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Uicia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining» Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Central African Bepublic, Colombia, Cote d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Jamaica, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, Yemen, Zaire	i
The words "and, particularly, the Federal Republic of Germany, which recently | emerged as the leading trading partner of South Africa,11 were retained by 53 votes to io, with 41 abstentions.,
■	■	'	I
The PRESIDENT; I now put to the vote draft resolution A/44/L.28 as a
i whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour» Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myaimar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts aid Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay. Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zamb ia, Zimbabwe
Against» Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America	•
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
Abstaining: Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Belize, Botswana, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Lesotho, Malawi, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Saint Lucia, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden
Draft resolution A/44/L.28, as a whole, was adopted by 118 votes to 11, with 22 abstentions (resolution 44/27 C).,
The’PRESIDENT: The Assembly will next take a decision on draft, resolution A/44/L.29, entitled "Imposition, co-ordination and strict monitoring of measures against racist South Africa".
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded-vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Conqo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Ganbia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea‘Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tbgo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab ^nirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
,Subsequently the delegations of Bangladesh and Papua New Guinea advised the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.
Against, Portugal# United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining, Austria, Belgium, Botswana, France:, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Malawi, Netherlands, ^pain
Praft resolution A/44/L, 29 was adopted by 135 votes to 3, with 15 abstentions _ (resolution 44/27 D). ,
The PRESIDENT, We now turn to draft resolution A/44/L.30, entitled "International financial pressure on the apartheid economy of South Africa".
A recorded vote has been requested.
A-recorded vote was taken.
In favour, Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Qiana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Qiyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire-, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against, Germany, Federal Republic of, Netherlands, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
NR/ras
Abstainingt Belgium, Botswana, France, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lesotho, taxenbourg, Malawi, Portugal, Swaziland
Draft resolution A/44/L. 30 was adopted by 140 votes to 4, with 11 abstentions
(resolution 44/27 E).,	————————————
The PRESIDENT» The Assembly will next take a decision cn draft resolution A/44/L. 31 and Corr•1, entitled "Relations between South Africa and Israel,.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour, Afghanistan,-. Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozanbique, Myanmar, Népal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian) Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
m/raa
Abstaining» Antigua and Barbuda» Bahamas» Belize» Cameroon» Chile» Costa Rica» Dominica» Dominican Republic» Fiji» Grenada» Japan» Malawi» Malta» Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/44/L; 31 and Corr.l was adopted by 114 votes to 22, with 18 abstentions (resolution 44/27 F)., . ■ ■ ■■■	——■> »>—W
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
The PRESIDENT» We now turn to draft resolution A/44/L. 32, entitled “Programme of work of the Special Committee against Apartheid“.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A-recorded vote was taken.
In favour» Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Itomania, Svanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Lecne, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against» None
Abstaining: Belgium, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Uhited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution A/44/L.32 was adopted by 145 votes to none, with 10 abstentions (resolution 44/27 G).,
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
,
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will next take a decision on draft resolution A/44/L.33, entitled "Oil embargo against South Africa".
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burmdi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Qiana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining: Belgium, Botswana, Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Israel, Japan, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Malawi, Netherlands, Portugal, Swaziland
Draft resolution A/44/L. 33 was adopted by 139 votes to 2, with 14 abstentions (resolution 44/27 H).,
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
The PRESIDENT» The Assembly will next take a decision on draft resolution A/44/L. 34/Rev.l, entitled "Military collaboration with South Africa".
Members will recall that the representative of Zambia moved, within the terms of rule 74 of the rules of procedure, that no action be taken on the amendment contained in document A/44/L.46. Rule 74 reads as follows,
"During the discussion of any matter, a representative may move the adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion. In addition to the proposer of the motion, two representatives may speak in favour of, and two against, the motion, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote."
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak under rule 74 of the rules of procedure.
Mr. KARUKubIRO-KAMUNANWIRE (Uganda), My delegation has asked to speak in order to support fully and whole-heartedly the formal proposal made a short while ago by the Permanent Representative of Zambia on draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l requesting that the General Assembly take a decision on the draft resolution as a whole.
Mr. DAZA (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish), The representative of Zambia has requested that no action be taken on the amendment I have proposed. The entire meaning of the debate on this issue is related to the idea of justice and human beings being deprived of their rights.
At this moment I am wondering - aside from human rights and the rights of institutions and countries - what right could be stronger than the right of a country to have its proposal considered. I am not questioning general concepts. I agree with the concept underlying the draft resolution. I am simply proposing a vote with regard to my country’s situation - and this goes to the heart of the kind of coexistence we must have in the Assembly. To deny, by a procedural manoeuvre, a
(Mr. Pass, Chile) country the right to raise such a vital issue as its own position in the Assembly would be incompatible with the atmosphere which should prevail in this body, where the value of justice should predominate in the debates on this issue.
For that reason, of course, I oppose the proposal made by the representative of Zambia.	i
Mr. GBBHO (Ghana): In terms of rule 74 of the rules of procedure, which the President was kind enough to read out to the Assembly a short while ago, my delegation would like to support the motion of the delegation of Zambia, which was supported by the delegation of Uganda. In doing so, I wish to stress that it is not the intention of my delegation to rob any country or any delegation of its rights here in the Assembly. We support the motion purely on the basis of the approved rules of procedure.
It could be argued that to seek to amend a paragraph of a draft resolution is to indulge in procedural gerrymandering, but we do not believe that to be the case; nor is it so if provisions of the rules of procedure are invoked legitimately to take a certain course of action.
It is purely for those reasons that my delegation begs to support the motion of the Zambian delegation, supported by the Ugandan delegation.
The; PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the motion submitted by the representative of Zambia that no action be taken on the amendment contained in document A/44/L.46. A recorded vote has been requested.
A' recorded - vote was • taken.
I,> favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cape Verde, Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Polaid, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining : Antigua ad Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, Colombia, Dominica, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Hungary, Maldives, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Suriname, Togo, Venezuela
The motion was adopted by 72 votes to 39, with 20 abstentions.,
The PRESIDENT: An objection has been made to the request for division in connection with draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l. In accordance with rule 89 of the General Assembly’s rules of procedure:
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
Mr. BROCHAND (France) (interpretation from French)» I have the honour to speak again on behalf of the twelve States members of the European Community. The Twelve would recall that it is not the practice to object to a separate vote when a Member State requests such a vote. Hence, the Twelve support the request made by the Federal Republic of Germany that part of operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l be voted upon separately.
Mr. HAJNOCZI (Austria): As a matter of principle, Austria supports the right of every Member State to have a separate vote taken.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Zimbabwe on a point of order.
Mr. MUD ENGE (Zimbabwe): The representative of Zambia moved that this draft resolution be taken as a whole, without amendment. Specifically he was aware only of the Chilean amendment> but certainly his motion was that the draft resolution should be voted on as a whole. I thought that, as a result of the vote we just took, we had disposed of any attempts to have separate votes on parts of the draft resolution. I seek clarification, but my impression of the way the motion was presented is as I have just stated it.
The PRESIDENT.- The Assembly voted on the motion presented by Zambia, in accordance with rule 74, that no action should be taken on the Chilean amendment. We are now voting on the motion presented in accordance with rule 89. That is the clarification.
Mr. KARUKUB IRQ-K AMUN ANW IRE (Uganda), I want to reiterate what I said before and to express agreement with what the representative of Zimbabwe said when he asked for clarification of the problem - namely, that we have voted on the motion submitted by the representative of Zambia.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Zimbabwe on a point of order.
Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): With due respect, Mr. President, the representative of Zambia, to the best of my understanding, first invoked rule 89, which you, Mr. President, are now referring to, and then, specifically with reference to the Chilean amendment, he invoked rule 74. So both rules were invoked, when the representative of Zambia made the proposal that this draft resolution should be voted on as is, as a whole, he referred specifically to rule 89, and then to rule 74.
The PRESIDENT: We took care of the motion under rule 74, and now we are going to vote on the motion under rule 89.
I call on the representative of Zimbabwe on a point of order.
Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): The principal motion by the representative of Zambia was made under rule 89. That is the rule he used. In other words, he invoked rule 89 to deal with the Chilean amendment - or any other proposal with this same aim. Now we are being asked to vote again under rule 89 - something that we have already done.

The PRESIDENT» The Assembly has been requested to vote on the words, "and two corporations based in the Federal Republic of Germany, for supplying blueprints for the manufacture of submarines and other related military materiel#" and on the words,
"and upon the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany to honour its obligations under resolution 421 (1977) by prosecuting the said corporations#". Those words are contained in operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/44/L.34/Rev.l.
I call on the representative of Zambia.
Mr. ZUZE (Zambia), When I moved the motion - and there was only one motion - I was invoking rules 89 and 74. Under rule 89, I was objecting to a request for division under that rule, which was, as I understand it, made by the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany. Rule 74 is specific on the same motion, and I was invoking that rule in respect of the request by the delegation of Chile to amend the particular paragraph that refers to his country. I moved one motion and invoked two rules.
The PRESIDENT, I call on the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Mr. BRAUTIGAM (Federal Republic of Germany), There seems to be some confusion. I should like to point out that no vote has been taken yet on our request for a separate vote, and for that reason I repeat the request that there be a separate vote on operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l, in which the Federal Republic of Germany is named.
The PRESIDENT, If objection is made to the request for division, the motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to speak on the motion for
(The President) division shall be given only to two speakers in favour and two speakers against. To answer the representative of Zambia, he did make a request which was disposed of according to procedure by invoking rule 74. Now a vote will have to be taken on the objection by the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with rule 89.
I call on the representative of Malta, on a point of order.
Mr. BORG OLIVIA (Malta) , For some time now, I have been trying to raise this point of order so that I may perhaps assist you, Mr. President, in clarifying the procedural situation.
The situation under the rules of procedure is clear, Sir. Any member of the Assembly may request a separate vote. Such a request has been made. Now, any member may similarly object to the division, in which case the request will have to be put to the vote. The statement made by the representative of Zambia can only be interpreted as an objection to division. That is the situation. We have disposed of the other motion under rule 74 and we now have to dispose of the request, and the objection thereto, under rule 89.
The PRESIDENT» In accordance with rule 89, I put to the vote the motion for division. A recorded vote has been requested.
I call on the representative of Zimbabwe on a point of order.
Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe); I have voted twice, on both sides. I am not sure what is required. Could we start the voting process again and be clear on what we are voting?
The PRES IDENT: The representative of the Federal Republic of Germany has asked for a division. If your vote is "yes," it will be in favour.
Mr. MUDENCE (Zimbabwe)t I take it that if I vote "no", I will be opposing the motion of the Federal Republic of Germany. I intend to vote against.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Ghana.
MM/rr
Mr. GBBB3 (Ghana)s What is at issue here is the exact nature of the question that should be put to the Assembly in the present circumstances. That is what is not clear to many delegations. I am in complete agreement with the representative of Malta in his explanation. Now that the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany has explained his motion, it is assumed that the motion of Zarbia is against division, in which case it is the motion of Zambia that should be put to the vote. In other words, those who vote for the motion of Zambia will be against division and those who vote against the motion of Zambia will be voting for the proposal of the Federal Republic of Germany to have a division. That should be the exact nature of the question and not the motion put by the Federal Republic of Germany.
I; ■ '
The PRESIDENT: Rule 89 says:
"If objection is made to the request for division, the motion for division shall be voted upon."
I have announced the beginning of the voting, and no representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order in connection with the conduct of the voting.
The representative of Malta has made very clear what the Assentoly is voting upon - the motion of the Federal Republic of Germany.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Comoros, Cbsta Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Denmark, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Qiatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Liberia, Luxenbourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Portugal, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Togo, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Zaire
Against:	Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Barbados, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Qiana, Guinea, Guyana, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, United Arab Pirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, Colombia, Cyprus, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, German Democratic Republic, India, Jamaica, Mexico, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Sing-^ore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Un^n of Soviet Socialist Republics, Venezuela, Yugoslavia
The motion for division was carried by 58 votes to 45, with 26 abstentions., ---------—	I
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it	i
had intended to abstain.	।
The PRESIDENT» I now put to the vote the following phrases in operative paragraph 1 of dra’t resolution A/44/34/Rev.l, on which a separate, recorded vote has been requested»
"and two corporations based in the Federal Republic of Germany, for supplying blueprints for the manufacture of submarines and other related military matériel"»
and
"and upon the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany to honour its obligations under resolution 421 (1977) by prosecuting the said corporations". A recorded vote was taken.
In favour» Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain? Barbados, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Chechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, German Democratic Republic, Qiana, Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Qnan, Panama, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Itepublic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against,	Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Zmstria, Belgium,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Grenada, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malawi, feldives, Malta, Mauritius, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint lucia. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Spain, Sweden, fogo, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining» Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire
By 53 votes to 45, with 38 abstentions the following phrases were retained» "and two corporations based in the Federal Republic of Germany, for supplying
blueprints for the manufacture of submarines and other related military matériel,y and "and upon the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany to honour its obligations under resolution 421 (1977) by prosecuting”the said corporations".,
The PRESSENT: I new put to the vote draft resolution A/44/L. 34/Rev.l as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote w^ ’taken.
,In favouri	Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain,
Barbados, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
’	Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tbbago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nara, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Belgium, Chile, Denmark, France, Germany, Federal Republic of,
Greece, Honduras, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining : Antigua aid Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Belize, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, Grenada, Iceland, Kenya, Malawi, Malta, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sweden, Togo
Draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l, as a whole, was adopted by 106 votes to 17, with 26 abstentions (resolution 44/27 I).,,	. t
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.
,, Subsequently the delegations of Bangladesh and Papua New Guinea advised the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to draft resolution A/44/L.35, "United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa". May I take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/44/L.35 was adopted (resolution 44/27 J).
The PRESIDENT: We shall now take a decision on draft resolution
A/44/L. 36, "Concerted international action for the elimination of apartheid".
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In-favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Itepublic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Pinlmd, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining» Germany, Federal Republic of, Lesotho, Portugal
Draft resolution A/44/L.36 was adopted by 151 votes to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 44/27 K).,
, Subsequently the delegation of Bangladesh advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.
The-PRESIDENT» Lastly we turn to draft resolution A/44/L.40, entitled i "Support for tiie work of the Commission against Apartheid in Sports".
।	A recorded vote has been requested.
, recorded1vote was taken.
In favour» Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against, United States of America
Abstaining» Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Icelsid, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/44/L. 40•was adopted by 127 votes to 1, with•23 abstentions
(resolution 44/27 L).,
, Subsequently the delegations of Bangladesh and Mauritania advised the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.
i£i®_SSJB§JS, I shall now call on those representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote after the voting.
I would remind delegations that, in accordance with General Assenbly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr^ MOORE (United States of America): It is a source of great sadness and disappointment to us that we must meet once again, as we have so many times in the past, to consider draft resolutions concerning apartheid. It is a tragedy that ®£ajrtheid still exists. The United States Government and people have repeatedly made clear our abhorrence of apartheid. We remain convinced that it must be dismantled and replaced, and we shall continue to work for that objective through peaceful negotiations to achieve a non-racial, democratic system of government.
I shall not elaborate at length my Government’s view on apartheid or what steps need to be taken by the South African Government and its people to resolve the situation in that troubled country. We have done so on numerous occasions, in many places. I shall confine my remarks to the draft resolutions that were before the Assembly.
The United States was pleased to be able to join the consensus on the draft resolution on international support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations. My Government has made explicit numerous times its belief that the only way truly to resolve the difficult issues in South Africa is through peaceful negotiations. Violence will not work. It creates problems rather than solving them; it leaves lasting scars which perpetuate hate and fear.	.
The demands articulated in this resolution are among the actions that can be taken by one of the parties to "help create the necessary climate for genuine negotiations" (A/44/L. 27^ para. 4). This is not an exhaustive list of what could
(Mr. Moore, United States) be done nor does it include actions which other parties to this conflict could also take to further and accelerate the peaceful resolution of this issue. If we are to see progress, all parties involved in this tragic issue need to act to forestall violence and begin the process of negotiation.
We are encouraged by the positive actions taken by the new South African Government as well as by the recognition in the Harare Declaration of the need for peaceful negotiations. These are first steps. There is still a long and difficult road ahead. However, if the problems still to be faced are addressed positively and with sincerity, all the South African people will reap the benefits of peace, freedom and democracy.,
Unfortunately, not all the draft resolutions which came before this body demonstrated as nuch wisdom. As I have already made clear, the United States has repeatedly emphasized its objection to armed struggle, which was endorsed in several of the draft resolutions which came before us. In this forum especially we should not accept language that legitimizes armed conflict. This is wholly contrary to the dedicated search for peaceful solutions to the world's problems which is the raison d'etre of the General Assembly, our purpose in meeting here. A call to violence only increases the probability of greater violence. For that reason we have again opposed draft resolutions which endorse violence.
My Government maintains firmly its opposition to comprehensive, mandatory sanctions. The irony of the Assembly's call for them is hard to ignore. Others with more active trade ties with South Africa have been among the most vocal in calls for sanctions. The United States has imposed and enforced the most stringent sanctions against South Africa of. any Member of the Assembly. The stated purpose of these sanctions is to encourage the South African Government to move through
Mr. Hurst (Antigua and Barbuda), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Moore, United States) peaceful negotiations towards the elimination of apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial, democratic society. The release of some important political prisoners, the repeal of laws which segregated some public places, and the visits of South Africa's Presidents to various capitals in southern Africa suggest that South Africa is moving in that direction. While such steps must continue and go further, now is not the time to rebuff these signs of progress by the introduction of additional sanctions by the international community.
My delegation has been on record for many years as opposed to the practice of name-calling by United Nations bodies; yet the practice persists. We cannot support resolutions which single out any country by name to condemn for actions which we all know are also taken by others, including some of the most vocal in their criticism. We shall continue to oppose this practice.
Change is in the air in southern Africa. The time has never seemed better to move the processes of change forward. However, progress must be recognized and taken advantage of. We felt compelled to abstain on the draft resolution on the work of the Special Committee against Apartheid because it failed to take adequate note of the changes which have occurred and are continuing to occur. I also wish to make clear my delegation's position that this resolution does not mandate additional expenditures by the Department of Public Information. It is now time to focus on the future, and we must use all our skills to help devise mechanisms to bring the parties forward. The resolution on eradicating apartheid through genuine negotiations is an example of the type of constructive action that can be taken, aid I hope it is an example of the approach we shall increasingly see in the future.
For the first time in years it is possible to be somewhat hopeful that a negotiation scenario may be just on the horizon. The great pressures, internal aid , external, on South African whites to accept change are growing and ar? helping to convince the South African Government that it must move beyond its current position
JW22
(Mr. Moore, United States)
and accept fundamental change. It is new increasingly clear to that Government that the well-being of the white minority cannot be sustained without a negotiated political settlement that results in political equality for all South Africans. The aim of the United States in all of this is to maximize our ability to promote dialogue leading to full-fledged negotiations on a non-racial, democratic future for South Africa.
Mr. wirier (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish) , Argentina voted for all the draft resolutions under agenda item 28 because those draft resolutions correspond fully with the principles and objectives that inspired them and faithfully reflect the firm position that has been taken by Argentina with respect to the international struggle against apartheid.
Nevertheless, with respect to the procedural motions in connection with draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l, we voted in principle to support the right of States to request separate voting on the paragraphs that concern those States directly. We also voted for the motion of the Federal Republic of Germany in connection with the content of operative paragraph 1 of that draft resolution because we did not agree that there should be a separate critical mention of States with respect to behaviour that cannot be attributed to the Governments involved. Furthermore, in the case of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Government immediately set in motion a process of investigation into the alleged practices.
In any case, we understand that the practice of naming States militates against the co-ordination of effective intergovernmental action in the struggle to eradicate apartheid.
Mr. GREALY (Australia)t The Australian Government's continued and implacable opposition to apartheid was made abundantly clear in our statement on this item at a plenary meeting earlier in the month.
I am pleased to mention that this year my delegation has been able to sponsor four of the resolutions before us - an increase from two - and we have endeavoured to be as forthcoming as possible on others. We welcome the very real efforts that have been made this time to improve a number of the texts, including that of draft resolution A/44/L.26, and to widen support to increase their effectiveness in implementation.
(Mr, Grealy, Australia)
While my delegation supports the broad thrust of most of the texts, I should like to point out that our support should not be construed as agreement to all the elements contained in each of them. We do, for example, retain our well-known reservations with respect to the legitimacy of armed struggle, prisoner-of-war status, the Convention against Apartheid in Sport and the selective singling-out, in resolutions, of particular Menber States.
Australia's support for effective forms of pressure, including economic pressure, on the South African Government is well known. We particularly welcome the support this year for draft resolution A/44/I».30 on international financial measures - which is new - and we call on the international financial community to respond positively to its recommendations. The announcement last month by South Africa of an agreement with its foreign creditors on a payment schedule affecting part of its debt has not let South Africa off the debt hook. Very considerable presage can still be exerted through financial sanctions, including efforts to restrict South Africa's access to trade credits.
My delegation's continuing support for the broad thrust of the resolutions that have just been adapted reflects our belief that the international community must continue to ensure that South Africa receives the clear and unmistakable message that apartheid policies cannot and will not be tolerated.
Mr; BRÄUTIGAM (Federal Republic of Germany)i The representative of France, in his statement on behalf of the 12 State Members of the European Community, has explained the position of the Twelve on the resolutions that have just been adopted.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany subscribes fully to this statement and, in particular, shares the essential political principles set out therein. The Twelve have made clear their unequivocal rejection of apartheid and
AE/dr
(Mr. Brautigam (Federal Republic of Germany)
their determination to contribute to its total eradication. My delegation would like to add the following.
My Government shares the conviction of this Assembly that apartheid constitutes a flagrant violation of the fundamental human rights laid down in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The system of apartheid cannot be reformed but must be eradicated to create a democratic society in which all South Africans enjoy equal human, political and civil rights.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the steps that the South African Government, under its new President, has taken recently. It urges the South African Government to continue along this path without delay and to take further steps - in particular, steps to end the state of emergency, to unban the African National Congress (ANC) and other political organizations in South Africa, to repeal the existing apartheid laws and to release all political detainees, including Nelson Mandela. This could create the conditions necessary for genuine negotiations between the Government of South Africa and the black majority.
It is, however, with great disappointment that my Government finds itself singled out in two of the resolutions that have just be~n adopted. My delegation is especially concerned that in operative paragraph 1 of the resolution entitled "Military collaboration with South Africa", the Federal Republic of Germany is accused of a breach of the United Nations arms embargo.
I should like to put on record that my Government has at no time approved, allowed or condoned the supply, by German companies, of blueprints for submarines or any other related military matériel to South Africa. It implements the embargo strictly and has co-operated actively with the Committee that was established by
(Mr. Brautigam (Federal Republic of Germany)
Security Council resolution 421 (1977) to oversee the implementation of the arms embargo. That co-operation has been forthcoming since the Conmittee began its investigations into the case. Immediately after receiving information that blueprints were being delivered by two German companies the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany took measures to stop the provision of the remaining parts of the blueprints indispensable for the construction of the submarines.
With respect to the resolution entitled "Comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa", in operative paragraph 2 of which the Federal Republic of Germany is singled out as the leading trading partner of South Africa, I should like to put on record that by trading with South Africa my Government does not contravene any existing international laws of a mandatory nature. It is well known that many other countries maintain commercial links with	j
South Africa. My Government is aware of the pressure that restrictive economic	।
measures can exert on Pretoria. It is for this reason that the Federal Republic of Germany, together with its partners in the European Community, adopted a range of restrictive measures in the economic field. These measures include, inter alia, a ban on the export of oil to South Africa and a ban on the import of South African steel and iron products. On our initiative, the 12 States menbers of the European Community recently strengthened the code of conduct that governs the relationship of the European Community companies operating in South Africa with their employees.
I

(Mr. Brautigam, Federal Republic of Germany)
It ensures that none of these companies will discriminate against its black workers. Furthermore, in the past year German companies, as the latest report of the Special Committee against Apartheid illustrates, considerably disinvested their operations in South Africa.
The singling out of the Federal Republic of Germany in the two draft resolutions is arbitrary and unjustified. It is out of place at a time when the international community is uniting in its efforts to press South Africa for the abolition of the apartheid system.
Mr; MATNAI (Israel): Notwithstanding the inclusion of certain formulations on which we have reservations, my delegation voted in favour of draft resolution A/44/L.36, on concerted international action for the elimination of apartheid. Israel voted in this manner in order to emphasize clearly its connitment to the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination. My delegation, however, voted against draft resolution A/44/L.26, regarding international solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa, since it calls inter alia for armed struggle. My delegation strongly believes that true, genuine and direct negotiations are the only way to solve conflicts, and therefore Israel joined the consensus cn draft resolution A/44/L.27, which calls for the eradication of apartheid through genuine negotiations.
My delegation abstained cn draft resolution A/44/L. 33, on the oil embargo, because its obvious motivation is to divert the focus of attention from the oil-producer States to the shipping States, on which it would lay the blame. It is the firm belief of my delegation that the prime responsibility in this matter rests on the shoulders of the oil-producer countries which have organized a world-wide network of middlemen and straw companies to camouflage their oil deals.
i
(Mr. Matnaif Israel)
At the sane tine, my delegation voted against draft resolution A/44/L.28, as it should be a matter for the States themselves to impose and monitor the actions to be taken against South Africa» however, it abstained on draft resolution A/44/L. 30.
For the same reason, my delegation abstained on draft resolution A/44/Ii. 40, although Israel itself has curtailed, by the Government’s decision of 16 Septenber 1987, sports ties with South Africa and has adhered to the decisions of the international sports associations. My delegation also abstained on draft resolution A/44/L.32, on the programme of work of the Special Committee against Apartheid, because of the unfair and unsubstantiated singling out of Israel in the Committee's reports.
My delegation voted against draft resolutions A/44/L.31 and A/44/L.34/Rev.l, much debated here, because of the singling out of Israel and the baseless and unfounded allegations against it. It is regrettable that the struggle against apartheid is harnessed to the all-out diplomatic onslaught on Israël staged against it by certain countries.
As for the recent allegations in the press leaning, purportedly, on official documents, they have been emphatically denied not only by Israel but by the very same sources on which the press relied. My delegation wants once again to declare - loud and clear - that it is Israel's adamant and long-standing policy to have no oo-operation with South Africa in the nuclear field. On 30 October the Minister of Defence of Israel, Mr. Rabin, said in a radio interview:
"When it comes to the nuclear field, we have no relations whatsoever with South Africa and therefore all stories about any relationship between our country and South Africa on this issue are totally unbased and without any justification".
AP/jf
(Mr. Matnait Israel)
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates without the slightest hesitation the abhorrence of Israel, Government and people, for apartheid and all other forms of racism.
Mr. HAYES (Ireland)t My delegation endorses the views expressed by the representative of France in his statement on behalf of the twelve States members of the European Community.
This debate on apartheid represents each year the reiteration of a moral challenge by the members of the international community to a system that is universally condenned. We may disagree at times on particular ways of framing that challenge but we are united in our central moral message: the system of apartheid is unacceptable, it is an affront to all of us, and it debases the standards of justice and reason by which we aspire to live.
In a few weeks we shall have a special session on apartheid. That will be an opportunity for the international community to reassert that apartheid is a bondage of fear and injustice but that it is not too late to build a society that will be based on respect for the rights and dignity of every individual.
Ireland supported six of the draft resolutions before us today, three of which we co-sponsored. We found it necessary to abstain on some draft resolutions as they contain a number of formulations and ideas which are not consistent with my Government's approach, we abstained on four draft resolutions and we voted against two.
I turn first to the draft resolutions which Ireland supported.
Ireland co-sponsored draft resolution A/44/L.27, on international support for the eradication of apartheid. We especially welcome the fact that this draft resolution has been adopted with the support of all delegations.
Ireland supported draft resolution A/44/L.30, on international financial pressure on South Africa. We agree with the general content of the draft resolution while believing that the right policy for the international community is one of steady and graduated pressure for change through carefully chosen, selective, graduated sanctions. However, we believe such' sanctions should be mandatory - that is, that they should be imposed by the Security Council and fully implemented by all countries.
We voted in favour of draft resolution A/44/L.32, on the programme of work of the Special Committee against apartheid. We strongly support the work of the Special Committee in its role of focusing attention on the unacceptable situation in South Africa and of promoting international action against apartheid,. I should add, of course, that our attitude to the recommendations contained in the report of the Special Committee mist be understood in accordance with the general policy of my Government.
Ireland voted in favour of draft resolution A/44/L.33, which deals with the question of an oil embargo against South Africa. My Government has for many years favoured the imposition by the Security Council of a mandatory oil embargo against South Africa.
Ireland co-sponsored draft resolution A/44/L. 36, on concerted international action against apartheid, which inter alia urges the Security Council to consider the adoption of effective mandatory sanctions against South Africa. We also co-sponsored draft resolution A/44/L.35, on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa# here again, we are pleased that this draft resolution was adopted by consensus.
My delegation abstained on draft resolution A/44/L.26, which calls for international solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa. We should have liked to vote in favour of this draft resolution as it contains many provisions we support. However, we cannot accept the reference to armed struggle. Njy delegation has made it clear in the past that we do not wish to see this Assembly endorse violence.
My delegation abstained on draft resolution A/44/L.28, which calls for comprehensive aid mandatory sanctions. As I said earlier, we favour the application by the Security Council of a range of selective, graduated sanctions.
We abstained on draft resolution A/44/L.29, on the imposition and co-ordination of measures against South Africa. We agree with the broad thrust of the draft resolution, but certain of its formulations and elements cause us difficulties.
Ireland abstained also on draft resolution A/44/L.40, on the sports boycott of South Africa, which, inter alia, calls on States to ratify the International Convention against Apartheid in Sports. The Convention, unfortunately, contains a number of provisions which are incompatible with provisions in Ireland’s Constitution relevant to freedom of travel.
My delegation voted against draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l, on military collaboration with South Africa. We fully support the arms embargo but must express regret at the way in which certain States are selectively singled out in the draft resolution.
Ireland, as in the case of similar draft resolutions in previous years, voted against draft resolution A/44/L.31, on relations between Israel and South Africa, in view of its selective singling out of one Menber State of this Organization for condemnation.
Mr. SAVUT (Turkey), Turkey has no diplomatic or consular relations with South Africa. Furthermore, being opposed to South Africa's policy of apartheid, Turkey has always supported all resolutions adopted within the framework of the	'
United Nations and in other international organizations for the eradication of apartheid. Similarly, my delegation has voted in favour of all the draft resolutions presented to the General Assembly on this subject.	i
Having said that, I wish to refer to the fifth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution A/44/L.28, entitled "Comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the	>
racist regime of South Africa", wherein reference is made to certain paragraphs of the report or the Special Committee against Apartheid. We do not consider that the wording of those paragraphs is appropriate. Furthermore, we are not satisfied with the way in which operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution A/44/L.28 has been	1
drafted.
Finally, my delegation does not approve of name-calling in General Assembly ■ i resolutions, and consequently voted accordingly in the separate votes.	i
'I Mr. BORG OLIVIER (Malta), I should like to explain briefly my	l
Government's position on the resolutions just adopted.
Malta fully shares the widespread abhorrence and condennation of the policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa. We are unequivocally committed to their total and immediate eradication and are therefore determined to continue supporting all effective measures, including increasing international pressure, to achieve this objective. We also continue to give our full support to the front-line States. In this spirit, my delegation was pleased to support the seven draft resolutions contained in documents A/44/L.27, L. 29, L. 30, L. 32, L. 33, L.35 and L. 36. My delegation had, reluctantly, to abstain on the draft resolutions contained in documents A/44/L.26, L.28, L.31 and Corr.l and L.34/Rev.l, for the same reasons as those given in the case of similar resolutions last year.
We also had to abstain on the draft resolution contained in document A/44/L.40. My Government actively discourages sporting contacts with South Africa. It cannot, however, agree to some of the enforcement measures contained in the 1985 International Convention against Apartheid in Sports, which conflict with principles enshrined in Malta's Constitution.
I wish to stress that my Government supports the general thrust of all these resolutions and that our abstentions are addressed exclusively to certain formulations with which we have difficulties, including in particular those involving selective name-calling and those which, in our view, are inconsistent with our commitment to the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes. Our abstentions should in no way be interpreted as a weakening of our unswerving opposition to the policies of apartheid and our full support for all effective measures aimed at their total and immediate eradication.
Mr; KEMBER (New Zealand): The New Zealand Government is pleased at the way in which efforts have clearly been made since last year to ensure that the texts on which we have taken action today reflect the views of a wider section of the United Nations membership. As this year's debate clearly indicated, there is no doubt about the abhorrence that States share for the apartheid system, or about the need for its eradication.
It is therefore gratifying for my Government that this year we have been able to sponsor four of the 12 draft resolutions. These include the resolution on the oil enbargo, with which New Zealand, as a meitber of the Intergovernmental Group, has been closely involved, as wellas the new resolution on financial pressures, which is consistent with the decisions taken at the recent meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Kuala Lumpur. We understand that our co-spons'orship of this resolution will be reflected in the final records on this item.
NR/gt
(Mr. Kerber, New Zealand)
New Zealand regrets that despite the vastly improved language in draft resolution A/44/L.26» it has not been able to lend its support to the draft resolution. As we noted last year and previously» New Zealand is unable to accept an endorsement of the use of force in a manner inconsistent with the United Nations Charter. We understand and sympathize with the frustration of those who, in their quest for a just and democratic South Africa, face violent repression and inhumane treatment. Violence and repression as practised in South Africa or anywhere else are beyond justification. Nevertheless, New Zealand cannot accept that such action in turn gives licence for other illegal activity. Because of the references in operative paragraph 2, we have thus had to abstain on the draft resolution as a whole.
New Zealand was unable to support draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l because of references to specific States. Name-calling is not, in New Zealand's view, acceptable. We much regret the retention of this language in a text whose broad objectives we favour.
With regard to draft resolution A/44/L. 40, there can be no misunderstanding on New Zealand's position on sporting contacts with South Africa. On the basis of the Commonwealth's Gleneagles Agreement of 1977, New Zealand is fully committed to the policy of discouraging contact and competition by New Zealanders with sporting organizations, teams or players from South Africa. New Zealand denies entry to South African sportspeople, end we are firmly opposed to competition in third " countries between New Zealand and South African players. This policy is understood and accepted by virtually all New Zealand sports bodies.
(Mr. Rentier, New Zealand)
New Zealand was, however, unable to support draft resolution A/44/L.40 because of the reference in operative paragraph 2 to a convention to which New Zealand could not become a party. Signature of the International Convention against Apartheid in Sport would be contrary to the obligations already assumed through our ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the - provision therein for freedom to leave one’s own country. That said, let there be no doubt that New Zealand fully subscribes to efforts by the United Nations to encouraging States to help achieve the total isolation of apartheid in sports, as described in operative paragraphs 3 to 6 inclusive of that draft resolution,
Mr. HAJNOCZI (Austria)t Austria is on record as having consistently condemned and opposed the policies of apartheid as a particularly serious violation of human rights that deprives the majority of South Africa’s population of their civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. We therefore hold the view that the eradication of this system of institutionalized racial discrimination remains one of the most important challenges confronted by the United Nations.
For these reasons we find ourselves in agreement with the general thrust of the draft resolutions submitted under this item. It is our firm conviction that the international community must stand united in the struggle against the evil of apartheid. Therefore, we regret all the more that a few provisions which Austria cannot support prevented us from voting in favour of some of the draft resolutions.
In particular, Austria has always held the view that the United Nations should concentrate all its efforts on bringing about political and social change by peaceful means. We therefore cannot support the concept of armed struggle, since we firmly believe in the resolution of conflicts exclusively by peaceful means. Therefore, we call for the eradication of apartheid through genuine negotiations.
Let me also reiterate that Austria, as a matter of principle, is against singling out Member States in General Assembly resolutions and that this practice, in our view, does not promote the cause of the oppressed people of South Africa. Moreover, Austria believes that the General Assembly should respect the prerogatives of the Security Council with regard to comprehensive mandatory sanctions.
In the light of these considerations, Austria sponsored draft resolutions A/44/L. 27, L.35 and L.36. Although Austria is well-known for its liberal banking rules, we also voted in favour of draft resolutions A/44/L.30, L.32 and L.33. I should like to welcome certain modifications in draft resolution A/44/L.26, but,
(Mr. Hajnocziy Austria) for the reasons stated, we abstained on this as well as on draft resolutions A/44/L.28, L. 29, L.34/Rev.l and L. 40. Since on legal grounds, Austria will not accede to the International Convention against Apartheid in Sports, Austria cast a negative vote on draft resolution A/44/L.31 and Corr.l.
Our positive attitude to the main thrust of the resolutions just adopted reflects our support for a free, democratic and non-racial society in a united South Africa based on the free exercise of universal suffrage.
Ms. DITLHABI-OLIPHANT (Botswana) : The Botswana delegation voted in favour of all the draft resolutions inder item 26, entitled "Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa", with the exception of draft resolutions A/44/L. 28, L. 29, L. 30 and L. 33, on which we abstained. We did so guided by our strong conviction that apartheid, which is the root cause of the acts of aggression and destabilization in the region and of oppression and repression in South Africa, should be totally eradicated, not reformed. We urge all the parties concerned to recognize this fact and fulfil their responsibilities.
My delegation wishes, however, to go on record once more with its well-known position regarding the imposition of economic sanctions against South Africa. Botswana itself cannot impose economic sanctions on South Africa but does not wish to be used as an excuse by those who can and for not deciding to do so.
Mr. EHLERS (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): The Uruguayan delegation, consistent with its traditional position, joined the international community in condemning the racist apartheid regime by voting for the majority of the draft resolutions submitted to the General Assembly for consideration. However, in accordance with the position which we have maintained in this and other United Nations forums, we were compelled to express reservations in connection with selective naming of countries such as occurs in operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of
(Mr. Ehlers, Uruguay)
draft resolution A/44/I». 34/Rev.l. References of this kind are liable to be unfair and discriminatory, for reasons either of inclusion or of omission, and should not appear in texts such as those we have just adopted, the force and authority of which stem precisely from the fact that these draft resolutions formulate general principles and recommendations for application in the resolution of general situations.
For these same reasons, we wish to place on record our reservations with respect to operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution A/44/L.28.
Finally, we abstained in the voting on draft resolution A/44/L. 31 and Corr.l because we consider that its subject-matter was adequately covered in draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l.
Mr; GUPTA (India)» My delegation has consistently stressed the need for concerted »d effective sanctions by the international community to exert pressure on the Pretoria regime to take the steps necessary for the peaceful eradication of apartheid. Full and effective implementation of the various sanctions, and in particular the mandatory arms embargo, against South Africa is in cur view an indispensable element of international action. Any direct or indirect violation of the arms embargo, therefore, must be deplored in unambiguous terms, and my delegation deplores it without any equivocation.
At the same time, it is important to call upon all States which continue to violate directly or indirectly the arms embargo to refrain from such acts and scrupulously to observe their obligations under the mandatory arms embargo. In operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/44/T 34/Rev.l, entitled "Military collaboration with South Africa", which has just been adopted, the General Assembly, while deploring the actions of those which directly or indirectly
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
_____________—____ ~ ■	■	■ - ■
(Mr. Gupta, India)
continue to violate the arms embargo, calls upon only a few selected countries to comply strictly with the arms embargo against South Africa. While the call upon those States is justified, my delegation is of the opinion that this call should have been addressed to all those States and organisations which continue to violate, directly or indirectly, the arms embargo. The absence of such a call, in the view of my delegation, is an important omission because of which my delegation was constrained to abstain in the separate vote recorded on sone portions of operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/44/L.34/Rev.l. I wish to clarify, however, that if the two phrases had been put to the vote separately, my delegation would have voted in favour of the first phrase, which refers to the activities of the two corporations based in the Federal Republic of Germany.
The PRESIDENT» I now call upon the Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
Mr. PUDO VEN K3 (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), Acting Chairman, Special Committee against Apartheid: In my capacity as Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, I wish to express my appreciation to those Member States which supported the draft resolutions, both those initiated by the Special Committee and those prepared by other groups. It is particularly encouraging that draft resolution A/44/L.27, "International support for the	¡
eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations”, was adopted	j
by consensus. This is one of the welcome rare occasions when on a substantive matter relating to the subject, of apartheid the international community has spoken with one voice.
This is a particularly encouraging development and I wish to express appreciation to all those who made it possible. It is an auspicious omen for the forthcoming special session, which will be held three weeks from today.
Forging a united front, an international consensus on the conditions, the process and the goals of political settlement ending apartheid and establishing a free, non-racial South Africa, through genuine negotiations, would represent a landmark in the United Nations and a formidable diplomatic instrument to put pressure on South Africa to eradicate apartheid promptly and peacefully.
I should also like to emphasize the importance of the adoption of all the other draft resolutions by the General Assembly at this session. They are of paramount significance for the speediest achievement of the goal of complete eradication of the apartheid system in South Africa. The Special Committee will be encouraged by the fact that for the first time the draft resolution on its programme of work - this year contained in document A/44/L.32 - was adopted without a negative vote.
(Mg. Oudovenko, Acting Chairman, Special Committee against Apartheid
In the present circumstances, an emerging international consensus on the subject of apartheid would acquire profound importance. I hope that there will be a constructive approach, which does not abandon the lofty principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which does not sacrifice the most essential imperatives of our civilization, which does not neglect the ugly realities of apartheid, which does not disregard the implications of cynical collaboration with the apartheid regime. Sudi an approach would be of utmost value and would prove to be enormously effective. I sincerely hope that we shall be able to fulfil our challenging task in the very near future.
The PRESIDENT, In accordance with the decision taken by the General Assembly at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 22 September 1989, I now call on the representative of the African National Congress of South Africa.
Mr. MAFOLE (African National Congress (ANC)), Once again this body has had occasion to pronounce itself on a matter tbich is of great concern to my organization, the African National Congress (ANC), and to the people of South Africa: the issue of apartheid.
We should like at the very outset to extend our profound gratitude to the United Nations, which has expressed itself so unambiguously in condemnation of apartheid, that crime against humanity. We wish to commend the Général Assembly for having spoken so unequivocally in favour of democracy in South Africa. Let me also take this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to all those Member States that not only have expressed their abhorrence of apartheid but also have demonstrated this by casting their votes in favour of the draft resolutions.
I
(Mr. Ma foie, ANC)
It is our considered view that today's vote, if anything, will contribute immensely towards strengthening and inspiring the millions of people in South Africa who are daily engaged in a struggle to bring peace and democracy to their country. Today's vote, it is to be hoped, will send an important and very clear signal to the Pretoria regime - namely, that the international community cannot and will not allow itself to be duped by pronouncements of good intentions on the part of the regime of F. W. De Klerk. Indeed, what the United Nations is saying is that the new regime will be judged not by its words but by its actions in ending a system that not only has denied fundamental human rights to the majority of the people of my country because of their skin colour, but also has brutalized and terrorized the people of the entire subcontinent of southern Africa.
It is a matter of deep regret that some Member States, in spite of their declarations of abhorrence of apartheid, have seen fit to vote against some of the draft resolutions. While we recognize and respect the prerogative of those Menber States to exercise their vote, we cannot fail to express our amazement at some of the explanations given for the negative votes. We should like very briefly to address some of these questions.
We are being told that the international community should not take action against apartheid, simply because the new regime has said that it is ready to negotiate. It should however be recalled that for many years a number of countries here obstructed concerted international action against apartheid long before De Klerk came on the scene, long before any intention to negotiate was expressed on the part of the South African regime. Therefore, we cannot help feeling that this is a mere excuse.
(Mr. Mafole, ANC)
As regards the issue of name-calling, we can only agree with the position outlined by the Ambassador of Zimbabwe in his statement in explanation of vote before the voting.
Regarding the issue of armed struggle, we wish only to state that we have over the years presented our views, from this rostrum and in other international forums, let us merely add that had it not been for armed struggle the representatives of a number of Member States would not be seated in this Hall today, including some of those that have vociferously opposed this method of struggle.
Our organization and the people of South Africa have over the years reiterated their preference for a peaceful resolution of the tragic conflict in our country. In spite of the years of brutal repression, the ANC has never abandoned the hope of a negotiated settlement in South Africa. Indeed, the Declaration adopted by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in Harare and endorsed by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in Belgrade testifies to this. We were therefore highly gratified to note that draft resolution A/44/L.27, entitled "International support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations", was adopted by consensus.
(Mr. Mafole, ANC)
Hence we are highly gratified to note that draft resolution A/44/L.27, entitled "International support for the eradication of apartheid in South Africa through genuine negotiations" was adopted by consensus. It correctly places the onus on the Pretoria regime to undertake measures to create the climate necessary for negotiations. It is therefore to be hoped that the forthcoming special session on apartheid will speak in one voice on this very issue.
In conclusion, on behalf of the African National Congress I wish to thank the United Nations and the international community for their unswerving support in the campaign for the release of political prisoners. We are happy to say that seven leaders of the African National Congress have now been released, after a quarter of a century in prison, to join the ranks of the struggle and to continue the work that has started. May I also say that we shall rely on the international community to continue to apply the kind of pressure that has made it possible for the South African regime to sit at the negotiating table, particularly in the case of Namibia. However, we wish to state here that the on vs of the struggle rests with the people of South Africa and that the African National Congress will spare no effort to ensure that our country and the world are rid of the scourge of apartheid.
The PRES IDEM Ti One representative has requested to speak in exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to 5 minutes for the second, and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
■a.
Mr» SHAHEED (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The representative of the Zionist racist regime in occupied Palestine, in trying to explain his vote today, has resorteu once again to oft-repeated and refuted fabrications. He alleged that the Zionist regime he represents rejects the policies of apartheid in South Africa. In so doing, he simply repeated the statement he had previously made during the general debate, namely that: (spoke in•English)
"Isra'’ and the Jewish people reject and condenn apartheid in the most categoric and unequivocal manner, both as an ideology and as a political system. Together, with all the community of black nations, they call upon South Africa to abolish apartheid, to desist from any kind of racial discrimination and to grant full equal rights to all its citizens - black, white and coloured. Israel and the Jewish people tell Africa and the world forcefully: We are with you in the just struggle to eliminate apartheid and all forms of racial discrimination."
(co nti nued in ~Arab ic)
If we review the 10 resolutions, which have just been voted upon, we shall find that that representative has voted against four and abstained on five. As a ploy, he voted in favour of just one resolution. Even then he voiced numerous reservations which qualified his vote for that one resolution. It is significant that the average number of the delegations which voted in favour of those resolutions was 130.
The representative of world Zionism sought to hide behind the sort of rhetoric of which I have just given members a sample and which he has repeated this evening. His honeyed words, however, deceive no one. We are not interested in misleading statements but in declared positions that translate words into deeds. At the time, we pointed out that his words were no more than idle talk.
(Mg. Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic)
The negative vote by the representative of the Zionist regime in Tel Aviv	,
shows that that racist regime is not merely beyond the pale of the international	!
community but is also the ally of the Pretoria regime. Therefore, that regime is a full partner of Pretoria and lends support for its policies of racism and domination. Its negative vote flies in the face of the international community and the action taken by the Organization to eliminate apartheid. It is also further evidence of that regime's insistence on maintaining relations with the apartheid regime and to co-operate in the political, military, nuclear and economic fields, thus demonstrating the identical nature of the two racist regimes, their community of interests and the oneness of their goals.
The relationship between the two racist regimes of Tel Aviv and Pretoria is a chain with various links. They aid and abet each other in pursuing their expansionist-colonialist goals and ambitions. That is why the Zionist regime is invariably opposed to every resolution adopted by the Organization against the racist regime in South Africa. In this connection, we should emphasize the fact that the Zionist racist regime has never let a single opportunity pass to vote against United Nations resolutions condeitning apartheid.
The negative vote by the Zionist racist regime in Tel Aviv is pa,- nt evidence that, notwithstanding its misleading and repeated allegations, it supports the apartheid policies pursued by South Africa and encourages its acts of aggression. This demonstrates the degree of credibility we should attach to the statements of the representative of world zionism when he speaks again in the Assembly early next month.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of item 28.
AGENDA ITEM 126
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY CO-ORDINATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS WITH THE SOCIALIZED AŒNCIES AND THE INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/724)
The PRESIDEN T, if there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the report (A/44/724) of the Fifth Committee which is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The' PRESIDENT» The Assembly will now take a decision on the recommendations of the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report (A/43/724). The Committee adopted without a vote draft decision I, entitled "Harmonization of the statutes, rules and practices of the administrative tribunals of the International Labour Organisation and of the United Nations". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The PRESIDENT, Draft decision II, entitled "Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions", was also adopted by the Committee without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft decision II was adopted.
The PRESIDENT, That concludes the Assembly’s consideration of agenda item 126.
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.
I
UNITED
NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.64 6 December 1989
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY »OVEKNAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 27 November 1989, at 3 p.m.
^sidenti	Mr. FEYDER '	(Luxembourg)
(Vice-President)
later»	Mr. HURST	(Antigua and Barbuda)
(Vice-President)
-	Tribute to the memory of Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane, President of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros
-	The situation in the Middle East [37) (continued) < reports of the Secretary-General
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in Baglish and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Oonference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64471/A 5312V (£}
In the absence of the President, Mg. Feyder (Luxembourg), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MBiORY OF AHMED ABDALLAH ABDEREMANE, PRESIDENT OF THE ISLAMIC FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF THE COMOROS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)t Before proceeding with the consideration of the item on the agenda for this afternoon, I should like to invite the General Assembly to join in a tribute to the memory of Mr. Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane, President of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros.
It was with deep sorrow that I learned this morning of the tragic death of President Abdallah. President Abdallah will be remembered for the distinguished leadership he gave to his country and for the support he extended to the quest for peace and justice in the world.
On behalf of the General Assenbly, I request the representative of the Comoros to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government and the people of the Comoros and to the bereaved family.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French):  It was with heartfelt sadness that I learned of the tragic death of the president of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, Mr. Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane. President Abdallah occupied the lofty office of Head of State of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros for 10 years, a period during which he earned the great esteem not only of his people but also of the African and international communities because of the great wisdom and moderation with which he carried out the peaceful development of his country.
I should like also to pay a tribute to President Abdallah for his devotion to the principles and ideals of the Charter and his strong support for the work of the

United Nations. During his mandate President Abdallah visited United Nations Headquarters several times, and I had the honour of receiving him and gaining first-hand knowledge of his outstanding qualities as a statesman.
In these painful circumstances I should like to convey to the bereaved family and to the people and the Government of the Comoros ray most heartfelt condolences on this great loss.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I invite representatives to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of President Abdallah.
The members of the General Assent,ly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Lesotho, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. PHÛOFOL0 (Lesotho): Last week I had the unfortunate task of conveying to the Assembly the African message of condolences on the untimely death of the late President of Lebanon, Mr. René Moawad. A week has not yet passed, and I am again in the position of having to undergo the ordeal of conveying yet another message of condolences, on behalf of the African Group and of ray country, regarding the untimely death of Mr. Ahmed Abdallah Abdereraane, who was Head of State of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros.
On behalf of the African Group and on behalf of my country, I wish to say that we learned with a great sense of shock and dismay that the Head of State had met a violent and untimely death during what seems to have been an attempt to effect a coup d'état.
Mr. Abdallah became the first Head of State of the Islamic Federal Republic of
the Comoros in 1975. He came to power again and became President of the Islamic	!
I
Federal Republic of the Comoros in May 1978. He also held the portfolios of	i
i
NR/dr
(Mr. Phoofolo, Lesotho)
President of the Politico-Military Directory, Minister of Defence and Minister of Justice and the Civil Service and overhauled the structure of his Government in February 1982.
It is a cause of great concern that internal political differences would warrant the assassination of those holding opposing views on issues. The African Group views this action on the part of those who perpetrated it as an unwarranted and cowardly waste of valuable life. We ask ourselves why peaceful means were not adopted to resolve whatever problem or problems existed as such means would appeal to all peace-loving people who cherish ideals of democracy.
Africa mourns this loss of an African leader and shares the grief of the Government and the people of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros. We remenber the immediate menbers of the family and the next of kin of the late Head of State and those who died with him. We convey to them our sincere sympathies and condolences. May his soul and the souls of those who died with him rest in peace.
MM/rr
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Brunei Darussalam, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. JAYA (Brunei Darussalam): In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Asian States for the month of November, I should like to express our profound sorrow over the sudden death of President Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros.
At a time when the world is enjoying relative peace and tranauillity, the tragic circumstances surrounding his death fill us with sadness. May I extend, on behalf of the Group of Asian States, our heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the family of the late President and to the Government and the people of the Comoros on this sad loss.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Czechoslovakia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. ZAPOTOCKY (Czechoslovakia): On behalf of the Group of Eastern European States, I wish to express our sincere condolences to the delegation of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros over the tragic demise of President Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane. His sudden passing away is a severe loss to the people of the Comoros, to whose progress and better future President Abdallah devoted his entire energy. Like the people of the Comoros and the whole international community, we are dismayed by the brutal crime that has taken the life of that outstanding politician and statesman.
I take this opportunity to reauest the representative of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros to convey cur words of sincere sympathy to the bereaved family of the deceased and to the Government and the people of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros.
MM/,,	A/44/PV.64
7
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French)., I call on the representative of Saint Lucia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr.FLEMMING (Saint Lucia): It is with deep and sincere regret that I express, on behalf of the members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, our profound condolences to the Government and the people of the Comoros on the sad occasion of the untimely death of their President, Mr. Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane.
We in the Latin American and the Caribbean countries have long admired his leadership, and our hearts go out to the people of the Comoros who, we know, will long mourn the loss of this great statesman. We in Latin America and the Caribbean are particularly distressed at the way in which President Abdallah died.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Norway, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. TELLMANN (Norway): The delegations of the Group of Western European and Other States were stunned and aggrieved at the tragic news of the assassination of President Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane. Mr. Abdallah was a highly respected leader of his country and its people.
This dastardly deed has left the world with a sense of loss and the people of the Comoros without an inspiring helmsman.
At this tragic hour, our deeply felt sympathy is extended to the people of the Comoros. On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I should like to convey our most sincere condolences to the bereaved families, to the people and the Government of the Comoros and to our colleagues in the Comorian delegation.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. ABÜLHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): The Arab world was grieving last week over the untimely death of President René Moawad of Lebanon. Today the African continent is grieving over the untimely loss of one of its leaders. This is the fate of those who struggle for their peoples.
The Group of Arab States at the United Nations was shocked by the tragic news of the assassination of President Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane of the Comoros, who defended the noble causes of his nation and led his people within the Islamic and African family and who was interested in international affairs, foremost among which was achieving peace and stability not only in the African continent but also in the entire world.
This tragic event prompts us to extend to the friendly people of the Comoros, w.io have long fought for freedom, our deep condolences at this immense loss. We appeal to God to help the people of the Comoros to overcome the consequences of this great tragedy as they continue working for the achievement of the political stability and economic progress of their country.
The Arab Group would li!,,» to request the delegation of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros to convey our deepest condolences to the bereaved family. May he rest in peace and may God inspire the Muslim people of the Comoros with steadfastness.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of the United States of America, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. WATSON (United States of America) t As the representative of the host country, I wish to express the United States Government's most energetic condemnation of the assassination of Mr. Ahmed Abdallah Abderemane, President of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros. In office since 1978, President Abdallah ws a force for stability within the region. The United States Government deplores this recourse to violence, rather than peaceful action to resolve political differences. I request that the most sincere condolences of the United States Government be conveyed to the family of President Abdallah, to the Government of the Comoros and to all the Coraorian people on his tragic death.
The PRESPENT (interpretation from French), I now call on the Permanent Representative of the Comoros.
Mr. MOOiiN (Comoros)t On behalf of my Government and on ny own behalf, I should like to thank you all for the expressions of sympathy addressed to my Government and my people and to the family of the late President. We all share the same feelings and we are all against this dastardly act that was carried out, not with political motives, but in pursuit of a personal vendetta. The assassination of my President had no political motivation behind it. It was a purely personal vendetta, and we cannot but regret and condenn all such acts.
On behalf of my people, I should like once again to thank you all for this mark of sympathy in this hour of mourning.
AGENDA ITEM 37
THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDIE EAST, REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/690 and AM.l, A/44/731, A/44/737)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French), Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed tomorrow at 12 noon. If I hear no objections, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French), I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names on the speakers list as soon as possible.
Mr; ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic), For almost two years now the world has been going through a stage of unprecedented positive / I changes and developments, the result of détente in relations between the two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union» Those developments have transformed relations between the major international blocs in the world from confrontation based on suspicion and mistrust to relations based on a desire for co-operation and coexistence on the basis of trust and faith in the unity of human fate and a belief in the need to provide and re-channel forces and resources towards economic development and facing challenges. Some of the most salient results of those positive developments have been seen in the resolution of certain regional problems that were on the verge of threatening peace and security in the world, such as the question of Namibia, Afghanistan, and the situation in Central America.
It is regrettable that the winds of change and a positive spirit have not yet exerted influence on the situation in the Middle East. That situation remains unchanged, fraught with possibilities of explosion and instability.
The Secretary-General rightly described the situation in the Kiddle East in his report when he said,
As we are all too well awards, the Middle East is an explosive region and events or trends in ones area almost invariably have repercussions else a. For years I have stated that few international issues are as complex or Potentially dangerous as the Arab-Israeli conflict. This remains so today." (A/44/737, para. 43)
If there is no change in the situation in the Middle East, that part of the world will undoubtedly become more dangerous, given its strategic importance that constitutes a major element in the security, stability, welfare and progress of the whole world because of its social, economic, human, historical and geographical components.
Iff one asks why the situation of the Middle East has not yet been influenced by the new positive climate permeating most parts of the world, one can readily see that the cause is Israel and the philosophy of this expansionist entity, with its strategic objectives in the region and its aggressive policies that respect no boundaries, no conventions and no customs.
The situation in the Middle East has in origin in the question of Palestine, the core, essence and crux of the problem in the region.
This Question is made all the more complex as a result of the increased expansionism of Israel. It eludes solution. The positive international atmosphere has no influence on its solution because of Israeli obduracy and arrogance, and because of the failure of the Organization, as represented by the Security Council, to take decisive, appropriate decision to deter that entity, to compel it to respect United Nations resolutions, whether they pertain to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, the city of Al Quds Al Sharif, the occupied Syrian Arab Golan Heights or southern Lebanon. The population of these territories occupied by Israel since 1967 lives at the mercy of a regime that depends on military brute force, a régime that believes in no law, no charter, no customs a regime that has no scruples about perpetrating the worst atrocities to consolidate its occupation. Its military arm is extended to attack positions in Arab States located thousands of miles from it and far from the occupied Arab territories, such as Baghdad and Tunis. It has no scruples about developing or using any type of weapon or testing it in a manner that constitutes an act of aggression against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of Arab States. Such was the case when Israel launched a missile that came down off the Libyan coast.
While the Palestinian people have been continuing their just struggle for their historic rights in the land of their ancestors, their legitimate leadership, in the form of the Palestine Liberation Organization, their sole, legitimate representative, has made successive peace initiatives. Arab States, through summit meetings, have submitted comprehensive plans for peace based on justice and international legitimacy. However, Israel, true to its type, has not been satisfied with impeding the peace efforts and making them meaningless. It persists in its position, rejecting any just settlement, and in its inhuman practices in
(Me, AbuIhasan, Kuwait) the occupied territories, the atrocious details of which have been made public by the mass media and which have been deplored in the reports of all human rights organizations, We continue to wonder what the denunciations and waves of international indignation lead to in the way of practical measures and tangible action, at a time when the heroic intifadah is entering its third year and while the Israeli occupiers continue to fire live ammunition at children and other defenceless Palestinians.
Israel continues to demolish their homes and expropriate their properties# to impose policies of starvation and economic debilitation} to detain thousands) to use asphyxiating gases# to expel citizens, and to carry out internationally prohibited measures of collective punishment.
The Israeli occupation has not been satisfied with all this# it has gone even further and outraged the religious feelings of its victims and of the 1 billion Muslims throughout the world by attacking, desecrating and defiling their holy shrines. What the Zionists are doing to the Islamic holy shrines in Al Quds Al Sharif and to mosques in other parts of the occupied territories is a heinous crime on which a resolute stance should be taken by all States and organizations. This immoral conduct should be a matter of concern not to Muslims alone but to all peoples which respect religions and holy books and are committed to humane principles and values.
These familiar Zionist acts remind us that 14 years ago this month the General Assembly adopted a resolution in which it determined that Zionism was a form of racism and racial discrimination. Under that resolution Israel became the second State, after South Africa, to be branded racist by the international family of nations. The only difference is that the unlimited western support for Israel during all these years of unchecked Zionist aggression has prevented the imposition
AP/td
of international sanctions against Israel to force it to cease its practices and respond to the need for a just settlement and peace.
This month the United States used its right of veto against a draft resolution denouncing Israel's barbaric practices submitted to the Security Council. That was the third time the veto had been used this year to prevent simple international condemnation of these crimes. The world can no longer find an explanation for this policy of condonation of Israel's policies and practices. Does the United States not see in Israel's actions and in its occupation army something that deserves condemnation? Would the United States adopt the sane position if these practices took place in any other part of the world? No one can claim that the right of self-determination and the enjoyment of human rights and basic freedoms are privileges to be granted to some peoples and denied to others, to be granted or withheld according to ideological whim and self-interest. This cannot be ^n acceptable concept of the values and precepts of which the Arab world is constantly reminded by the West.
What does the international community, especially the super-Powers, intend to do in the face of the blatant nuclear collaboration between South Africa and Israel, in particular in the light of the latest, patent evidence that those two racist regimes have tested a missile that is capable of carrying nuclear warheads and could reach many Arab and African capitals?
The Arab Group, of which I have the honour to be Chairman for this month, renews the appeal for concerted efforts by all States, in particular those that I have acquired nuclear technology, to persuade Israel to end its illegal nuclear programmes, which are based on the thext of Western technology, above all American technology. These States should combine their efforts to compel Israel to place its nuclear facilities under international supervision through the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system.

The arms race into which Israel has dragged the Middle East for scores of years now is a fearful, evil race whose astronomical costs are taken from resources that are badly needed by the peoples of the region to implement their numerous development programmes instead of spending them on lethal weapons. The continued development of nuclear weapons by Israel is yet another part of its policy of aggression against the Arab peoples and is a tool of the nuclu&r intimidation and blackmail with which it tries to achieve its expansionist schemes.
Israel's continued occupation of large parts of southern Lebanon, its almost daily armed acts of aggression against Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity, its continued interference in Lebanon's internal affairs and its constant acts of destabilization of Lebanon are all elements that make the problem of the Middle East even more complex. They constitute an obstacle to stability in that sister country. The Arab Group in New York therefore calls upon the international community, and in particular the Security Council, to bring pressure to bear on Israel to comply with the various Security Council resolutions calling for Israel's immediate and unconditional withdrawal from southern Lebanon so that the people of Lebanon may be able to regain their well-being and concentrate their efforts on rebuilding their country's internal front in a way that would fulfil their aspirations to a stable and prosperous life.
The Palestinian leadership took a historic position at the meeting of the Palestine National Council at Algiers last year, a position that was fully supported by the Arab countries. Indeed, the international community as a whole has supported that position, whose premise is that the International Peace Conference on the Middle East - under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people - is the framework with international legitimacy for finding a solution to
(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait) thia problem that would achieve Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and establish an independent State of Palestine with its capital in Al Quds-Al Sharif.
The Arab Group considers this Palestinian position to be just and realistic. In the light of such a position no one can prevaricate unless the intention is to reject peace. It has become patently clear to the whole world now who wants peace in the Middle East and who is prevaricating and undermining efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement at a time when the world is at the dawn of a new era in international relations and a new era of detente and coexistence.
Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic), Once again the General Assembly is seized of the situation in the Middle East. However, this year it is discussing the question at a time of marked progress towards the settlement of a number of internationally significant regional issues, a clear departure from the old patterns and the logic of confrontation, a willingness to engage in constructive dialogue and support an enhanced role for the United Nations.
The world breathes more easily in view of the recent positive indications in the international political climate which have emerged from the adoption by the two super-Powers and other major Powers of new policies of dialogue and agreement and their renunciation of the cold-war logic. This has reflected positively on the regional contact of coexistence and given impetus to the resolution of issues which had remained intractable, such as those of Namibia, Central America, Afghanistan and the Iran-Iraq conflict.	j
However, the aberration amid all those favourable signs has been the situation in the Middle East. It has remained the area where no improvement has been made. Though it continues to be in the forefront of world attention and has been a grave
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library ........;. . ................... _ •	.	...	. ............'	.....
(Mr. Salah, Jordan) cause for international concern since the end of the Second World War, it continues to move very slowly indeed.
It is a regrettable fact that the international will is never shown, as far as this region is concerned, unless the region explodes into military conflict. As soon as hostilities end however, that international will evaporates and the old despondency and acquiescence reign supreme.
The peoples of the region and, indeed, the whole of the international community sense,? some sort of promise in the air, towards the end of last year on a wave of international welcome for the resolutions adopted by the Palestine National Council at its special session at Algiers and the subsequent Palestinian statements and declarations wherein the Palestinian pciple gave voice to their sincere desire for peace and earnest willingness to work for peace. In all this, the Palestinians committed themselves to acceptance of a peaceful solution based on Security Council resolutions 2 42 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of two States in Palestine as envisaged by General Assenbly resolution 181 (II) of 1947.
Together with the majority of the States of the world we expected Israel to respond to those resolutions and decisions with a degree of reasonableness and a show of good will. It has not done so. Instead, it has resorted to its well-tried technique of obstructing the path to peace by proposals that lead to a head-on collision with the requirements of a comprehensive and just peace. In doing so, it has demonstrated yet again that real peace is the very antithesis of its goals and expansionist designs, of which it has given ample evidence by its annexation of Arab Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights, its insistence on renaming the occupied West Bank "Judea and Samaria", and the continued building of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
^¡^
On top of all thia, Israel has continued to flout th, international will eflbodied in United Nations resolutions that define the prerequisites for resolving the Arab-Israeli dispute in its entirety. Needless to say, the core of that dispute is the Palestinian issue.
The prerequisites of peace in the Middle Bast, as defined by the international community, are, Israel’s withdrawal freer all the Palestinian and Arab territories which it has continued to occupy since 1967» recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination and to establish their independent State on their soil in the occupied territories of the West Bank and the Gaea Strip» respect for the right of all the States of the region, including the two States of Palestine and Israel, to live in peace and security within internationally recognised borders.
When the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, declared its acceptance, towards the end of last year, of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 336 (1973), the principal prerequisites of a complete and peaceful settlement were provided by the Arab side, and thus, the political and psychological obstacles which were seen by Israel and its supporters as hurdles in the way cf a political solution of the Middle Bast problem were removed. Regardless of all this, however, and notwithstanding the clarity of the Arab side's political stance and its commitment to a real, peaceful solution, Israel has remained intransigent. Its response has been ambiguous and far from serious, as is proved by its so-called peace initiative of last May. to illustrate, let ne recall what that so-called Initiative stated In Its preamble, "This document presents the principles of a political initiative of the Government of Israel which deals with the continuation of the peace process» the termination of the state of war with the Arab states» a solution for the
Arabs of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District» peace with Jordan» and a resolution of the problem of the residents of the refugee camps in Judea, ■ Samaria and the Gaza District." (A/44/282, annex, para. 1)
It is self-evident that that statement ignores completely the national rights of the Palestinian people. It refers to the Palestinian nationals in the occupied territories as the Arabs of Judea, Samaria and Giza, and as "the residents of the refugee camps". It does not deal with the problem of Palestinian refugees in the Diaspora» it does not refer to the legal situation of the occupied territories» it insists on referring to the occupied West Bank as Judea and Samaria» and it does not even mention Jerusalem.	^
The Government of Israel aims through this plan to dilute the peace process and mire it in a morass of controversy over procedures and formalities in order to gain tine and vitiate the peace initiative of the PLO. Such a posture on the part of Israel is tantamount to total rejection of all the prerequisites that must be provided if there is to be peace.
The Israeli Foreign Minister's letter to the Secretary-General - document A/44/721 - confirms that this Israeli political posture vis-à-vis any attempt to solve the problem in the Middle East is intended to be a substitute for the resolutions adopted by the United Nations. It even changes the terms used to describe the land and the rights of Palestinians. The content of the Israeli Foreign Minister's letter is a clear indication of the Israeli Government's intent to annex the Palestinian territories, to give the West Bank the name of Judea and SSmaria, and to refer to Jerusalem as the unified capital of Israel. All this is an indisputable perversion of the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations.
The two reports of the Secretary-General - documents A/44/731 and A/44/737 -voice concern over tLe increasing gravity of the situation in the occupied
AE/rr	.	V44/PV.64
28
.	.	(Mr. Salah, Jordan)
territories and the fact that the peace opportunities that have arisen during the past twelve months have not been grasped. Reference is made, to the Security Council's conviction that it has become urgent that a comprehensive, just and permanent settlement of the situation in the Middle East, particularly the question of Palestine, be achieved. This conviction on the part of the Security Council necessitates concerted and urgent action by the Council to.settle the Middle East ■ dispute, starting with agreement to hold the international conference that is unanimously regarded as the most appropriate forum for such an endeavour. Israel is the only State that has rejected completely and out of hand the idea of the international conference. Its leaders have never had any qualms regarding this rejection, which they have repeatedly stressed.	-
The General Assembly's general debate at the beginning of this session proved, when the talk turned to the Middle East, that the United Nations has an opportunity to move from the maintenance of peace to peace-making through the holding of an international peace conference - an idea that has attracted a wide measure of international support.
Jordan has always called for a peaceful, just and comprehensive solution, particularly since 1967. That call has continued to be for a settlement based on the United Nations Charter and on the relevant United Nations resolutions. In his statement to the General Assembly at its fortieth session, His Majesty King Hussein	I
affirmed that the resolutions that would constitute a balanced basis for a peaceful and just settlement, are these» General Assembly resolution 181 (II) on the partition of Palestine) General Assembly resolution 194 (III) on the question of the Palestinian refugees) Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which calls for an Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories and affirms the right of	I
all the countries of the region to live in peace within secure and recognised	.
boundaries; and Security Council resolution 338 (1973), which calls for negotiations between the parties to the conflict. These resolutions as a whole meet with complete international acceptance, as they include the basic principles which, if adhered to, would lead us to the desired solution.
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) has since its adoption been considered by us to be the basis for all peace efforts and every international attempt to deal with the consequences of the 1967 war» In view of this, Jordan has continuously striven, both on the Arab and on the international levels, to mobilize the necessary support for adherence to and implementation of that resolution.
As a matter of fact, it was Jordan's acceptance of that resolution which led to the emergence of an Arab posture which later developed into an Arab endeavour to reach a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute, the core of which is the issue of Palestine. Progress in that direction has been accelerated over the past few years - witness» the decision of the Fez Arab suntnit conference of 1982, which formulated a unified Arab position committed to international legitimacy as a basis for solving the Arab-Israeli dispute» the subsequent Palestinian-Jordanian joint efforts within that context» the Arab unanimous stance at the two Arab summit conferences of Amman, in 1987, and Algiers, in 1988, which, as a further affirmation of that Arab stance, called for the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East.
All those efforts culminated in the emergence of an earnest and non-ambiguous Palestinian stance on the question of peace. This stance was embodied in the resolutions of the Palestine National Council in its special session last year in Algiers and was equally adopted by the Arab summit conference held in Casablanca this year.
We are convinced that such a historic opportunity should not be missed. We are equally convinced that all that is needed for this opportunity to produce a significant contribution to the search for peace is a measure of good will on the part of Israel. We are confident that the international community - and even those who pretend to believe otherwise - realize that there is a unified Arab stance that
is highly moderate and responsible, and that it is based on the principles Included in the international resolutions I have referred to.
We in Jordan support every effort, including the valuable efforts of the Secretary-General, to ensure the holding of an international peace conference on the Middle East, in order to end the suffering of the Palestinian people in the occupied west Bank and the Gaza Strip, to end the suffering of the Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, and to move away from the dangerous and explosive tensions which beset the region.
We hope the Security Council will respond favourably to the request of the General Assembly to consider the adoption of the necessary measures to convene that conference before it is too late to reach a just, permanent and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute. Thus the Council would take a very important step towards dealing with the very roots of the Middle East problem. The Security Council has both the authority and the mandate to do so. It also has the resolutions which it has adopted unanimously and which would put paid to the problem if only they were implemented. The Security Council has also at its disposal an international unanimity on the most appropriate means of finding a solution, namely, an international peace conference.
While the focus is on the Arab-Israeli dispute and its core, the Palestinian question, we view with the utmost concern the continued Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, which poses grave threats to Lebanon’s unity, stability, independence and natural resources. In the light of our awareness of the dangers inherent in the continued Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, we support all efforts, particularly those of the new Lebanese Government, which are aimed at safeguarding Lebanon's independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was deployed about 12 years ago, but it has not yet been able to fulfil its mandate because of
EH/ed	A/44/PV. 64
33-35
(Mr. Salah ,•Jordan)
Israelis refusal to comply with Security Council resolutions calling for Israel's complete, unconditional withdrawal from the occupied Lebanese territories.
The opportunity for peace in the Middle East is available. The commitment by the Arab side to benefit from that opportunity is clear and consistent. It is necessary - nay, imperative - not to miss this opportunity through the powerlessness of the United Nations, which bears the responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and the intransigence of Israel, which harbours dreams of hegemony and expansion.
We in Jordan are committed to all efforts to achieve a ‘ust and permanent peace settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. We reiterate our willingness to co-operate in every sincere effort that would lead to such an end, including the valuable efforts of the Secretary-General. We appeal to the United Nations and particularly to the Security Council, to shoulder their responsibility and translate international will into concrete action before it is too late.
Mr; BADAWI (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic), The international community is living through an extremely sensitive, historic moment which will have profound repercussions on our world as it endeavours to achieve a free and worthy life under a new international order, built on dialogue and peaceful coexistence and free from the polarization policies and international tensions that had prevailed for many years. It appears that this is a reconfirmation of commitments entered into by the founders of the United Nations when the Charter was adopted. These are clear indications that peoples and Governments are now aware that time-worn ideologies do not pay and that it is the right of future generations to enjoy a more tranquil life, enabling them to devote their energies to economic and social development and prosperity.

(Mg. - Badawi» Egypt)
Ne not, that the two major Powers and their allies have committed themselves te ending the nuclear and conventional arms race, a trend that we hope will continue and grow. However, they must not forget that they are partners in this interdependent, integrated world, a world united by a conaon destiny, that depends on the harmonious coexistence of nations to the benefit of mankind as a whole.
The prevailing international détente has contributed to the solution, or the beginning of the process of solving, a series of regional conflicts which for many years had resisted all attempts at settlement and come up against international tensions, strategic confrontations and transient interests of States.
Only a few days ago the brother people of Namibia elected its representatives M the conclusion of the process leading to total independence. Considerable progress had been »de even before that towards solving many other regional problems, such as those of Afghanistan and Kampuchea, the Iran-Iraq conflict and, most recently, the Lebanese situation. In this connection, I pay tribute to the national leadership in Lebanon, which has lost no time in facing up to its responsibilities with a view to ensuring the unity of that sister country and its sovereignty over the whole of its territory through the total withdrawal of foreign troops.
Me welcome all the initiatives that have been taken to improve international relations, modest though they be and long though we have awaited them. Nevertheless, we feel it to be our duty to alert the international community tc the fact that our achievements to date are but a small step forward on the long and arduous road ahead. The successes achieved in the past two years are derisory compared with the challenge the international community still faces.
Kesers will agree that the clearest evidence that we are still faltering on our road and that we have not yet moved to genuine detente is the situation in the Kiddle test, the cradle of the revealed religions and the very centre of many
(Mg. Badawi, Egypt)
cultures. The Middle East has not yet benefited from the positive international climate that now prevails in most regions of the world, in particular the European region neighbouring the Mediterranean basin. I am bound in all honesty to acknowledge that the situation in the Middle East has become even more tense owing to the introduction into the region of more sophisticated weaponry and to the tests on intermediate-range missiles carried out by Israel on the Mediterranean coast. This is a threat to the security of the Mediterranean and the stability of all States in the region, particularly in the light of the precise, detailed information we receive daily regarding the non-peaceful character of Israel's nuclear programmes and the strategic military co-operation between Israel and South Africa, with all its dangerous connotations.
I need hardly stress the fact that the other States in the region will not stand by with folded arms in the face of those Israeli policies, which threaten their security. Israel should carefully assess the situation, because if it pursues those policies there will inevitably be a very serious and dangerous arms race, the disastrous consequences of which will spare none in a region that already has more than its share of problems.
If Israel truly wishes to live in peace and security in the Middle East it must provide the States in the region with the guarantees for which they are asking. Those guarantees cannot be assured unless the peaceful nature of Israel's nuclear programmes is ascertained, Israel accedes to the Treaty cm the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and places all its nuclear installations under the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system, a denuclearized zone is established in the Middle East, and military co-operation with South Africa is terminated.
It is unfortunate that, while the hopes, and even the dreams, of some States are coming true, and we are talking about a favourable international situation, the
(Mr» Badawi, Egypt) tribulations of the peoples of the Middle East are increasing and Israel's policy of occupation continues» as do its arbitrary actions against the Arab population in the occupied territories. This is all part of Israel's desperate attempt to crush the popular Palestinian intifadah and implement measures that blatantly flout international charters and resolutions and, in particular, the fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
This policy certainly attests to the short-sightedness i.2 the Israeli occupation authorities, because U only reinforces the determination of the Palestinian people to resist the occupation and cannot but lead to further violence, thereby widening the gap between Israel and the peoples of the region.
In consequence of all this, the great hopes that were raised last year regarding positive results from the efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the Middle East problem, thanks to the courageous position adopted by the Palestinian leaders, in particular President Yasser Arafat, in November and December 1988, have been dashed and replaced by a new surge of feelings of mutual distrust by the parties involved, because the Israeli Government has not given the response that the Palestinian's historic position deserves.
We have followed the evolution of this situation with great concern because we are convinced that it is vitally necessary for negotiations accepted by all concerned to be started, in order to reach a comprehensive, lasting solution to the Middle East problem in all its aspects. That is why Egypt has decided to continue its efforts off this year to bring about a dialogue between Palestinians and Israelis, on a footing of ecuality and free from pre-conditions, as a first step in a comprehensive peace process - because the Palestinian problem remains the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. I need not add that this dialogue would not be conducted in a vacuums rather, it would be based on resolutions and positions that

JSM/dr
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
would ensure its international legitimacy, and, first and foremost, on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and on recognition of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people.
i	■ ■	’
NS/td	A/44/PV.64
41
'	^r> Badawi, Egypt)
Similarly, this dialogue must be followed by measures that will necessitate expanded international participation within the framework of an international peace conference with a view to readying a definitive, comprehensive settlement of the conflict.
Egypt would like to take this opportunity to reiterate its consistent position, which is the following. The international peace conference must be held under the auspices of the United Nations in conformity with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and with recognition of the national rights of the Palestinian people. The aim of that conference must be to reach, through negotiations, a comprehensive, peaceful solution of the Middle East problem in all its aspects, and other related problems, so as to guarantee a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Egypt supports the effective participation in the conference, on an equal footing, of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, and - the five permanent members of the Security Council. It should be emphasized that, . to be feasible and lasting, the comprehensive solution of the problem of the Middle . East must include the following elements)
First, withdrawal from all Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem, as well as other occupied Arab territories# secondly, • the conclusion of an agreement on the measures for the security of all States of the region, including, in particular, a provision with regard to part A of ' resolution 181 (II), of 29 November 1947# thirdly, solution of the problem of Palestinian refugees in conformity with General Assembly resolution 194 (III) and other relevant resolutions# fourthly, the dismantling of Israeli settlements in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967» and, fifthly, guarantees of freedom of worship in the holy places of all revealed religions.
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt)
I remind representatives of the States Members of the Oiited Nations, of the Peoples of the world, as we discuss the situation in the Middle East, one of the thorniest regional conflicts Md one that has been before us continuously for years, that they have a common responsibility to try to solve all conflicts, no matter which region is involved. That was the purpose that led at the end of the Second Kbrld War to the founding of the United Nations, because of our conviction that peace is one and indivisible. History has demonstrated the far-sighted vision of the founders of the Organization, who drafted its Charter. There can be no doubt that in the light of recent technological progress any conflict, wherever it may occur, will have repercussions everywhere else on earth. Egypt believes in the	I
common destiny of all the peoples of the world. It is committed to playing a	I
direct or indirect role in the quest for just solutions to all regional problems.
Egypt also believes that the Uhited Nations has a consistent role to play as a peacemaker. It is a role that evolves and adapts to the characteristics of the conflict involved and the stage through which that conflict is passing. In this connection I remind the Assembly that the first deployment of United Nations peace-keeping forces, which won the Nebel Peace Prize for the Organization, was in the Middle East.
Egypt welcomes the Secretary-General's assurance in his various reports on the situation in the Middle East that he intends to pursue his efforts, with all the parties concerned, to find a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict. We
i call upon all peace-loving States to contribute as such as they can to the	I
relaunching of the peace-making process in the Middle East and the attainment of a peace guaranteed by a well-balanced and equitable series of rights and obligations, because this is indeed the corner-stone of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. History would judge us severely if we allowed this opportunity to escape.
It would be an even more serious error than the errors that have been committed in
,®/td	A/44/PV.64
43-45
(Mr. Badawi, Bsjypt) th, past and would have a negative, redoubtable impact on the present international efforts to establish a new international order that will ensure freedom, security, stability and prosperity for sankind as a whole.
Mr. Khitab KHAN (Pakistan) i In the Middle East the prospects of peace, unfortunately, remain as elusive as they were over 40 years ago when the General Assembly fii,st considered the threat posed to international peace and security by developments in the region. The Secretary-General referred to this impasse in his report, noting that
•The situation in the Middle East remains a source of profound and intones concern, not only because of the political principles and issues at staffs, but also because of the widespread human suffering caused by the failure to resolve those issues.” (A/44/1, p. 7)
The current debate, indeed, is another reminder of Israel's intransigence and its deliberate policy of thwarting every peace initiative. The reason for its attitude is simple. Israel persists in the mistaken belief that, through its military preponderance, it can in the course of time transform into a fait accompli its gradual absorption of the Palestine and Arab territories which, through the massive, abusive use of force, it continues to occupy illegally. Therefore, we once again condem Israel's policy of expansion and annexation and its continued occupation of the southern territories of Lebanon.
The crux of the problem in the Middle East is the denial of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination and statehood. Neither through five wars nor through its contemptuous dismissal of Palestinian rights has Israel been able to will this problem to disappear.
(Me. Khitab Khan, Pakistan) Nai that through tha protracted use of force and terror nor through its repeated attempts to liquidate the identity of the Palestinian people has Israel succeeded in extinguishing the flame of freedom which for over four decades the Palestinian people have kept alight through incalculable suffering and sacrifice.
The intifadah in the occupied Palestinian territories since 9 December 1987 has demonstrated once again the determination of the Palestinian people to be free and independent. As the Secretary-General has rightly pointed out in his report on the Work of the Organisation,	!
"it is the political aspects of the problem that have to be addressed if an	[
end ia to be put to the confrontations that occur almost daily throughout the occupied territories. I would, therefore, remind all concerned of the urgent	I
need for an effective negotiating process based, on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and taking fully into account the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including that of self-determination. The longer such a process is delayed, the greater will be the difficulties in initiating it and the more explosive the situation can become.” (A/44/1, p. 8).
For too long Israel's obduracy has been allowed to run rampant in’ the Middle East. Israel's distorted vision of its destiny, buttressed by a siege mentality, has engendered grave turmoil and turbulence in the Middle East and wrought havoc on its neighbours. It continues its occupation of southern Lebanon and the Golan	.
Heights. On the other hand, the Arab desire for genuine peace was repeatedly made manifest in the resolution adopted last year in Algiers by the Palestine National Council. There is no longer room for prevarication. The Palestine National Council resolution is clear and unambiguous. It underlines the necessity of holding an effective international conference concerning the Middle East question and its crux, the Palestinian cause. The conference will be held under the

(Hr. Khitab Khan, Pakistan) auspices of th® United Nations with the participation of the permanent ambers of the Security Council and all parties to the struggle in the region, including the Palestine Liberation Organisation - the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people - on an equal footing. The international conference will be convened on the basis of Security Council resolutions 2 42 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the assurance of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people. First and foremost among these are their right to self-determination and the liberation of all Palestinian and Arab territories that Israel has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.
No nation need condemn itself to a perpetual state of war. Israel has a choice between durable peace and an ephemeral security based on the instruments of war and coercion. The prospects of a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East can be resuscitated if Israel is willing to negotiate on the basis of the proposal for an international peace conference on the Middle East.
In September 1989 the Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries reaffirmed their call for a settlement through comprehensive peace negotiations under United Nations auspices. Stressing the need for the early convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East, they called upon the Security Council,, while exerting efforts to convene that Conference, inter alia to consider and elaborate
"guarantees for security measures agreed upon by the Conference for all States in the region". (A/44/551j annexe p; 39> para. 8) We believe that the members of the Security Council, particularly its permanent members, have a special responsibility to provide the necessary impetus for the convening of such an international conference.
It is our conviction that th® establishment of the State of Palestine, which constitutes a glorious milestone in the inexorable march of the people of Palestine
(Me, Khitab Khan, Pakistan) towards their cherished goal» will serve to strengthen the process of peace in the Middle East.
More than 4Q years ago the Palestinian people were brutally uprooted iron their ancient homeland. Por all these years the people of Pakistan have remained steadfast in their support for the just cause of the Palestinian people. I wish to take this opportunity to renew our pledge of solidarity with the Palestinian people in their struggle to regain the exercise of their right to self-determination and independence» and with the Arab States in their efforts to resolve the Middle East conflict and strengthen peace and stability in their region. There can be no durable peace in the Middle East until and unless justice is done to the Palestinian people and Israel withdraws fully from all occupied Arab territory.
For four decades the Palestinians have suffered a tragic life. They are entitled to a homeland of their own. We join all fair-minded nations in supporting their righteous cause.
Mr. OUEDRAOGO (Burkina Faso), (interpretation from French), Throughout the years the superimposition and overlapping of political» strategic» economic, social» cultural and religious factors have complicated a situation whose crux is the question of Palestine.
Whatever approach we take in considering the problem, the legitimate claim of a people emerges irresistibly, irrepressibly and totally. A just and lusting peace in the Middle East can be based only on the acknowledgement and effective exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Everything that has happened has resulted from the contempt shown for those rights.
While the climate in international relations has been characterised by relative détente and efforts to achiever conciliation, that climate regrettably has not affected the Middle East, where there has been a dangerous escalation in tension. There are two major reasons for that. The first is Israel,, determination
pkb/plj
(Mr. Qiedraogo, Burkina Faso) to ,mum Ue policy of force to ^ ^ion, [he ^ 18 iaMeV8	to
recognize the rights of the Palestinian people.
in hot, ,nd, cover of Its Clair, of self-defence, lauel h„ »„sued a policy of .„ression end ..„„.ion gainst lu n.^. a„a ot „„^ ^^ the entire region.
A/44/PV. 64 SI
(Mr. diedraego, Burkina Faso)
Its policy is characterized by violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States near and far, by illegal occupation and annexation of Arab and Palestinian lands, and by denial of the Palestinian people's legitimate rights and aspirations, which are the crux of the Middle East conflict. Thus Israel has annexed Arab Jerusalem and the Syrian Arab Golan Heights, invaded Lebanon, destroyed its capital Beirut, occupied southern Lebanon, extended its repressive practices to the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories, and intensified its colonization policies in those territories.
In that context, and in the Middle East turmoil, Lebanon is paying an incommensurately high price. The people and Government of Burkina Faso are concerned at and saddened by that situation. As a victim of the chain reaction resulting from the failure to solve the question of Palestine, Lebanon is entitled fully to regain its sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial integrity.
Therefore Burkina Faso supports the proposals of the Tripartite High Committee of the Arab League to restore peace to Lebanon and establish genuine national reconciliation. We support those proposals especially since the recent tragic events which cost the life of President Moawad and members of his entourage are a reminder that that fraternal country, a victim of outside interference, must start somewhere if it is to recover. Fourteen years of blood and pain cry out to the whole international community.
Burkina Faso again expresses its solidarity with the entire Lebanese people. True to its status as a non-aligned country, Burkina Faso reaffirms that the integrity and unity of Lebanon require the withdrawal of all foreign troops and also stable institutions. Thus the process that has begun must continue.
(Me. Qiedraogo, Burkina Faso)
The security of the region is also being adversely affected by Israel's
refusal to adhere to the 1970 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its refusal to agree to the International Atomic Energy Agency's monitoring of its nuclear activities. This policy of force and domination in the region, to
which I referred at the beginning of my statement, is being practised by Israel so that it can go on denying the Palestinian people its inalienable rights. The Palestinian people continues, because of Israel, to suffer the most humiliating ordeals - harsh repression, deportation and the pillaging of its property.
Nevertheless, the Palestine National Council has decided on an approach based
on negotiation. An independent State of Palestine was proclaimed to that end. The Palestine Liberation Organization, representative of the Palestinian people, has shown its readiness for dialogue. On all sides appeals have been made to Israel to put an end to its policy of intransigence and force. The Israeli authorities, unfortunately, refuse to heed these appeals, m the final analysis nothing can break the determination of a people struggling for the recognition of its inalienable fundamental rights. Nothing car. maintain indefinitely a policy based on domination, exploitation and pillaging that is pursued against people carrying on that struggle.
From Burkina Faso's viewpoint, a peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle East requires that Israel renounce its policy of force and agree to the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East. Renunciation of the policy of force on Israel's part means# its total withdrawal from all the Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, its recognition of the inalienable national rights of the Arab Palestinian people to return, to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent State in Palestine, the ending of its occupation in southern Lebanon, and respect for the
(Mr, Qiedraogo, Burkina Faso)
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of the States of the region, as
,eu as for the right of all the states of the region to live in peace ana
secur ity.
The idea of convening an international peace conference on the Middle Bast ,as initiated in General Assembly resolution 38/58 c, dated 13 December 1983. six
years have elapsed since then, and the consensus for the convening of such a conference has ,instantly expanded, to such a point that today only the Gavernaent of Israel opposes it.
We believe that it is necessary to hold an international
the Middle East with
Security Council and
the
all
Liberation
Organization
settlement
of the Middle
242 (1967)
this regard
peace conference on
participation of the five permanent menbers of the parties to the conflict, including the Palestine
with
East
and 338 (1973) and
a view to reaching a comprehensive and just problem on the basis of Security Council resolutions of all other relevant united fetions resolutions, in
, the united Nations, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has the means available to formulate a strategy and specific plans with a view to helping the participants in that conference establish a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. The particularly important role Of the Security Council should be emphasized.
More than 40 years have passed and the situation in the Middle East remains just as alarming, tor the reasons I have just given. He believe that an international peace conference on the Middle Bast would be a step in the right direction, and ,e take this opportunity to appeal to the Israeli authorities to join in the broadiy based international consensus on the convening of such a conference, so that they too can take pert in the collective efforts being made on all sides to reach a just and lasting peace in the Middle Bast in the Interests of all the States and peoples of the region.
,ÎÆ (Democratic Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic).
honour for me to have this opportunity to address the
It is a great
General Assembly on behalf of
the te» parts of Yemen, on this important agenda item of the current Assembly session, namely -The situation in the Middle Mm-. ^ confltm3 ^ o£ position of the two parts of Yemen with regard to this Important question.
the
This renewed discussion of the question
of the Middle East is taking place
the positive climate prevailing in international relations at the present time.
in
Shat climate is reflected in the policy of detente between
the two super-Powers
the replacement of confrontation and lack of trust by understanding and co-operation.
and
It has also reflected positively on regional problems in certain parts of the world( which had been hotbeds of tension threatening peace and security not only in those areas but in the whole world as well, peaceful solutions have been found to some problems» for example, the Iran-Iraq war, Namibia, Afghanistan, Central America, the Western Sahara) while others are on the way to a settlement, such as Kampuchea and Cyprus. The United Nations has played an effective role in achieving understanding between the parties concerned and a political settlement to some of those problems that had long been of concern to the international community. We must pay a tribute here to the consistent and persistent efforts of Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar, whose work has proved beyond a shadow of a doubt the importance of the United Nations in solving disputes by peaceful means and instilling confidence and understanding among warring parties. All this has reinforced the confidence of the international community in the United Nations, a confidence which was almost lost at one point owing to the ineffectiveness of its resolutions and decisions.
In spite of our optimism vis-à-vis the present climate in international relations, this has, regrettably, not reflected on the situation in the Middle East. The fact that this situation has remained virtually deadlocked for over four decades is the outcome of Israel's rejection of peace, the principles of the United Nations Charter, international law and all the resolutions adopted by the Organization and other international and regional forums over several years to help solve the conflict in the Middle East.
What encourages Israel to continue to reject the repeated appeals by the international community to see reason instead of to pursue a policy of war and aggression is the unlimited military, political, economic and moral support it receives from the United States. Not only is that support unlimited but the United
Wj,	A/44/PV.54
57
(Mr. Obe id. Democratic Yemen) States is also propping up the Israeli policy on the regional and international levels by all the means at its disposal, including political and economic pressure on States and the right of veto, and protects Israel by preventing the Security Council from adopting sanctions against Israel or even condemning Israeli acts of aggression in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories.
On behalf of the two parts of Yemen, we call upon the United States, as one of the permanent members of the Security Council, to shoulder its responsibilities in keeping with the United Nations Charter and adopt a positive attitude towards relevant international peace efforts, thus joining the international community within the agreed framework to achieve a political settlement in the Middle East. The Security Council could then take the practical measures to prepare for the convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East. We appeal to the United States to exercise pressure and influence on Israel to respond to the Palestinian and international peace efforts.
We have to take advantage of the positive climate in international relations and multiply our efforts to find a just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem based on the principles of international law, the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations calling for the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories and the restoration of all the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, including the right to return and the right to self-determination and the establishment of an independent State on their national soil. This can be accomplished only through the convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organisation and the permanent members of the Security Council.
MM/jf
The Arab States have repeatedly expressed in regional or international forums their desire to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East. They have laid down the foundation of an Arab peace strategy based on the aforementioned principles. The PLO, the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, has reaffirmed beyond a shadow of doubt its interest in achieving peace in the region and has responded positively to the international efforts in that direction. The resolutions adopted by the Palestine National Council and the positive initiative announced by Mr. Arafat in Geneva had a positive effect on the Arab and international levels. The increasing international recognition of the State of Palestine, which celebrated its first anniversary this month, testifies to the conviction of the international community in the legitimacy of the PW and its serious attitude towards achieving a just and comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli dispute in general.
The Palestinian popular intifadah in the occupied West Bank and the Gaza Strip, which will shortly enter its third year, has demonstrated more than ever the urgency of finding a just solution to the problem. That heroic uprising has clearly illustrated that, notwithstanding the barbarity of the racist Zionist regime in the occupied territories, the occupation of the Arab and Palestinian territories, the desecration of holy places and the violation of basic human rights, as well as other acts of Israeli barbarity and terrorism, are not the way to settle the problem of the Middle East through the kind of peace Israel desires. The Zionists, however, refuse to heed that lesson even now that the Palestinian people has convinced the whole world of its will not to be vanquished and of its desire to determine its own future. In this connection, we must also pay a tribute to the struggle of our Arab people in the Golan Heights and the Lebanese south. At every session of the Assembly the debate on the situation in the Middle East ends with the adoption of numerous resolutions. These resolutions, like other
(Mr. Obeid, Democratic Yemen) resolutions adopted by the Assembly since the inclusion of the Arab-Israeli item on its agenda, have always condemned the Israeli occupation of the Arab and Palestinian territories and have denounced Israel for its disregard of the resolutions of the Security Council and the United Nations. They have also condemned Israel's continued occupation of the Golan Heights and the Lebanese south. The adoption of such resolutions does not amount to much, however, since they are not binding or have any influence on Israel or on those who support it. Israel cort^iues to reject those resolutions and to pursue arrogantly its policies of occupation and acts of aggression which have become more violent over the years in defiance of the will of the international community. In fact, Israel's arrogance vis-à-vis the United Nations resolutions, its short-sightedness, its lack of will to achieve a just and comprehensive settlement of the problem and its repetitious false claims have all become permanent features of Israel's attitude towards the United Nations.
What is the importance of such resolutions if they do not even exercise moral pressure on Israel or contribute towards mitigating its arbitrary practices? Indeed, Israel considers that United Nations resolutions are not in keeping with its philosophy, which envisages only one State in Palestine and depends on military might and the support of its friends to impose that philosophy.
We believe that the international community must find new ways and means to exercise pressure on Israel and ensure that it respects international law and abides by its obligations in accordance with the United Nations Charter, including the adoption of sanctions, the imposition of an economic and military boycott and	.
other mandatory sanctions which, in our view, would not be effective enough unless countries friendly to Israel withheld their unlimited support.
(Mr. Obeid. Democratic Yemen) Thoee measures proved effective when they were imposed on the racist regime in South Africa.
Despite the fact that we know beforehand that such mandatory measures cannot be adopted by the Security Council because of the strong opposition of the United States, we call at least for voluntary measures by the States Menbera of the United Nations. Otherwise we shall continue to adopt one resolution after another, while Israel will only turn a deaf ear to the international community and the suffering of the Arab population in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories will increase, thereby posing a threat to international peace and security.
The achievement of peace and security in the Middle East, indeed, in the entire world, calls for collective, honest, sincere and practical efforts and steps. Success in solving the Middle East conflict and other complicated regional problems will be determined in accordance with the level of political maturity displayed by the States Members of the Organization. That is the only standard against which the effectiveness of the United Nations as an international political body will be judged.
We hope that 1990 will he the year of peace in the Middle East. It is high time for the peoples of the region'to enjoy security and stability after long years of torment and suffering. Why should the policy of international detente not extend also to the Middle East and restore a smile to the lips of its people? That will depend basically on the ability of the United States to adopt a realistic and fair policy vis-à-vis the conflict in the Middle East and on its readiness to exercise pressure on Israel to compel it to abide by international law. Let us hope so.
Mr. AL "SHAHAR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic)t Today there is a new will in the international arena to enhance the effective role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security on the basis of
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) complete respect tor its Charter, and through the promoting of international co-operation within the Organisation to solve international problems in accordance with the Charter-
Against that backdrop, the General Assembly is considering the situation in the Middle Bast, which is one of the most important items on its agenda in view of the close link between the situation in that region and international peace and security. The representative of the State of Kuwait, the current Chairman of the Group of Arab States, has expressed the position of the Group, including that of my country, in his statement made earlier today before the General Assembly.
The Assembly’s consideration of this item is rendered all the more important this year in view of the fact that more than 22 years have elapsed since Israel occupied the Palestinian territories and the Syrian Golan Heights in 1967. It has been a period replete with successive events, momentous developments, grave concerns and heart-rending sadness, accumulating year after year as a result of Israel's non-compliance with its commitments under the Charter of the United Nations. Foremost among those commitments are respect for the principles of the Charter, in particular the principles of political independence, territorial integrity, and the right of peoples to self-determination, respect for basic human rights, refraining from the use or threat of force, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
A clear analysis of the reports of the Secretary-General in documents A/44/731 and A/44/737 makes it abundantly clear that the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, has adopted a positive stance, and so have the Arab States concerned. They have unambiguously demonstrated their desire for peace in accordance with international law. They have responded to all endeavours for the achievement of peace. They
(Mr. Al-Shahar, Bahrain) have adopted a position» in harmony with unanimous international opinion, as embodied in General Assembly resolution 43/176. On the other hand, there is Israel's intransigent position, which foils all international peace efforts, through obstructionism or rejection.
Hence, and in the light of the facts contained in the reports of the Secretary-General, we call upon the General Assembly to tackle the situation in the Middle East with the utmost seriousness. We call upon it to shoulder its responsibility for peace and security in that sensitive part of the world. It is high time to adopt a decisive position against Israel's obstruction of the peace efforts, its rejection of the convening, under the auspices of the United Iteti, on a, of an international peace conference for the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and its intransigent refusal to negotiate with the FED, the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
In the present climate of international detente, and in view of the positive winds of change on the International scene, the General Assembly cannot remain silent in the face of this aberration. It is illogical to assume that the winds of detente, which have blown through all corners of the Earth, should have missed the Middle East. The situation is crystal clear, and the picture has become very obvious, it is no longer possible to justify Israel's continued refusal of the convening of an international conference. It is our belief that the General Assembly and the major Powers must adopt a unified international position on the call for that conference in order to settle the Arab-Israeli conflict and establish a just and comprehensive peace. This necessarily calls for the adoption of a decisive position vis-à-vis Israel's continued refusal of the conference - a position which would reaffirm the credibility of the Organization, the effectiveness of its resolutions and its prestige.
I
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain)
Last year we witnessed a frantic escalation by Israel of acts of oppression aimed at eliminating the heroic Palestinian intifadah and stripping the Palestinian people of their inalienable national rights, including the right to self-determination and to the establishment of their independent State on their national soil. The purpose of these measures was to uproot the Palestinian people and expel them from their homeland by means of persecution, torture and, finally, deportation. Israel's aggressive policies have not been confined to Palestine and its people. Rather, they have encompassed the territory and the present and future of the whole Arab nation. Israel's acts of aggression and occupation have extended to other Arab countries.
The situation now prevailing in the Middle East is the result of Israel's rejection of all international and Arab peace initiatives, which are based on international law. But Israel has not limited itself to that. Rather, it has escalated the sense of confrontation by strengthening its more sophisticated military capabilities. It has acquired and developed weapons of mass destruction	i
in the mistaken belief that that is the way to impose its occupation and dictate to the Palestinian people and the other Arab States.
The international and the united States media, in particular the NBC TV network, have made it clear that Israel has acquired weapons of mass destruction, that it is carrying out tests of such weapons, and that it launched a medium-range missile, which fell in the Mediterranean off the shores of Libya. In addition, they have made clear the increasing co-operation between Israel and the South African racist regime in the development of long-range nuclear missiles.
Israel has also transferred to South Africa sophisticated united States technology in the manufacturing of jet fighters. There has been a long history of collaboration between Israel and the South African regime in all fields,
AP/PLJ	A/44/PV. 64
67 (Mg. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) particularly that of armaments. Thia collaboration has taken on even graver dimensions since it was extended into the field of nuclear co-operation. This constitutes a threat to the very existence of both the Arab and the African States, which will always be the targets of the nuclear weapons and missiles of these two racist regimes, whose only objective is to Impose their evil schemes. This collaboration, which constitutes a grave danger to the present and the future of the Middle East and southern Africa, cannot remain unchecked by the international community. It is a flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions which call for the imposition of an embargo on South Africa in connection with the military and nuclear co-operation between Israel and the Pretoria régime. Yet Israel has totally disregarded these resolutions. In addition, the collaboration threatens international peace and security in those two sensitive regions of the world.
A realistic analysis of the current situation in the Middle East leads to the following conclusions,
First, the intifadah during the last two years has succeeded in strengthening the international conviction that it is a legitimate way of rejecting occupation. It has attracted further international support for the struggle of the Palestinian people for the attainment of its inalienable rights. It has also refuted the unfounded accusations by Israel, which desperately attempts to portray the intifadah as an act of terrorism.
Secondly, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has succeeded once again in exposing the lie uiled by Shamir the ’Israeli peace plan". That plan has been exposed as a mere farce designed to dissipate popular discontent since there is a refusal to recognize the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, as well as the principle of

(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) land for peace. The least that can be said about it is that it lacks the	J
acceptable basis on ,4iich a just and lasting peace could be established.
Thirdly, the actions taken by the Palestine Liberation Organization have made clear the coanitment of the Palestinian people to peace. They have exposed Israel's obduracy about all peace initiatives. They have also made it clear that there can be no substitute for the Palestine Liberation Organization as toe representative of the Palestinian people in any negotiations that could take place for the achievement of the desired peace. In any solution of the Middle East situation or settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, toe PLO must inevitably discharge its major role. Therefore, Israel's attempts to keep the PIO out of the peace process are doomed to failure.
Fourthly, the international conference to be convened under the auspices of the United Nations - with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council and all toe concerned parties, including the PDO - is toe internationally accepted forum for toe achievement of a comprehensive and lasting settlement to toe Arab-Israeli conflict. That is toe way to establish peace and thereby bring security and stability to the region, which has been deprived of them for so long.
Fifthly, the obdurate Israeli refusal to agree to the convening of the International Peace Conference is the major obstacle to the peace process in the region.
The international community should give serious consideration to those facts Mid undertake a joint international effort to ensure that toe Security Council plays its proper role so that an end can be put to Israel's obduracy and to the events taking place in toe Palestinian and ctoer occupied Arab territories in connection with Israel's attempt to crush the Palestinian intifadah. A
AP/SW
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain)
continuation of this situation will not contribute to th® peace process. Bather, it will open toe door wide to grave repercussions in toe region, repercussions whose magnitude and results cannot be predicted. The obdurate Israeli position ■ust not dissuade the in-arnational community from playing its proper rol,. The international community must pursue its action for launching of toe peace process and bringing Israel to accept a just and comprehensive peace within the framework of international legitimacy, through recognition of toe Palestinian people's right to the restoration of their occupied territories and their right to exercise self-determination and to establish their independent State on their soil. That is toe only way to save the region from the disaster of the repercussions to which I alluded to earlier. It is the only path to the establishment of stability and security in our region.
»/ dulegaUœ fully agreus „iU1 to, Sone wry-Genet al's reaffirm lion, In his ,port nutted to tb. Gemetal Assembly, of the need for the Security Council to contribute to the efforts being ,de to reach a co.prebensive settlement of the sraeli conflict by renewing its comitoent to resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and to the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination, with all It entails. That is the only solid foundation for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region. The Secretory-Cenersl rightly points out in bls report before the General Assembly that
few international issues are as complex or potentially dangerous as the Arab-Israeli conflict". (A/44/737, para. 43)
Will the General Assembly this year stand up to this Israeli obduracy that jeopardizes the possibilities for peace? win it reaffirm the commitment of the international community to the convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East with the participation of all parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, on an equal footing, as well as the five permanent members of the Security Council, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and recognition of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people, foremost among which is the right to self-determination? will it do that?
Mr^PE^C (Yugoslavia)» The crisis situation in the region of the Middle East, which seriously affects international peace and security and the stability of the world economy, has preoccupied the world Organization and the broadest segments of the international community over a number of years. Despite certain positive movements in the region, such as the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq and the efforts to create conditions for overcoming the situation in Lebanon, there are unfortunately no important signs of the early initiation of the process for the
'fo. Pejic, Yugoslavia) solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict	_
i conflict, at the core of which is the problem of Palestine and which remains the basic	a
e basic and most dangerous source of tension and instability not only 1„ that region but In the world.
This is the second Bast has been marked by
consecutivo PK that debate on ^ altuatlon to ^ ^^
against Israeli occupation.
the intitidah, the uprising of the Palestinian people
has thus drawn international attention most eloquently
The explosive situation in the occupied territories
situation created by continuation of the occupation, understandable to expect urgent efforts to be exerted this problem and thus prevent developments that would
to the untenability of the
armed conflict in the region
It is therefore
to bring about a solution to lead to the outbreak of a new
. the decisione adopted by the Palestine Ustionai
Council last year along these lines and the opening of the united
Staten-Palestinian dialog» are event, of Mjor ¡»port,,
for the commencement of substantive dialogue East crisis and the question of Palestine.
Along with other non-aligned countries, unsatisfactory situation in the Middle East, the continued use of force, violation of the
that open up prospects
for a peaceful solution to the Middle
Yugoslavia has always
pointed to the
which is by territorial
of the countries of the region, the policy of occupation.
and large integrity
a consequence of and sovereignty
and the denial of the
legitirate right, cf the people, of the region to s.lMeteruin.ti, and incident developtent. General agréent exist. that the basin ,... of this .Ituatlon 1. the policy coveted by so, ruling circle. In Israel and their constant refusa! to en,g. to dialog» Mlu, ^ ^^ „^^^ of ^ Palestinian people - that is, the Palestine Liberation Organisation ,o>, whioh enjoy, the full support of the Palestinian population in the occupied territories and of Palestinian. living lo diaspora _ f„ a 1Mti„g ^ ^ ^^ , problem of Palestine.
Bearing in mind the complexity of the Middle East crisis and its potential threat to world peace, Yugoslavia has always pointed out that the only possible way to achieve a lasting solution of the situation in the Middle East is to begin the process for a political solution of the problem within the United Nations, with full respect for the authentic interests and rights of all countries and peoples in the region. Foreign occupation and domination, regardless of the military might upon which it relies, do not and cannot bring peace and security to anybody. Equally unacceptable are attempts to ensure exclusive protection for one's own interests at the expense of the elementary rights of others, through violation and even outright denial. Lasting and stable peace in the Middle East can be achieved only by eliminating the chronic sources of instability and conflict in that region and creating conditions for the coexistence of peoples and countries in that area. In that context, Yugoslavia firmly believes that a solution to the Middle East crisis is possible only through the unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all territories occupied since June 1967» recognition of the legitinate rights of the Palestinian people, under the leadership of the PLO, to self-determination and independence} and respect for the rights of all the countries in the region, including Israel, to existence and security within internationally recognized borders.
Yugoslavia, as well as the vast majority of non-aligned countries, considers -and this position was reaffirmed at the recent summit conference in Belgrade - that the initiative for the early convening of the International Conference on the Middle East under United Nations auspices on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as other relevant United Nations resolutions - with the participation of all interested parties, including the PLO, on a footing of equality, and of other factors that can make a constructive contribution to the success of that Conference - provides the most suitable
(Mr. Pejic, Yugoslavia) framework for a lasting and just solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, with the problem of Palestine at its core. We sincerely hope that at long last this will be recognized also by some of the most responsible members of the Israeli Government, thereby finally opening up prospects for substantive efforts in the direction of the solution of this serious international problem.
We therefore consider that it is indispensable to make decisive joint efforts to overcome the current situation of no war, no peace, and bring pressure to bear on those whose positions stand in the way of the opening of dialogue directed at finding the basis for resolving the Middle East crisis. As Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and a non-permanent meober of the Security Council, Yugoslavia will continue to support each and every constructive effort towards opening a process that would lead in that direction. In this context we fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
Yugoslavia hôs been following the most recent developments in Lebanon with great attention and concern. The brutal, criminal assassination of the newly elected President of Lebanon, Mr. René Moawad, caused understandable shock and outrage in Yugoslavia. That senseless act, which met with the broadest condemnation by the international community, was carried out by those who oppose efforts to ensure the speedy restoration of the full national unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon. It was carried out at a time when, on the basis of the Taif agreements reached as a result of the tireless efforts of the Tripartite Committee of the Arab League, the Lebanese people was starting the process of national reconciliation after years of conflict and suffering.
For its part, Yugoslavia will continue to render full support for implementation of the Th if Agreement, which remains a broadly acceptable basis for solution of the Lebanese situation. In that regard, we welcome the election of the new President of tebanon, Mr. Elias Hrawi. Of course, we continue to believe that essential pre-conditions for a lasting solution of the Lebanese situation are termination of the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon and the withdrawal cf foreign troops from Lebanese territory, cessation of interference ir the internal affairs of that country, and the enabling of the Lebanese people to decide, freely and independently, how it should develop.	■
Yugoslavia has been following with keen interest the developments in other parts of the Middle East. We attach great importance to the commitwant of Iran and Iraq to the quest for a peaceful solution of the conflict between the two countries, on the basis of Security Council resolution 598 (1987'. Yugoslavia reiterates its full support for the efforts being made by the United Nations Secretary-General and his Special Representative towards achievement of the goal of a peaceful solution. At the same time, however, we cannot but express our deep concern over the current impasse in the talks on the implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) concerning a solution of the Iran-Iraq conflict.
The eight-year-long war demonstrated in a most tragic way that the problems between the two countries cannot be solved by military means. We therefore call on the two sides to take appropriate steps to overcome the current impasse and to continue to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of resolution 598 (1987). We believe that progress in achieving this would be in the interests not only of the two countries but also of the peace and stability in this part off the world that are of vital importance for international relations.
The crisis in the Middle East continues to be one of the most serious burdens in the context of the overall situation in international relations. We therefore believe that at this session of the General Assembly the international community will reaffirm its consensus on the need for the broadest possible international endeavour to overcome sources of tension and instability that have existed in that part of the world for years. For its part, Yugoslavia, in its capacity as Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, will continue to make a full and active contribution towards this end.
Mr. PITARKA (Albania), This year again the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly contains a multitude of items on acute political problems that call for solution and clearly reflect the concerns and legitimate aspirations of a number of ifember States. At the same time these items represent a challenge to the entire international community to deal seriously with the problems and to make use of its role and of the role of this Organization to provide just solutions to them. One acute political problem bearing directly upon peace and security in the region and the world is that of the Middle East.
The representatives of numerous Member States have expressed profound regret, but also great disillusionment, at the course along which several regional crises and conflicts are developing. Among these is the problem of the Middle East, which, so far, has defied attempts to set it upon the road to a just and lasting solution. It is very unfortunate that the situation in this region remains dangerous and very explosive. This is because of the persistence of the factors that generate such situations - the number-one factor being the Zionist aggression and occupation of Arab territories and the denial of the Palestinian people’s inalienable right to self-determination and to live free in their homeland.
Other factors relate to foreign interference and to the conspiracies hatched against the Arab people in general and the Palestinian people in particular. These conspiracies, which take the form of manoeuvres and political and diplomatic tricks and are inflamed primarily by the rivalry and collaboration between the two super-Powers - the United States and the Soviet Uhion - have become a stumbling-block to realization of the national aspiration of the Palestinian people and to solution of the Middle Bast crisis.
The further aggravation of the fatricidal war in Lebanon, which could have dangerous consequences not only for the country ,s unity - indeed, its very existence - but also for peace and stability in the region and beyond, is another factor which, in conjunction with the de facto continuation of the occupation of southern Lebanon by Israel, seriously exacerbates and renders more explosive the situation in the Middle East. Renouncement of the discords and feuds, as well as of the fatricidal bloodshed in Lebanon - and such a renouncement should be attained through a cease-fire and national conciliation, assisted by the fraternal Arab countries - would not only create the conditions for the extinction of another hotbed of tension and for the restoration of national unity and integrity in Lebanon but also encourage the Arab countries to concentrate their efforts and attention on putting an end to the occupation of their territories and, especially, on solving the Palestinian question, which remains the key to the final solution of the Middle East problems.
In the meantime, another important and encouraging development in the region is the heroic resistance and struggle of the Palestinian people to put an end to the Zionist occupation and to realize their inalienable right to self-determination in their own lands. Living proof of this determined resistance is the continuation o£ the intifadah - the massive uprising in the occupied territories in which the
(Mr. Pitarka, Albania) Palestinian people have been engaged for almost two years. Events and facts over this two-year period abound, thus proving that the Zionist oppression and genocide, the savage police violence, the massive number of arrests, the forced deportations, especially of patriotic Palestinian youths, and all other most barbaric measures of the occupying Israeli forces and administration have failed to break, however insignificantly, the will of thr ^lies tinian population in these territories and their determination to resist, with their bare fists and chests, the bullets and tanks of the occupiers, so that they may free themselves from the hateful occupation and regain their stolen homeland, the land that was torn from them.
This massive popular uprising in the occupied territories and the ever more active involvement of the new State of Palestine, which has gained the recognition and support of the international community, and of its legitimate leadership, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO), are, likewise, positive factors and developments that should accelerate the process of setting the Palestinian question on the road to solution by discarding the intrigues and plotting schemes, one of which is the so-called free elections in the occupied territories. This extremely anti-Palestinian plan has been rightly condemned and turned down by the Palestinian people themselves and by their legitimate representative, the PIO, as an attempt to gain time and to perpetuate the Israeli occupation régime in these territories, to crush the Palestinian uprising, and to neutralize the success of the important steps that the new State of Palestine has undertaken internationally, as well as its increasing prestige in the world and the affirmation of the part that it is entitled to play in the just resolution of the Palestinian question, which remains the key to the solution of all the problems of the Middle East.
Such deceptive plans can be neither covered up nor prettified by the new cosmetics that are being applied in order to paint as pacifiers those who are the real accomplices in implementing the Israeli expansionist policy. Nor can such plans be boosted by those who profess to be friends of the Arab peoples and strive to present their rapprochement and collaboration with Israel as "new opportunities" to exert pressure on it for the alleged purpose of contributing to the attainment of a peaceful solution of the Middle East question.
Life itself, reality and their resistance for survival have show» the Palestinian people and the other Arab peoples that the solution of their problems, the liberation of their ancestral lands and the preservation of freedom and independence are ultimately in their own hands; they lie in their unity and the resolute struggle against the Zionist and imperialist enemies and reaction. Against the unity of the Arab peoples, which is a source of invincible power, against the all-round Palestinian resistance, the intifadah included, the imperialist and Zionist schemes and plots are doomed to failure. This is the most secure course for the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to follow. No solution to the Palestinian Question in particular or to Middle East problems in general can be achieved without the participation and the expressed will of those peoples, much less without the Palestinians and against the Palestinians.
The debate at this session of the General Assembly offers us an opportunity to reiterate once more the Albanian Government's and people's resolute support for and unreserved solidarity with the fraternal Arab peoples in their struggle and efforts, as well as to express our firm confidence in the triumph of the just cause of the Palestinian people and the fulfilment of their legitimate national aspirations and the aspirations of all the fraternal Arab peoples.
Mr. ESZTERGALYOS (Hungary)s The deliberations at the present session of the General Assembly are being conducted in favourable international conditions under the influence of the many positive change that have taken place during the past year. The year 19®9 has also witnessed the growing involvement of the United Nations in the settlement of regional crises and hotbeds of tension. Indeed, we can note with satisfaction that most of the regional crisis situations on the agenda of the Organization seem to have been solved or to be well on the way to a peat¿ful solution.
(Mr. Esztergalyos, Hungary) In striking contrast to all these encouraging tendencies, the situation in the Middle East remains alarming and continues to be a cause of serious concern to the whole international community. The ongoing militarization of the region, together with the constant tension among the participants in the conflict, have world-wide implications and one cannot exclude the possibility that at a certain point they may even threaten the unfolding positive processes in international relations.
The prospects for settlement are still uncertain. The problem at the core of the conflict, the Palestinian question, remains unsolved. The Israeli occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories continues and so does the uprising of the the Palestinian people against occupation, motivated by an accumulation of harassment, humiliation and frustration. The annexation of East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights and the continued violation of the territorial integrity of Lebanon are constant sources of tension necessitating large-scale United Nations peace-keeping operations in the area. In expressing our appreciation to the soldiers serving the cause of peace I wish also to reaffirm our support for these United Nations peace-keeping activities.
At this point I wish to express our deep indignation over the assassination of Mr. René Moawad, President of the Lebanese Republic, last week in Beirut. It is our hope that that terrorist act will not interrupt the process of national reconciliation and that the Lebanese people, who have suffered so much, will eventually regain peace, safety and prosperity for their country.
Owing to its geographical proximity and traditional relations with the countries and peoples of the Middle East, Hungary is deeply and sincerely interested in a just and early settlement of the conflict. Our approach to the complex issues and the many sensibilities involved in the Middle East problem is determined by a genuine desire to create and promote confidence between the parties
(Mr. Esztergalyos, Hungary) involved and to contribute to the lessening of tension in the region. Proceeding from this consideration and intention, we deem it important to develop our relations with all the parties involved in the conflict. It was also in this spirit that Hungary recognized the proclamation of the State of Palestine and that we raised our inter-State relations to ambassadorial level. At the same time our relations with Israel are also developing and this found expression recently in the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between our two nations.
Our position regarding the ways and conditions of resolving the Middle East conflict has been placed on record and remains valid and unchanged. Hungary believes that the best way to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the Middle East situation would be by the convening of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations, with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council and all the parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
The basic conditions for a viable and speedy solution have been clearly formulated and are recognized by the international community, and Hungary also fully subscribes to them. They are, the withdrawal of Israel from all territories occupied since 1967» the full exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights, including the right to self-determination and to establish its own independent, sovereign State? and respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all States in the region, including Israel.
In our considered opinion the encouraging international developments have created more favourable circumstances than ever before for the launching of the long-awaited peace process in the Middle East. Obviously, the increasing readiness for co-operation of the great Powers, which has been confirmed quite recently at this session of the General Assembly by their joint initiative on enhancing
(Mr» Esztergalyosa Hungary) International peace, security and co-operation in accordance with the Charter, as well as by the initial results in the elimination o£ regional conflicts, is of particular relevance. In this respect we should like to underline the significance of the new, constructive and realistic attitude of the Palestine Liberation Organisation and of the resistance of the Palestinian people to occupation, which has found powerful expression in the intifadah, now entering its third year, in the occupied territories.
The beginning of the dialogue between the United States and the PLO, the proposals and initiatives concerning the launching of a Palestinian-Israeli dialogue and the efforts undertaken by Western European countries also signify the commitment of the international community to finding a comprehensive political settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict on the basis of a balance of the Euareats of all the parties concerned.
The determination of the PLO to reach a comprehensive settlement by political means, the acceptance by the Palestine National Council of Security Council resoultions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and its repeated and categorical rejection of terrorism in all its forms have been welcomed and are regarded by the international community as important steps towards a peaceful, negotiated solution of the conflict. We believe that it is up to Israel now to take the next step and respond constructively to these moves. The opportunity remains to be seised in order to overcome the stalemate and engage in a negotiating process that should eventually bring peace and tranquillity to the peoples of the Middle East. ।
Mr. ZACtHANN (German Democratic Republic)t The current situation in the Middle East is marked by the persistence of one of the oldest and most intricate regional conflicts in the world. The main cause of the permanent state of tension in the region, which is so sensitive in terms of international security, remains Israel's denial of the right to self-determination of Arab people of Palestine. The German Democratic Republic has followed with great concern the further aggravation of the occupation practices, which not only are a hindrance to the early peaceful settlement of the conflict but lead to even greater suffering for the Palestinian people. In this context, the massive resistance by the people of Palestine, now well into its second year, has made it eloquently clear that only a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Middle East conflict will bring peace to all peoples in the region.
The German Democratic Republic has long pleaded and worked for the early start of a settlement process in the Middle East, a precess which should embrace all aspects of the conflict, today, it is more than ever imperative to set such a process in motion through collective international efforts and reliance on a flexible negotiating approach.
Practical experience in the solution of other regional conflicts demonstrates quite strikingly that such solutions will be just and lasting only if they are brought about by political means. The German Democratic Republic also believes that the complexities of the Middle East conflict can be disentangled only through constructive dialogue and an accommodation of the interests of all the parties involved. Here, all those concerned are called upon to display the requisite sense of reason and realism.
The German Democratic Republic holds that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PUD), the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, must be a participant in such a dialogue on an equal footing with all the others.
(Mr. Zachmann, Garman Democratic Republic)
The German Democratic Republic stands resolutely for a peaceful and just settlement of the Middle East conflict. This includes guarantees of the Palestinian people's right to self-determination and the right to existence of the State of Israel within secure borders. Proceeding from that, the German Democratic Republic is in favour of normal relations with all states in the region. My comtry also supports the demand voiced by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People that the State of Palestine should ba accorded its rightful Place within the international community and the United Nations.
The ’ID's peace offensive, marked as it is by a sense of political responsibility and realism, has been an essential element in the emergence of new conditions in the Middle East. At the recent summit meeting in Casablanca, the Arab States supported the constructive policy line pursued by the PLO. Notwithstanding the obstacles mounted by Israel, the PLO has agreed to enter into a dialogue with Israel under international auspices. The corralty of States now expects Israel to cone forward with an equally constructive approach. It is to be hoped that awareness will prevail in Israel that a just and secure peace can be achieved only through guaranteeing the legitinate rights of all peoples in the region, including the people of Palestine.
Like the overwhelming majority of States, my country emphatically pleads that the PLO should not be deprived of the political means of participating on an equal footing in the settlement of the conflict. We also believe that efforts to address only selected aspects of the conflict in order to circumvent the key issues or perpetuate existing conditions under a different label are doomed to failure.
In the recent past quite a few ideas have been advanced on how to start, without further delay, the process that is to bring about a solution to the Middle

(Mr. Zachnann, German Danocratic Republic?
B,>t conflict. One thin,, however, has becom, clear, an international conference on the Kiddle fest, if it were convened under united nations auspices and if all the parties directly Involved . include the p„ ^ l8Cael _ 88 ^	^ ^
percent menders of the Security Council, participated as .duals, would he the »st appropriate and realistic way towards peace. The principles of a future settlement have already been set forth in quite a nunber of pertinent General Assembly resolutions.
In our view, the Security Connell, particularly its permanent menders, should take practical steps to prepare the KMle Bast conference in good tine. This could conceivably be done in the framework of consultations. My damnation also supports an future efforts by the Secretary-General designed to set in motion a process leading to a solution of the conflict. By the same token, we wish to emphasise again that, as In the past, the German Denooratic Bepubllc will make every effort to ,„tribute to progress towards a political settlement of the Kiddle East conflict.
Hr^AL-BiyAHI (Oman) (interpretation from Arable), Mr. President, it gives am great pleasure to express to you , behalf of my delegation our profound satisfaction at the work accomplished during the deliberations and discussions at this sessl, of the General Assembly, your efficiency and diplomatic skill have undoubtedly enabled you to guide our work in this clear and satisfactory manner.
We are discussing today one of the most important items , our agenda, the situation in the Middle Bast, a region which Is of special strategic importance on the world Mp. it is among the m,t delicate and dangerous areas and what happens there has a direct bearing on international peace and security.
(Mr. Al-Riyami, Qnan)
The signs of détente in international relations, especially between the two super“Powers, are a source of satisfaction to us all. The relaxation of tensions has had a clear effect on stability the world over. The bounty of peace is beginning to bear fruit everywhere. Sty country will continue to work for this lofty objective and to advocate it. We in the Sultanate of Qnan have repeatedly voiced our belief in the effective role played by the various bodies and organs of this Organization in finding just solutions to the many crises and problems that beset humanity. This belief stems from our faith in the benefits of dialogue and understanding between nations and our conviction that to engage in such dialogue under the wing of the United Nations is the ideal means of resolving those problems and crises.
The current world trends and regional developments require a broader overview of the problem of reshaping the Middle East peaceably. It is quite obvious that the region is being armed to the teeth, at great speed, with the most sophisticated and destabilizing of weapons. Israel has consistently pursued a policy of destabilization and discord that plays havoc with the security of the region, in defiance of the will of the international community and the principles of our Charter. The proof, if proof is needed, of Israel’s persistence in this policy is that it has continued to introduce the most destructive of weapons into the region. It has constantly threatened the Arab countries. It has continued to test and experiment on weaponry and technologies of the most destructive kind. Its latest venture was a test run of a missile which fell near the coastline of Bengazi, in Libya.
The Palestinian intifadah is now two years old. This intifadah is the end product of the accumulated bitterness caused by the oppression and coercion practised against the Arab Palestinian people. One year has elapsed since the proclamation of the Palestinian State. And yet, we still see on our television
(Mr. Al-Riyami, Qaan) screens scenes of hundreds of unarmed, defenceless Palestinian victims being killed or ¡cairned at the hands of the Israeli forces of occupation. Such hateful brutality goes on unchecked while world public opinion sits on its hands, demonstrating its powerlessness vis-à-vis the brutish behaviour of those forces of occupation and the trampling under their jackboots of the most fundamental and legitimate human rights of the Palestinians.
The ongoing intifadah and unwavering resistance to the Israeli occupation demonstrate the resolve and the iron will of the people to bring to an end the occupation in every shape and form. The Government of my country, Oman, supports all Palestinian peace initiatives and every sincere and serious effort to reach a durable, just solution that would ensure the national rights, especially the right of self-determination and the right to an independent State, of the Palestinian people. My country's delegation calls for the mobilization of all the United Nations capabilities and organs in such a my that the mechanisms at the Organization's disposal may become the effective and efficacious means of safeguarding the human rights of all peoples and of humanity at large. Our strong commitment in this respect impels us to call for the urgent organization and convening of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations. That ,inference will afford the international community and all its peace-loving countries, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, the opportunity to address the matter.
My delegation hopes the two super-Powers will join all other world forces and the concerned parties in taking the necessary measures to achieve a just and peaceful solution that would end the long-drawn-out agony of the Palestinian people.
We hope the countries of the region will enjoy peace and stability. In order for that to happen, the two super-Powers must put the Middle East question at the
(Mr. M-Riyani, Qnan) top of their priorities. The question must urgently be addressed. We also call upon the international community and the United Mations to exert pressure on Israel to recognise the realities in the region. If Israel really wants peace with its neighbours and coexistence with the Arab countries, as it claims, it must renounce its policy of aggression. It must desist from rejecting out of hand every attempt and peaceful initiative, and put an end to its persistent bellicosity and its consistent use of force.
We wish to express our sorrow with regard to the situation in Lebanon, tty country has learned with grief of the assassination of the President of Lebanon, Mr. René Moawad. We condemn this heinous crime, which was committed against Lebanon's unity and its legitimacy and was designed as a blow against national reconciliation in that sisterly country.
We welcome the election of the new President of Lebanon, Mr. Elias Hrawi, and call on all our Lebanese brethren to work together towards restoring order, peace and stability in the country. We wish our brethren in Lebanon success in that endeavour and call for the immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern lebanon. We wish all the peoples of the world peace and security.
Mr. SHIHfiBI (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from Arabic) , The problem of the Middle East, which is now under discussion is a problem that we have addressed in the General Assembly year after year, a problem that we live with In the Middle East day after day and hour after hour. Although the world has been able in the course of this year to move other Intractable crises towards settlement and understanding, the problem of the Middle East has not moved any nearer to the end of the tunnel. Why? Because Israel, the most intractable problem of all and the source of all the disasters and troubles of the Middle East, still acts under the influence of its expansionist, colonialist outlook and pretends that it can protect itself by acts of aggression and the continued occupation of the land of others.
(Mr, Shihabi, Saudi Arabia) Its leaders do not seem to realize that if they persist in this - and all the indications are that they will - they gain nothing but more uncertainty and insecurity.
The leaders of Zionism have dreamt many dreams over the years. They have clothed their dreams in the garb of religion and bedecked them with worldly ambition. They thought they were going to be able to deceive all the people all the time. They disregard the fact that history and geographic and demographic realities lead to direct contradictions with their fabrication of history and twisting of its facts. The leaders of Zionism fondly believe that their penchant for settler-colonialism and their expansionist ambitions should be legitimate justification enough and sufficient licence to invade» commit acts of aggression, occupy another people's country and seize their lands. They seem convinced that their need for security is an international licence to threaten the security of others and an open-ended authorization to violate the rights of others and deprive them of their means of livelihood) and that the world has no alternative but to acquiesce in whatever the Zionists plan and whatever they may desire.
This, of course, is lop-sided logic, which the world of today rejects and twentieth-century society condemns. It has been condemned by divine religions since the advent of the prophets.
Israel, the irresponsible offspring of a corrupt, unacceptable precedent in international practices, has based its existence on the acquisition by force of other peoples' homelands and the violation of their national and human rights under the pretext of false claims. It thinks that the occupation of other peoples' homelands is a simple arithmetical exercise through which it can create facts on the ground and in which the owners of the land must acquiesce, and all the world must accept without demur the diktat of Israel.
The Zionist leaders seem to be ignorant of the wide cultural gap between the theorizing Western mentality in whose lap Zionism was born, under particular European social, political and religious circumstances, and the mentality and heritage of the East, especially the deep-rooted emotional Arabian and Islamic outlook which is closely bound to family, faith and the land in which it grew. In order for us to see our way to an acceptable solution, we have to understand the cultural origins of the Arab and Islamic outlook which refuses to be separated from its roots no matter how strong the forces working against it are. Zionism will eventually pay the price of its ignorance of and disregard for the realities and underlying components of the Middle East problem, the distortion of the problem's causes and obfuscation of its consequences. We witness daily their insistence upon ignoring the facts and their opposition to any attempt to deal with the situation in the true light of the Palestinian, regional and international realities and daily we witness the results of this attitude aaniiesting themselves in the growing lists of the killed and wounded.
The problem of the Middle East is the natural complement to the Palestinian problem. In its complexity, it embodies the complex nature of Zionism, its dreams and expansionist greed. It reveals the real nature of Israel and that it has become, since its inception, a grave threat to the peace and security of the region and the safety of its peoples. Israel has become the instrument of a dangerous logic which threatens the international scales and standards of regional and international peace and security through the right it claims for itself to do what it does and its attempts to justify what it does. In all this, it never ceases to cloud the issues and obfuscate the realities of the situation and the roots of the problem.
It also esbodies - and this is a grave danger indeed - the effectiveness of the networks of Zionist influence in certain world capitals and their ability to affect the readiness of those who occupy positions of responsibility in those capitals to listen to the counsels of reason. In this way, those in positions of responsibility tend to accept the irrational and choose to keep quiet about Israel while they refuse to do so concerning any other aggressor in the world. The dangerous Zionist influence on the sound judgement of the advanced and influential countries in the world is far-reaching and poses a danger to the relations of these countries with other nations, should this situation continue as it is now.
How can the world in this day and age accept the Zionist logic that gives licence to Israel to continue its occupation of Arab lands, even when they admit that those lands are being occupied, and acquiesce in what Israel is committing in order to deprive a whole people of their rights under the eyes of the whole world? How can it be content with statements and limited resolutions without any punitive action? How is it that we have failed to this day to adopt any resolution which would impose any penalty or sanction in the face of Israeli aggression, when we have seen here, in this General As aenobly, how many countries rose and took a stand
(Mg. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia) against the invasion by the armies of a certain State of another country» how they Mobilised all the potential and all the international forums in condemning that State in the strongest terms, hew they opposed that invasion with every means at hand until the occupation came to an end?
The proclamation by the Palestinian National Council on IS November 1988 of the Palestinian State in conformity with United Nations resolutions, and the speedy recognition of that State and the welcome extended to the Council's declaration by peace-loving countries, which have so far numbered 95, point at one of the ways which will lead to peace and security in the region, if the Israeli authorities respond to it. It is the way to the implementation of United Nations resolutions, the resolution of the Fez summit conference and the various plans formulated by wise statesmen for resolving the problem of the Middle East and Palestine. This is a stage in the history of the Middle East which opens widely the doors of hope that the world may respond and thus rid the international arena of one of the worst problems that we in the region have faced.
But the authorities of Israel and its rulers, even the so-called moderates among them, have rejected the initiative even before it was announced and continued to resist it after the Palestinian National Council proclaimed it regardless of the great sacrifices it involved and the calls by many States in the world to recognize it and co-operate with it for the sake of security and peace. It is that peace which Israel does not want, avoids, and cannot live with, as its responses demonstrate. Hence, where do we go from here remains your responsibility - our collective responsibility.
After all that we have seen over the past two years since the beginning of the intifadah - the strange attempts to crush the intifadah and the Zionist manoeuvres to hoodwink the population under the name of security and peace - we may ask ourselves, What is it that Israel wants? Is it peace that It wants? But what
(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia) sort of peace could that be when this is its response? It has made a mistake by rejecting the Palestinian State. It has shown that it does not recognize the right way to peace when it persisted in depriving the Palestinian people of their basic rights that are beyond dispute. It has strayed from the path because delusions have lured it since its inception in the land of Palestine when by aggression it seised the homeland of the Palestinian Arab people with the support and under the wing of imperialism^ it dreamed of obliterating for all time the Arab Palestinian people.
Peace cannot be achieved through expanding the areas of aggression, enlarging the fronts of enmity and extending the lines of animosities. In 1982, the Arabs offered the well-known Fez sunmit formula as a way to a balanced peace in spite of the big Arab sacrifices it involved.
(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia)
It was rejected, resisted and fought against by the Zionists, who even refused to	i
understand the declaration of the Palestinian National Council, its peaceful initiative and the proclamation of the Palestinian State a year ago.
What, then, do they want? Do they want to keep the Palestinian people hostage as a bargaining chip in their drive to dominate the whole region by force? Can the Israeli authorities really believe that Israel will be able for ever to dominate the region, impose its will by intimidation, demarcate borders at will, and grant or withhold rights as it wishes? If so, it would appear that just as they are ignorant of everything else, so they are ignorant of the fact that they are a small group of people living on land they have occupied, sustained for one day to the next by foreign aid. Their roots are not where they live, and their actual influence is not in the place of their dreams. They are living in an environment of increasing hostility and deep hatred. The Arab nation, spread far and wide, and the Islamic people, within their farthest limits, give birth every year to several times the number of persons that make up the Zionist population in Palestine, as representatives well know.
The gap of Zionist technical and military superiority is narrowing every day and in a short time the equation of Israeli superiority wilS be but a farce in the annals of history. This is the reality of what will happen if the Israeli authorities persist in their delusions and ignorance. From what we hear and see every day, it is my expectation that they will persist in that ignorance and cherish their delusions unless the countries of the world take a firm stand in keeping with the simplest demands of their responsibilities, as was the case of dealing with South Africa. We await the same show of firmness now by the countries of the world, especially the friends of Israel. This is the dimension we do not seem to be able to find in the guest for the solution for which we are working.
The revolution of the Palestinian people is in full flood» despite all the measures of suppression. It erupted 23 months ago. Then there is the revolution in the Golan» the occupied land of the Republic of Syria and the revolution in southern Lebanon» the part of the Republic of Lebanon dominated by Zionist injustice and aggression. On every side there is open revolt against injustice» conquest and occupation. Sons and daughters of the people in revolt are daily being martyred. The world's conscience is outraged and the human imagination set aflame. The minds of people the world over are being set free from the shackles of Zionist deception end the Israeli misinformation that has continued to brainwash people over the past decades. The revolution has shown the Israeli army to be a gang of outlaws and trainpiers of human values who wage war against children and beat women» men» children and the elderly. It has shown that army to be a group of saboteurs who destroy houses» pillage stores and take the daily means of livelihood away from peaceful citizens. It is the revolution of children who have exposed with their stoning the Zionist leaders' claim to moral vectitude and adherence to divine edicts. It has exposed them before the eyes of the civilized world, and shown them to be a group of forgers who have deceived some of the people some of the time. Members must have heard» as we have» that more than 30 per cent of the Injuries inflicted by the heavily armed Israeli army on the people of the occupied Palestinian territories were sustained by children under 15 years of age.
The question here is whether the United Nations, more than 40 years after the beginning of Zionist armed aggression» can rid itself of the complex that has prevented it from confronting Israel with the precepts of the Charter and all the measures against inadmissible acts of aggression called for in the Charter. Israel's actions are not admissible, whether in Palestine, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq or Tunisia) its acts of aggression are endless.
So can the United Nations face up to all this in the sane way as it faces up to South Africa, Israel's organic twin and racist companion, or to any other situations of invasion and aggression throughout the world? The answer to this Cuestión will decide the possibilities of achieving the real peace for which all Members of the Assembly strive, and it will either define the role of the United Nations in solving the Middle East problem or expose the Organisation's impotence. In the latter case, Israel, through its rejection of peaceful solutions, will face what every other invader throughout history has faced after seizing the exceptional opportunities afforded by the absence of logic and reason at a certain historical juncture. Such invaders have always had to face the realities of geography and the currents of history. They have always discovered, when it was too late, that exceptional opportunities are by their very nature temporary and that the realities of history and the facts of geography are bound to decide the outcome in favour of those in the right.
The Custodian of the TWo Holy Mosques, King Fahd bin Abdulaziz, said in the statement addressed to the Chairman and members of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People on the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian Peoples
"As we know, the endeavours to achieve peace founded on right and justice have to cross the bridge of respect for values, adherence to covenants, compliance with principles of justice, and the rule of law. No peace will endure that is not founded on these tenets, and no peace will survive that is reached thorugh violating and avoiding."
As we blessed and supported the proclamation of the Palestinian State, so today we praise with esteem and respect the revolt of the people in the lands of Palestine, the Golan and southern Lebanon to regain their usurped rights. We hail
NR/PLJ
(Mr. Shihab!, Saudi Arabia) the revolution and its heroes, men, women, children and the elderly. We hear the echoes from mountains and valleys, cities and villages, we hail their courage and sacrifice» we applaud their steadfastness in the face of Zionist injustice, and we salute their persistence until the final fulfilment of their aspirations. We have to translate into action our commitment to upholding Palestinian rights, restoring Syrian territory to Syria and Lebanese land to Lebanon, and ensuring the inviolability of the whole of the Arab land, from Baghdad to Tunisia, and all Arab and Muslim lands, as well as their protection from Zionist aggression. We have to respond to the calls of the Palestinian people in their intifadah in defence of the very principles upon which the United Nations was founded and the precepts enshrined in international conventions and treaties. They have a right to their homeland, to self-determination, to choose the form of government they desire, to uphold the State they have proclaimed, to reject all forms of injustice or aggression, and to condemn and expose the aggressor's unjustifiable claims.
Peace founded cn justice is the demand of all members of the Assembly. It is our demand. Let us work for it on the basis that is clear to all.,
Mr. Hurst (Antigua and Barbuda), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia) let us hope that, in the present international climate of detente, the peoples of the world will he able to hold their heads high end participate io ah interaatiohal order based on respect tor human values and the rights of the individual and of States, we hope that the Middle East win get Its fair share of support so that these principles, rules and rights may become a reality in our req ion.
M£i»gO2 (Afghanistan) , Allow me at the outset to express our profound condemnation of the cowardly act of terror that claimed the life of President René Moawad of Lebanon. We express our heartfelt condolences to the people of Lebanon on their tragic loss, and we are confident that the late President will go down in the history of his country as a true and courageous son of Lebanon who rose to the demands of the national interests of his country at a crucial juncture, sacrificing his life for the cause of peace, harmony and national reconciliation in his motherland.
Over the decades, the tense situation prevailing in the Middle East as a result of the continued Israeli occupation of Palestine, the Syrian Golan Heights and parts of southern Lebanon, as well as the policy of aggression and expansionism constantly pursued by Israel in that region, has posed a dangerous threat to peace and security in that region and throughout the world.
That policy has brought about untold irreparable suffering and sorrow to the Palestinian people scattered around the world as refugees and to those Palestinian and other Arab people living in the occupied territories.
It is quite obvious that a just and lasting peace and stability in that volatile region of the world can only be based on Israel’s total and unconditional withdrawal from all the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, as well as on the restoration of the undeniable and legitimate rights of
(Mr. Boqoq, Afghanistan) the Palestinians to exercise self-determination without foreign intervention, to return to their homeland and to establish their own State in their national territory in line with General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and other relevant United Nations resolutions.
In this connection, I should like to recall the great significance of the political declaration adopted by the Palestine National Council in Algiers on 15 November 1988. That declaration embodies the proper and practical ways and means for the settlement of the grave situation in the Middle East, with the Question of Palestine constituting its core.
The heroic intifadah, which has continued notwithstanding the merciless nurder of Palestinian youths, women, men and children at the hands of the Israeli butchers, is a convincing response to the illegal occupation of their lands.
In this regard, I should like to reiterate the firm solidarity and support of the people and the Government of the Republic of Afghanistan for the struggle of the peoples of Palestine and the Republic of Syria in their just and righteous cause of liberating their occupied lands.
The situation in Lebanon remains tense and explosive owing to the continued occupation of parts of southern Lebanon by Israeli forces. It is high time to demand the immediate and scrupulous implementation of Security Council resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978), 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), calling for the total and unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli aggressor forces from Lebanon. The full sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Lebanon as a full-fledged member of the community of nations must be preserved and ensured.
Under present conditions, the convening of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations is the only practicable means for ensuring just and lasting peace and stability and security in the Middle East. In that
(Mc. Hoqoq, Afghanistan) conference, the full participation of all the patties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, should be ensured on an equal footing.
In conclusion, I should like once again to express the firm support of the people and the Government of the Republic of Afghanistan for the just struggle of the Palestinian people and the other Arab peoples for the liberation of the occupied Arab territories and the immediate restoration of their legitimate rights. We are fully convinced that the just solution of the protracted Middle East problem can, in turn, consolidate the process of peace, understanding, peaceful coexistence, and international security.
Mr. AL-MASRI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic), While the improved climate of international relations and the replacement of years of confrontation, tension and cold war by a new phase of detente have had a positive effect on some of the regional disputes throughout the world, the Arab-Israeli conflict continues to take a different course in an atmosphere of tension and confrontation. This is the outcome of depriving the Palestinian people of its inalienable national rights and of the continued occupation by Israel of the Palestinian and other Arab territories, as well as of the increasing Israeli intransigence in challenging international law and United Nations resolutions and the escalation of its brutal oppressive measures in the occupied Arab territories.
The United Nations credibility has been enhanced by its great achievements in many regions of the world. People are increasingly convinced of the Organization’s effectiveness as an international machinery for resolving regional conflicts, eliminating injustice and assisting the oppressed in liberating themselves from all kinds of foreign occupation and alien domination and in restoring their national
rights. Hence it is imperative that the United Nations assume a decisive role in helping the Palestinian people - whose uprising has entered its third year - as well as the populations of the other occupied Arab territories, liberate their lands from Israeli occupation and put an end to their tragedy. The Palestinians are subjected daily to all kinds of repression, oppression, killing, house demolition, deportation, and other means of mass punishment such as the destruction of farms - means which occurred during the most barbaric periods of nazism.
The consideration of the Middle East crisis and the seeking of a just solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict cannot ignore the two following decisive elements which constitute the basis for the settlement of this conflictt first, the need for ending Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and other occupied Arab territories unconditionally, since occupation is an illegitimate act which violates the United Nations Charter and the rules of international law» and secondly, enabling the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights, including their rights to self-determination, to return to their homeland, Palestine, and to establish their independent and sovereign State.
My country has repeatedly made it clear that peace has certain components, foremost among which are justice and equity, the ending of occupation and the restoration of usurped rights. There is no peace under occupation. There will be no peace unless and until the Arabs regain all their lands and all their rights. It is sophistry and a grave mistake for some people to believe that peace can be achieved in this region without total, unconditional Israeli withdrawal from all the Palestinian and other Arab occupied territories and without giving the Arab Palestinian people the opportunity to exercise their inalienable national rights. Those who speak of peace and ignore those requirements and conditions steer away from the truth of the matter and make a serious error of judgement. Israel does not want peace in the region.
The rulers of Israel, with their Zionist doctrine which is unmatched in its fanaticism and fundamentalism by any other doctrine, are living in another age. They still rely on nyths and illusions to achieve their final objective of establishing greater Israel, from the Euphrates to the Nile. Israel simply wants the Arabs to accept its expansionist designs. It is for this reason that Israel
rejects the international conference under the auspices of the Uhited Nations and the implementation of related United Nations resolutions. It is escalating its expansionist policies and creating further obstacles on the road to peace. It has annexed Arab Jerusalem and the Arab Syrian Golan> it has invaded Lebanon,, destroyed its capital, Beirut, and occupied its southern party it has stepped up its settler policies by continuing to build more settlements. All of this strongly refutes the claims of those who believe that Israel wants peace. At the same time, it shows Israel to be a tool of aggression, a racist Zionist entity and an active factor against peace and security in the Middle Bast and in the world as a whole.
Having realized this fact, on 10 November 1975 the General Assembly adopted a ' resolution determining that Zionism is a form of racism. On 5 February 1982, after the application of Israeli laws to the Arab Syrian Golan, the General Assembly declared that Israel's record and actions confirmed that it was not a peace-loving Member State and that it had not carried out its obligations under General Assembly resolution 273 (III) of 11 May 1949.
The problem that obstructs the peace process in the Middle East is inherent precisely in the practices of Israel and the Israeli dreams of expansion. The long terrorist history of Israeli occupation of the Arab Syrian Golan, the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and southern Lebanon calls to mind the barbaric acts of the racist regime of Pretoria against the peoples of southern Africa and the Nazi crimes against civilians during the Second World War.
Since it occupied the Arab Syrian Golan in 1967, Israel has continued to impose measures aimed at annexation of the territory and encouragement of its settlement by Israelis. That is why, in December 1981, Israel took the decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Arab Syrian Golan and
Israeli identity on its Syrian Arab inhabitants. Those who refused to accept that identity were harassed by the most harsh measures. The Israeli occupation authorities confiscated the lands of the Syrian Arab inhabitants and converted those lands into military zones and settlement areas. They also took over the natural water sources and prevented the Syrian Arab inhabitants from moving and working freely in the territory.
The situation in the Arab Syrian Golan, as in other occupied Arab territories, is deteriorating further. Every day the Syrian Arab inhabitants face very brutal treatment at the hands of the Israeli occupation forces. Their basic human rights are systematically violated.
Since Israel occupied the Arab Syrian Golan in 1967, it has pursued the well-known Israeli strategy of aggression against the inhabitants of the territory. Its objective has been to Judaize the Arab Syrian Golan, eradicate the national identity of its inhabitants, destroy its economic infrastructure, take over its water resources and change its social and cultural character, in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention and General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously on 17 December 1981, and General Assembly resolution ES-9/1, adopted on 5 February 1982 at the ninth emergency special session and reaffirmed at every subsequent session of the General Assembly.
It is no secret that the tragic situation in southern Lebanon is the result of Israeli occupation of part of Lebanon and of Israel's use of armed mercenaries and puppets to commit acts of terrorism and violence against the Lebanese population.
Israel rejected Security Council resolution 425 (1978) and subsequent resolutions calling for the full and unconditional withdrawal of its forces from
all Lebanese territory and the deployment of United Nations forces in the area to carry out their mission.
The Israeli occupation forces have turned whole towns and villages in southern Lebanon into quasi-concentration camps. They transformed life there into hell as the Israeli occupation forces daily carry out acts of repression, murder and destruction from the air, sea and land.
The road to a just peace is a one-way road that passes through an international conference under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In essence, peace means justice} it means restoring the rights to those who have been denied them and putting an end to aggression and occupation. That is the kind of peace for which we struggle. The peace we desire follows the road of the implementation of the United Nations resolutions relevant to this ouestion, including those pertaining to the holding of the international conference. Unless Israel withdraws from all the occupied Arab territories, unless the ouestion of Palestine is solved in a way that guarantees the rights of the Palestinian people, there will be no peace in that region. For if there is no just peace, aggression and occupation will continue, in the Arab Syrian Golan, in the Arab Palestine land, and in southern Lebanon. That resistance is a result of continued occupation. Therefore, the resistance will continue in all these areas until the last inch of Arab territory is freed from Israeli occupation.
Mr. AKSIN Cforkey)t Once again the question of the Middle East is before the General Assembly, and once again we shall have to give expression to our feelings of frustration at our inability to see the prospect of an early settlement. As we approach the end of an eventful year, we are witnessing welcome developments in a number of areas of conflict, developments that contribute to the creation of an international climate of conciliation and understanding. It was against that background that we anticipated favourable developments to help bring to an end the conflict in the Middle East and the suffering of the people of the region. Unfortunately, attempts made this year to achieve a just and lasting solution to the problem have so far brought no tangible results.
(Mr, Aksin, Turkey)
Throughout the four decades of wars, strife and instability in the Middle East, Turkey has pursued policies conforming to its direct and natural interest in the region and in the fate of the people living near its borders. Close historical, cultural and emotional ties bind the people of Turkey to the people of the region. It is natural for Turkey to show concern at any event which would threaten the peace and well-being of the region, and the plight of the Palestinian population in the occupied territories is no exception.
We have made clear on a number of occasions our position regarding the Question of the Middle East. Turkey is convinced that there can he no satisfactory, lonq-term solution to this problem unless it is based on negotiations between all the interested parties, conducted in good faith within the framework of an international peace conference. My Government welcomes all efforts directed towards achieving this end and believes that following the proclamation and international recognition of an independent Palestinian State last year the circumstances are right for the consideration of new initiatives. We hope that all countries in a position to do so will contribute to present efforts aimed at the establishment of peace and justice. Turkey stands ready to assist in such endeavours.
Recent initiatives envisaging the participation of the true representatives of the Palestinian people in direct negotiations with Israel deserve very careful consideration. My Government believes that such negotiations can form a basis for the elimination of differences, thereby leading to the launching of the peace process. We appeal to the Government of Israel to respond to these initiatives by adopting more conciliatory policies. We remain hopeful that no Government will stand in the way and block efforts aimed at the early attainment of a lasting solution. Such a solution must he based on justice, the right to
(Mr. Aksin, Iterkey) self-determination, and the right of all States in the Middle East to exist in peace behind recognized and secure borders.
The report of the Secretary-General in document A/44/731 of 16 November 1989, on the Question of convening the International Peace Conference on the Middle East as stipulated in General Assembly resolution 43/176 of 15 December 1988, reveals that all parties directly involved in the conflict, with the exception of Israel, are prepared to enter the peace process under the auspices of the United Nations. My delegation concurs with the Secretary-General when he expresses his dismay in the following words:
"This is particularly unfortunate since the resolution ... received much wider support than earlier resolutions concerning an international conference. The vote in favour of Assembly resolution 43/176 reflected the commitment of the international community to the convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East, with the participation of all parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, on an eaual footing, and the five permanent members of the Security Council, based on Security Council resolutions 2 42 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people, primarily the right to self-determination". (A/44/731, para. 5)
It is sad to see opportunities of this kind being wasted, especially at a time when the situation in the occupied territories is so alarming. The international community must exert its influence in support of the convening of the International Peace Conference under the auspices of the United Nations. All countries must shoulder their responsibilities to reach that end.
As the peace process falters, the world follows with anguish the justified uprising of the Palestinians in the occupied territories. The Palestinians, the principal victims of the question of the Middle East, are bravely confronting the
AP/jf
(Mr. Aksin, Turkey)
harsh measures taken by the occupying Power. We need not go into the details of the oppression of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories. A random glance at the report (A/44/13) of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Belief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, or at the report (A/44/599) of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, is enough to reveal the tragic situation faced by the Palestinian people. There have been so many resolutions, the last one being General Assembly resolution 44/2 of 13 October 1989, condemning the unacceptable policies and practices of Israel. Several draft resolutions condemning Israeli practices, adopted in the Special Political Committee last week, have met with general approval and will be brought to the General Assembly. There will be others. Is the message of the overwhelming majority of the United Nations not clear? For how long must Israeli practices be condemned before the indignation of the world community is understood?
(Mr. Aksin, Turkey)
We appeal once more to the Government of Israel to end its harsh repressive measures in the occupied territories, to live up to its moral and legal obligations and stop violating the human rights of the Palestinian people, to recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, including their inalienable right to self-determination, and to engage in meaningful negotiations with the true representatives of the Palestinian people and other parties directly involved, in an international peace conference for the purpose of finding a political solution to the conflict.
Before concluding I wish to state once again that the tragedy of Lebanon is another matter of grave concern to Turkey. At a moment when expectations were rising as a result of the endeavours of Saudi Arabia, Algeria and Morocco to find a peaceful way of ending the agony of that suffering nation, the dark shadow of hatred once again overtook it. Turkey strongly condemns the cowardly attack on President Moawad and shares the shock and sorrow of the Lebanese people at its tragic loss. Our sincere wish is to see the early return of peace, unity and stability to Lebanon through the efforts of the Lebanese people, under the leadership of its newly elected President.
Mr^OUID MOHAMED MAEMOUD (Mauritania) (interpretation from Arabic), The improved political climate and the portents of hope do not, unfortunately, prevail everywhere. In the Middle East, notwithstanding the international community's appeals to and energetic and repeated condemnations of Israel through, among other things, resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, there has been no improvement in the situation in that part of the world. Danger continues to hang over the region because of Israel. Therefore it is more necessary than ever before that we adopt appropriate measures to prevent an exacerbation of the situation. We should also demonstrate good faith, courage and willingness to
(Mr. Chid Mohamed Mahmoud, Mauritania)
»salat th. Palestinian people, who have suffered for we than 40 years no» fro. occupation, displacement and denial of their rights.
The Palestinian people waited patiently for justice from the international community for a very long time, notwithstanding the brutality of the occupation. But in the face of disappointment, the Palestinian people lost patience, they had no option hut to stand up to tyranny in a ne» »ay. Therefore, on 1 Deoeiher 1,8, they began their popular uprisin, a,.i„st the Israeli oooupation, an uprising that efcodied the noblest »nines of steadfastness, reslstanoe and opposition to oooupation. The valiant Palestinian people have consented to generous sacrifices, demonstrating true courage and heroism, dra»in, upon their traditional values and closln, rants in a determined effort to achieve recount tion of their inalienable rlubt to establish their Palestinian State »ith the City of M Cuds as its capital.
The General Assembly must no» reaffirm the need for a comprehensive, lastin, solution of the problem of the Middle Bast, based on equity and justice, through the oonvenin, of an international conference on the Middle Bast under the auspices of the United Nations and ,4th the participation of all the parties concerned, inclosing, in particular, the Palestine Liberation Organisation (plO), the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. The conference should focus bn the principles set out in paragraph 3 of General Asseebly resolution 43/176, adopted in 1988.
The message of peace sent by the President of the Palestinian State, Mr. Yasser Arafat, to the Assembly at its last session mas testimony to the serious and sincere endeavours of the Palestine Liberation Organisation to create conditions conducive to peace. Therefore, we can no» only appeal sincerely to those in a position to exert influence to bring pressure to bear on the party
(Mr. Quid Mohamed Mahmoud, Mauritan ia)
obstructing the attainment of peace to contribute to the establishment of a truly just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the area based on recognition of the rights of the Palestinian people and total withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories.
While supporting the efforts of our Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, and all international efforts, Mauritania remains concerned about the tension prevailing in that part of the world. We feel that advantage must be taken of the favourable international climate to bring about the settlement of the Middle East problem. The United Nations has enormous potential and this should be brought to bear for the purpose of bringing peace to that part of the world through serious, practical efforts to convene an international conference.
Mr. STRESOV (Bulgaria)< The delegation of the People's Republic of Bulgaria is deeply disturbed by the fact that the Middle East conflict continues to he one of the most serious sources of tension in the world, despite the consistent efforts of the international community as reflected in numerous resolutions of the United Nations. The acuteness and scope of this conflict stands out in a particularly striking manner against the background of the current state of international affairs, in which a number of regional sources of tension are on the way to being quelled by political means.
(Mr. Stresov, Bulgaria)
It is common knowledge that the Palestinian issue is at the core of the Middle East crisis. Peace and stability in the region are unthinkable without a just solution of that issue. That is why every attempt to sidetrack or disregard the interests of the Arab Palestinian people through separate deals or by ignoring the Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO), which is the sole, legitimate representative of these people, will, in fact, impede resolution of the conflict.
The heroic uprising of the Palestinian people in the Israeli-occupied territory has been going on for two years already. The intifadah is a vivid expression of the struggle of the Arab Palestinian people for their legitimate right to independence and self-determination, including the right to a sovereign State. There are daily reports of casualties and of repressive measures imposed by the occupying forces. The history of mankind has repeatedly proved that repression and terror cannot destroy a nation's desire for freedom and independence.
Our attention, besides being focused on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, is also focused on the situation in Lebanon, from which news about bloodshed, civilian casualties and destruction is reaching us. Bulgaria welcomed the recent agreements between the Lebanese factions achieved through the efforts of the Tripartite High Committee of the League of Arab States, hoping that they would bring peace bo that troubled land. Unfortunately, this was not to be. We learnt, with profound shock of the assassination of President Moawad. Bulgaria strongly condemns this brutal act. We hope that the newly elected President will get the necessary support in his efforts to bring peace to Lebanon. It is most important now to avoid retort to further violence, which could disrupt the political dialogue. In order to bring peace to that suffering land, however, it is necessary, above all, to ensure the implementation of Security Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), which call for the immediate and unconditional
(Mr. Stresov, Bulgaria) withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon. The restoration of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon is long overdue.
The People,s Republic of Bulgaria is convinced that it is of paramount importance to seek a comprehensive, peaceful, just and lasting solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. That solution should be based on the generally recognized principle of the inadmissibility of the acauisition of foreign land by aggression, which means that Israel must withdraw completely and unconditionally from all Arab territories '' i-rapied in 1967. A solution to the conflict will be feasible only if the Arab people of Palestine are granted the right to self-determination and all States in the region, including Israel, are guaranteed the exercise of the right to free development and a secure future.
This approach enjoys strong support at the United Nations and has been
i elaborated in numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security	i
I Council. In our view, which is shared by the vast majority of countries, the most appropriate way to resolve the Middle East conflict is by convening an	।
international conference, under the auspices of the United Nations with the participation of all interested States and including the Palestine Liberation Organization, on behalf of the State of Palestine, and the five permanent members of the Security Council.
We are convinced that the positive changes in international affairs create favourable conditions for a peaceful solution to the Middle East conflict. New opportunities in this respect have emerged as a result of the historic decisions of the Palestine National Council at its nineteenth session, in Algiers, which convincingly demonstrated the PLO’s willingness to adopt a constructive approach to the solution of the Palestinian cuestion.
It is our hope that these opportunities will be utilized and that other States involved in the conflict will show the necessary political wisdom and realism in
(Mr. Stresow, Bulgaria) the search for a mutually acceptable solution. Efforts should now be directed at finding the common elements in the proposals and initiatives of the interested States, which should then be used as a basis for moving the political process in the right direction.
The People’s Republic of Bulgaria welcomes the growing role of the United Nations in the efforts to find peaceful solutions to regional conflicts and eliminate sources of tension. The United Nations will always enjoy the full and active support of my country, so that the Middle East may ultimately be transformed from a region of armed confrontation and contradictions to an area of peace and understanding.
Mr. CHORNY? (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian), The discussions at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly have shown convincingly that the process of improving the international climate by the development of dialogue and the strengthening of the principle of the primacy of law and human values has encompassed practically all spheres of multilateral diplomacy and had a positive impact on the approach of States Members to the settlement of long-standing regional conflicts. So far, unfortunately, the wind of positive change in international life has had only a very insignificant effect on the situation in the Middle East. The Middle East has been, and continues to be, one of the most sensitive areas in the world and a dangerous focal point of tension. The periodic outbursts of instability and the surges of confrontation and extremism in the region have confirmed a widely perceived truth - that there is no alternative to a political solution of that problem. Military measures and armed force have not only failed to lead to a settlement in the Middle East but also helped the accumulation of new factors that impede the movement towards peace and stability.
(Mr. Chornyy, Ukrainian SSR)
The Arab-Israeli conflict is now acquiring a particularly alarming nature because of the unbridled arms race into which the Middle East has been drawn. The accumulation, in that area, of weapons of mass destruction threatens the very existence of the States and peoples of the region, undermines the comprehensive system of peace and security established as a result of the efforts of the United Nations, and endangers the peace of the world in general.
Of course, new approaches have been seen there, too, from time to time. These relate primarily to the constructive and realistic platform of the PLO adopted at the special session, in Algeria, of the Palestine National Council. The PLO's recognition of the right of the State of Israel to a secure existence, its willingness to engage with Israel in negotiations within the framework of an international conference, and its renunciation of all forms of terrorism met with approval at the Arab summit in Casablanca and with a positive response in the world in general. The Ukrainian SSR actively supports the PLO’s position and regards it as an important step towards a Middle East settlement.
(Mr. Chornyy, Ukrainian SSR) Unfortunately there has still been no equivalent response from Israel.
Israel’s answer has been heightened repression in the occupied territories and in the political sphere the proposal of the so-called Shamir plan, which disregards one of the main requirements of a peaceful settlement in today's world -recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination. Those in the ruling circles in Israel continue to seek to retain control of the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories. Consequently, as the Secretary-General notes in his report on the work of the Organization,
"The situation in the Middle East remains a source of profound and intense concern ... Hopes for early progress in the peace process ... have sadly given way to mistrust and doubt among the parties concerned." (A/44/1, p. 7)
As a result of the continuing deadlock the situation in the occupied territories has become even worse. The policies and practices of Israel with regard to the population of the occupied territories have been unanimously condemned by the international community. However, Israel prefers to ignore that clearly voiced position, which has been repeatedly set forth in resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Today, when the United Nations has proclaimed the Decade of International Law, thus demonstrating the desire of the world community to strengthen the authority of international law, the question of Israel's compliance with its obligations under the Hour th Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War poses a particularly acute problem. The development of events that has occurred once more convinces us that only a comprehensive political settlement encompassing all aspects of the conflict in the Middle test can effectively protect the rights of the Palestinians, as well as those of the citizens of Israel.	\
Military force cannot guarantee a long-term, stable solution to political	I
EH/sk	A/44/PV.64
132 (Mr. Chernyy, Ukrainian SSR) problems. It is essential to revive as soon as possible the effective process of negotiations on the Middle East, relying on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and taking fully into account the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination. Delay in this regard could have the most serious consequences.
We fully share the alarm of the Secretary-General, who in his report on this question observes "I am deeply worried by the fact that time is passing and that opportunities that have emerged in the past 12 months might slip away." (A/44/731, para. 7) Because of the exceptional complexity of the Middle Bist conflict, the negotiating process must he aulti Vacated in nature and could include efforts to establish and develop a bilateral and a multilateral dialogue. Here everything is important, including the initiatives of individual countries and their own regional organizations, such as, for example, the league of Arab States, and an active role by the Security Council and its permanent members.
My delegation believes that, in the light of the extreme gravity of the situation, the peace process must be given a strong impetus by the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle Bist under United Nations auspices, with a view to achieving a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict. Consideration at a meeting of the Security Council of the Question of preparing an international conference would certainly import extra dynamism to the peace process.
The principle of the freedom of socio-political choice, which we view as one of the fundamental principles of international relations, requires that the possibility of exercising that right be extended to the Arab people of Rslestine. The holding, within the context of a comprehensive settlement under effective
(Mg. Chornyy, Ukrainian SSR) international control, of free and fair elections in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, could be a step towards that end.
In the general complex of Middle East problems the situation in Lebanon continues to be a source of great concern. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic has consistently supported steps likely to lead to the cessation of military activities in that country. We were deeply alarmed and distressed to hear of the death of the lawfully elected President of Lebanon, Mr. Rene Moawad. That tragic event could once again provoke clashes among Lebanese parties and groups. This must not be permitted. We call cm all Lebanese parties to show restraint and soundness of judgement and to use only political means. It is essential to consolidate the results achieved through the mediation of the Tripartite High Committee of the League of Arab States and the constructive positions of Arab and other countries. As the President of the Security Council observed on 22 November, "Democratic Lebanese institutions must be strongly supported and the process of national reconciliation must go forward. This is the only way Lebanese national unity can be fully restored." (S/PV.2894, p. 3)
The Middle East aid all the people who live there must cross the threshold of mutual hatred and confrontation. By taking that difficult but essential step they will open up for themselves the possibility of strengthening mutual security, economic co-operation and mutual cultural enrichment. Only by resolving the principal issue at this stage - by making a start on the process of a comprehensive settlement - can we trove towards the solution of the other complex problems of the region.
Miss WILLBERG (New Zealand), It is with a sense of frustration that New Zealand speaks on this item. There was a glimmer of hope as 1988 drew to a close that this year might have seen progress on this long-standing dispute. Despite the i efforts of many and the expressed wish of all, however, that was not to be.
BH/sk
New Zealand has long held that before any negotiated solution can be reached the parties concerned must have demonstrated a clear commitment to reach a just and durable peace, We welcomed, therefore, the outcome of the Algiers meeting of the Palestine National Council last year and, particularly, the statement by Mr. Arafat in December that the Palestine National Council explicitly accepted the existence of Israel. These were clear signs of movement, the opening of a door towards the possibility of negotiations.
In New Zealand's view, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) provide the basis for a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. We are all aware that these resolutions affirm that every State has the right to live in peace within secure and recognised boundaries, free from threats or acts of force. Israel has that right. We regret the reluctance of some of Israel's neighbours unequivocally to accept that right. The resolutions also emphasize the inadmissibility of acquiring territory by war. Israel has no right under international law to the occupied territories. Palestinian endorsement of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) provides a foundation on which to build a settlement that recognises the rights and aspirations of those party to the dispute. Regrettably, current hopes appear to be fading, with political stalemate and immobility on the part of Israel. We emphasize our view that without a willingness to consider reciprocal concessions there can be no negotiated solution. We look for signs that Israel is genuine about peace. A range of peace proposals exists and substantial efforts continue, hut real progress depends on political will. We have yet to see sufficient movement in the direction of reaching a negotiated settlement that addresses all aspects of the Palestinian problem) and for the Palestinians this must include the fundamental element of the right to self,determination and to a national homeland, if that is their wish.
Meanwhile, Israel continues to enforce measures to consolidate its hold over the occupied territories. New Zealand does not accept the validity of Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem, nor the continuing establishment and encroachment of settlements in the occupied territories. Nor can we condone Israeli practices in containing the intifadah. We are deeply concerned by reports of intimidation of those monitoring human rights, and of others working to provide humanitarian services to the Palestinian people. We find unacceptable Israeli practices of closing schools and educational institutions, of demolishing houses, of imposing economic sanctions and other forms of collective punishment. The repressive measures used against the village of Beit Sahur by the Israeli authorities have been widely condemned. The international community has been unanimous this year in its condemnation of Israel's continuing practice of deportations, in violation of international law. As an occupying Power Israel must accept the de jure applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention and apply its provisions in full.
We consider that the intifadah is a spontaneous uprising through which the Palestinian people have shown that they reject 22 years of Israeli occupation, that they are seeking to take control of their own destiny. The uprising shows no signs of ending, indeed, it has intensified over the last few months. It is clear that this is not simply a question of maintaining law and order» it is at root a fundamental political question which Israel must address.
Israel looks to negotiations with acceptable representatives of the Palestinian people. Yet those exercising leadership in the occupied territories find themselves either placed in detention or expelled from their homes. Who should represent the Palestinians is for the Palestinians to decide. We would remind Israel that in negotiating for peace one has in the end to deal with others besides one's friends. There can be no substitute for direct negotiations with
(Miss Willberg, New Zealand) genuine Palestinian leaders. These must include the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Israel's acceptance of this fact would serve to revitalize the hope that peace can be achieved. Such an act would match the constructive PID moves last year.
New Zealand is not, of course, a party principal to the dispute and our concern is one that recognizes the importance of the region for global stability. We have witnessed progress on many international issues over the year. A significant step was taken this month on another long-standing issue before the United Nations, the question of Namibia. The new international environment has seen a willingness on the part of parties to regional conflicts, and both super-Powers, to reach negotiated settlements, to seek peace and justice. When barriers are tumbling down around the world and enmities are seen as increasingly anachronistic, we look to the parties involved in this dispute to grasp the opportunities preferred in this new climate. The peace process is at a decisive stage because opportunities for progress do exist. We call on the parties to the dispute - and Israel in particular - to seize these opportunities. If they do not they will bear a heavy responsibility. If they do not peace will become ever more remote.
The United Nations has a constructive role to play. The convening of an international peace conference under United Nations auspices, with the participation of all parties Involved, including the Palestinians - and this mist inevitably involve the PLO - and those who can contribute to a successful outcome, provides the way forward to a negotiated settlement. Virtually all have given their support to this concept, but, as the Secretary-General notes, sufficient agreement does not yet exist to permit the convening of such a conference. We endorse the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard.
As we have said in this forum before, peace and justice for Israel will be found only when there is also peace and justice for Palestinians. We believe that the long-term interests of Israel will be served best by a peaceful resolution of the dispute based on a recognition of mutual rights. What we are looking to now is constructive movement by all parties to the dispute.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.65
6 December 1989
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters» New York, on Tuesday, 28 November 1989, at 10 a.m.
President»	Mr. RIVERA	(Costa Rica)
(Vice-President)
later:	Mr. NAVAJAS MOGRO	(Bolivia)
(Vice-President)
-	Tribute to the memory of Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations
-	The situation in the Middle East f37] (continued)
(a)	Reports of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolutions
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records off the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64477/A 5353V (E)
i	In ^g absence of the President, Mr. Rivera (Coata Rica), Vice-President» took
\	the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF CLAUDIO TEE HANK EE, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I have learned with deep sorrow of the passing away of Ambassador Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations.
Ambassador Teehankee was widely admired and respected as an international legal scholar. Before assuming his important responsibilities as Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations, Ambassador Teehankee had served since 1968 as an Associate Justice and later Chief Justice of the Philippine Supreme Court. His unwavering faith in the United Nations and his statesmanship commanded wide respect in the international community.
May I extend to the members of his family as well as to the Government and people of the Philippines my most profound condolences.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I have heard with deep sadness of the passing of Ambassador Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Philippine to the United Nations. He brought to his office a great depth of experience and devotion to the rule of law as a most distinguished and respected member of the judiciary. He was a man of wide culture and I was greatly struck by his wisdom in our many discussions together. We shall long cherish his memory.
I wish to extend to the Government and people of the Philippines, and to Mrs. Teehankee and the other members of his family, the profound condolences of the United Nations and my own very sincere sympathy.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I would now invite representatives to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Mr. Claudio Teehankee.
The menbers of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The-PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish), I call on the representative of Lesotho, who will speak on behalf of the African States.
Mr. PH0OFOIO (Lesotho), The darkness that descended over this Hall last week still lingers, it seems reluctant to give way to dawn.
Speaking on behalf of the Africa Group and on my own behalf, I wish to state that we learned with a sense of great loss and sorrow of the passing away yesterday morning, due to illness, of our dear friend and colleague the Philippine Ambassador, Permanent Representative to the United Nations, and former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Republic of the Philippines, Mr. Claudio Teehankee.
The death of Ambassador Claudio Teehankee is not only a loss to the people and Government of the Republic of Philippines but also a great loss to all of us who have known and worked together with him since his assumption of his duties here in September 1988, who have enjoyed the warmth of his friendship and valued his brilliant contribution to the work of the General Assembly.
Many of us in this Hall were moved at one time or another by the wisdom of his words in defence of the ideals we all hold dearest to our hearts. We could scarcely hide our admiration for the wealth of his experience in matters of law and for his personal integrity and the vigour with which he set himself to the performance of his duties as the Permanent Representative of his great country.
Both here and at home his reputation will survive him. The Philippine people will remember him for the firmness of his stance in defence of democracy during the

MLT/td	A/44/PV.65
4-5 (Mr. Phoofolo, Lesotho) difficult tines and for his invaluable contribution to the legal profession in his country, the feats for which he was deservedly rewarded with numerous honours and awards by the Government, institutions and the people of the Republic of Philippines.
At this dark hour of sorrow and need the Africa Group wishes to extend its sincere condolences to the delegation, the people and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines on this great loss. Our hearts are mainly with the bereaved family, the relatives and the other loved ones. We wish them the true consolation of the Almighty.
May his soul rest in peace.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish), I call on the representative of Brunei Darussalam, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. JAYA (Brunei Darussalam)i In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Asian States for November» I wish to express our sadness on learning of the recent demise of Ambassador Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Reprensentative of the Philippines to the United Nations.
Ambassador Teehankee served his Government with distinction» and prior to his appointment here in New York» he was Philippine's Chief Justice of the Supreme Court from 1986 until his retirement in April 1988» at which time he was awarded the Philippines Legion of Honour "in grateful acknowledgement of the valiant role he played in the dark days of dictatorship". As a true son of the Philippines, he will be greatly missed by the people.
Ambassador Teehankee was a dear colleague to all of us who knew him} he was well respected for his wise counsel and affable personality. As a personal friend of mine way back during my tour of duty as Ambassador of Brunei Darussalam to the Philippines» he will be remembered with affection.
On behalf of the Group of Asian States and on my own behalf, may I extend to the delegation of the Philippines, and through it the bereaved family of the late Ambassador, our deep condolences and heartfelt sympathy.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)t I call on the representative of Czechoslovakia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. ZAPOTOCKY (Czechoslovakia)t Speaking on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States, I wish to express our sincere condolences to the delegation of the Republic of the Philippines over the demise of
•	(Mc. Zapotocky, Czechoslovakia)	i
Mr. Claudio Teehankee, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and Permanent	j
Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations. All of us have known very well and highly appreciated the excellent diplomatic skills and personal Qualities of Ambassador Teehankee. His passing away is a great loss for his country and for the international community as represented in the United Nations
X take this opportunity to request the representative of the Republic of the Philippines to convey our sincere sympathy to the bereaved family of the deceased and to the Government and the people of the Republic of the Philippines.
The PE&iiDENT (interpretation from Spanish)t 1 call on the representative of Norway, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. TELLMANN (Norway), Xt was with deep distress that the menbers of the Group of Western European and Other States yesterday learned of the untimely death of Mr. Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations. Ambassador Teehankee presented his credentials to the Secretary-General in September 1988. Owing to a serious illness, he was thus allowed to serve as his country's representative to the United Nations only for a relatively brief period.
Ambassador Teehankee, who served as Chief Justice to the Philippines's Supreme Court prior to being appointed Permanent Representative to the United Nations, had a long and very distinguished career in the service of his country. Colleagues at the United Nations were fully aware of both his outstanding diplomatic skills and	,
his human qualities. Ambassador Teehankee will be sorely missed by his colleagues	!
at the United Nations.
On behalf of the Group of Western Europe and Other States, X should like to convey our most sincere condolences end profound sadness to the bereaved family, to the people and the Government of the Philippines, as well as to our colleagues in the Philippines delegation.
AP/dr
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish), I call on the representative of Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic), The Arab Group at the United Nations in New York learned with profound grief that a colleague very dear to us had passed away. The loss of Mr. Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations, is deeply felt by the Arab Group. It is a loss that is equally felt by all our colleagues at the United Nations. He was a colleague who throughout the time - albeit short - he spent with us provided the very example of the experienced, capable statesman representing his country with great talent. He highlighted the active role his country, the Philippines, has been playing in this international forum.
The deceased had a deep conviction of the lofty principles, aims and objectives of the United Nations. He devoted his time and efforts to the cause of peace, progress and justice throughout the world.
The Arab Group, in acknowledging the vacuum left behind by such a dear colleague, would like to convey to the delegation of the Philippines its most sincere condolences and sympathy. We hope that the delegation will convey to the bereaved family of our late colleague and to the Philippine Government the sentiments of the Arab Group and their sorrow at this irreparable loss.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish), I call on the representative of the United States.
Mr. PICKETING (United States of America), It was with great sadness that my delegation learned of the untimely passing of our distinguished colleague Ambassador Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Philippines.
(Mr. Pickering» United States)
Ambassador Teehankee will be remembered by those of us who had the privilege of working with him as a kind and thoughtful friend who embodied the warmth of the Philippine people. He will be remembered by history as a towering figure in the cause of justice and human rights.
His record as a Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines was one of integrity and honour. "The great dissenter”, as he was known, was not afraid to oppose injustice and his principled stands more than once came at great personal sacrifice. His distinguished record, which includes numerous human rights awards, was recognised by President Aquino, who chose Ambassador Teehankee to administer the oath of office at her inaugura tic»» and thereafter named him Chief Justice.
His subsequent appointment to the post of Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the united Nations was a credit to this Organization, and his passing is our deep loss. Ambassador Teehankee will be missed by all of us.
On behalf of the Wilted States Government and all of the American people I wish to extend our sympathies to his family, to his delegation and to the people of the Republic of the Philippines.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish), I now call upon the representative of the Philippines.

Mt. swum (Philippines) t On behalf of the Government and people of the Philippines, the Philippine delegation and the family of the late Ambassador Claudio Teehankee, X should like to thank the President, the Secretary"General, the chairmen of the regional groups, the representative of the host country, and all the other representatives in the Assembly for the tribute paid to Ambassador Teehankee and the sympathy extended to his bereaved family,
The Philippines has suffered the loss of one of its mast outstanding and illustrious citizens. For Ambassador Teehankee was not only an able diplomat» he was a brilliant legal scholar, lawyer and jurists and above all a man of singular courage, a man of principle and integrity.
The kind words we have heard in this Rall today help assuage our loss - and for that X wish to express my thanks and gratitude.
AGENDA ITEM 37 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST
(a)	REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/690 and Md.l, A/44/731, A/44/737)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/44/L.47 to A/44/L.49)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish)» I should like to remind representatives that, in accordance with the decision taken yesterday afternoon, the list of speakers in the debate on this item will be closed today at 12 noon. I therefore reauest those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names on the list as soon as possible.
X now call on the representative of Cuba, who will introduce draft resolutions A/44/L.47, A/44/L.48 and A/44/L.49 in the course of his statement.
Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish)» The crisis in the Middle Bast has been the focus of attention in the international connunity for more than four decades and has become one of the most serious, indeed dangerous, sources of international Instability.
As a reflection of the trend that seems to be talcing hold, and thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and some Member States, progress has been made in the quest for solutions to a number of regional conflicts by means of dialogue and negotiation. Unfortunately, these encouraging events have had no general effects that have led to the settlement of all the hotbeds of tension that, in one way or another, have a bearing on the attainment of international peace and security. Without any doubt the Middle Bast conflict is one of those which, rather than being settled, is becoming more acute each day. Hence it is a matter of the utmost importance that we double all our efforts, that we enlist the entire peace-making potential of our Organization in the task of achieving a just and honourable solution to a crisis whose existence goes beyond the boundaries of universal reason.
However, we must not forget that solving the Palestinian problem is a prec ondition for that, as it is the core of the problem. Unless the Palestinian people regains all its inalienable rights, including its right to return to its homeland, unless it is permitted to exercise its legitimate right to self-determination and to establish an independent and sovereign State in Palestine, it will be impossible to achieve a lasting peace in the region.
The just aspirations of the Palestinian people were expressed in concrete terms in the Declaration adopted on 15 November 1988 in Algiers, where in a solemn meeting the Palestine National Council proclaimed the Constitution of the State of Palestine, a State that has already been recognized by more than 90 nations. Cuba has the honour and the satisfaction of having been in the forefront of those nations.
In accordance with the Algiers proclamation, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has taken important steps to foster a peaceful solution to the conflict. Among those steps was the acceptance of Security Council resolutions
(Mr. Or,M< Oliva, Cuba) 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) aa a basis for negotiations. The proposals put forward by Chair Man Arafat to the forty-third session of the General Assembly were also important steps in that direction.
The flexible position taken by the PIO, which reaffirm that organisation's commitment to the principles inherent in the achieve sent of a comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine - principles that were also recognised at the recent ninth Sumit conference of the Non-Aligned Move sent in Belgrade - provided us with an opportunity that, unfortunately, has been undermined by Israel's stubbornness, indeed intransigence. Disregarding this historic opportunity to achieve harmony between the peoples of the region, Israel is insisting on imposing solutions that respond solely to hegemonistic interests which, sooner or later, will be swept aside by history.
The Palestinian national insurrection, the intifadah, which will soon be two years old, is the direct result of Israeli positions that have led to the stalemate in the efforts to achieve a dignified and honourable peace in the region. It confirm the Palestinian people's absolute determination to struggle against Israeli domination and occupation. Moreover, it is one more piece of evidence of its decision to exercise its inalienable national rights. Thus, we reiterate our support for the intifadah and condemn the measures used by the Zionist occupier in the occupied territories, including the brutal repression carried out In an effort to drown in blood the heroic uprising of the Palestinian people. We urge the General Assembly to reaffirm the unconditional support it offered in its resolution 43/21.
Solving the question of Palestine is, as we have indicated, the key element in solving the Middle East conflict, but it is not the only one. It is absolutely necessary that we also work to ensure the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli forces that are keeping under occupation the Syrian population of the
JVM/5	A/M/W.S5	I
14-15 (Hr, 0t,M8 Oliva» Cub,)
Golan Haight#» th# Lebanese living in southern Lebanon, and all the Arabs and Palestinians living in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967» including Jerusalem - thereby violating all the principles of international law and flouting the resolutions adopted by the united Nations that reaffirm the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.

AB/N
,/,/W,65 1ft
(Mr. Or—» OH»,» Cuba)
Tht solution of the conflict that han afflicted Lebanon for ,ore than 15 year, la also part of the comprehensive solution we nee,. The recent assassination of President Reni Moawad, whose election appeared to put Lebanon on the path to peace - the peace that in no deeply desired by this suffering people - is a clear demonstration that there are forces that stand ready to use any weans to prevent Lebanon from preserving its unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned character. Cuba reaffirms, in thin forum, its strongest condemnation of thia abominable crime - as the Security Council has done, and as the Non-Aligned Movement did just a few days ago.
Only by means of negotiation can a just, eauitable and lasting solution to the Middle East conflict he achieved. Thun it is a matter of the imperative necessity that an international peace conference on the Middle East be convened, und$r the auspices of the United Nations, to provide the proper framework for the attainment of a comprehensive solution to the crisis in that part of the world. All the parties involved, including the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) and the permanent members of the Security Council, would participate on an eoual footing. Cuba supports the convening of such a conference and considers that this Organization must concentrate its efforts on the removal of any obstacle to it. We are ready to commit our modest efforts to the achievement of that goal.
I have the honour, on behalf of the sponsors, to introduce to the General Assembly draft resolutions A/44/L.47, L.48 and L.49 on the situation in the Middle East.
Draft resolution A/44/L.47 addresses itself to the most general aspects of the Middle East situation and reaffirms the conviction, which the General Assembly has reiterated, that the auestion of Palestine is at the core of the conflict in the Middle East and that the full exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
(Mr. Oramas Oliva, Cuba) national rights and the immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territories occupied in 1967 constitute an overriding prerequisite for the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region. Moreover, the draft resolution condemns the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories and rejects any action that contradict the principles that should govern the search for a just and comprehensive solution of the conflict in the Middle East. Similarly, it considers the Arab peace plan that was adopted unanimously at the Fez Summit, and confirmed in May this year at the Extraordinary Arab Summit Conference in Casablanca, as an important contribution to the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Draft resolution A/44/L.47 refers also to the negative effects on peace efforts in the region of the continued co-operation between the United States and Israel and the continued co-operation between South Africa and the Zionist regime, which demonstrates that the Arab and African countries are confronting a common enemy. Of particular importance is the fact that this draft resolution reaffirms the General Assembly's call for convening the International Peace Conference on the Middle East, in which the five permanent members of the Security Council and all the parties to the conflict, including the PLO, would participate on an eaual footing. We hope that this draft resolution will help to speed up the preparatory work for that Conference and will result in the removal of the remaining obstacles to its being convened.
Draft resolution A/44/L.48 addresses itself to the illegal Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights and to the decision of the Zionist authorities, on 14 December 1981, to impose their laws, jurisdiction and administration on that territory, which in terms of Article 39 of the United Nations Charter and of the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), constitutes an act of
(Mr. Oramas Oliva, Cuba) aggression and, moreover, is illegal and therefore null and void and has no validity whatsoever.
Draft resolution A/44/L.48, above and beyond reiterating the demand that Israel rescind forthwith all the measures that have resulted in the virtual annexation of the Golan Heights, reaffirms the appeal to Member States to refrain from supplying weapons and military assistance to the Zionist regime, to refrain from acauiring any weapons or military eauipment from Israel, to suspend any economic, financial and technological assistance to that country, and to sever diplomatic, trade and cultural relations with the Zionist State.
Draft resolution A/44/L.49, which deals with the illegal measures adopted by the Zionist Government to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the city of Jerusalem and with the decision of some States to transfer their diplomatic missions to that city, in violation of Security Council resolution 478 (1988), reiterates the reouest that those States abide by the provisions of the rele’ mt United Nations resolutions, in conformity with the United Nations Charter.
Representatives will note that the three draft resolutions my delegation has the privilege of introducing on behalf of the sponsors have retained language similar to that in the texts of the resolutions adopted last year under item 40 of the agenda of the forty-third session, entitled "The situation in the Middle East". Hence, today, we urge all States and, in particular, the forces that are promoting a solution to the conflict in the Middle East by means of negotiation, to redouble their efforts to achieve a just, eauitable and lasting peace in the region, which will enable the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence and will enable the Arab peoples to regain the territories that were taken from them by force - territories whose status is today being changed to serve the purposes of the Israeli Zionist regime.
Mr. HOHENFELLNER (Austria), The recent tragic events in war-tern and internally divided Lebanon loo, large over this year's debate on the situation in the Middle East. The abhorrent murder of President René Moawad, whose election held the promise of a better future for his country, came as a shock to us» it can never have any justification. More than a decade of civil war and external Interference have seriously endangered the very existence of Lebanon. We do hope that the Lebanese people will finally reach the goal of their very basic aspirations, full sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
The item "The situation in the Middle East, and its core problem, the related item "The question of Palestine", have been on the agenda of the community of nations for several decades now. During this time the United Nations has spared no effort in the search for a political solution to the problem. The Security Council and the regular sessions of the General Assembly have dealt with it since 1948. There have also been special sessions and emergency special sessions of the General Assembly, and numerous conferences and seminars on Palestine. One of the most recent in the series of supporting events was the Sixth International And Third European Regional Meetings of United Nations Non-Governmental Organizations on the Palestine question, held in Vienna last August.
All those efforts have helped in devising formulas for achieving a just and lasting peace in the Arab-Israeli conflict. Ta this day they serve as the basis for constructive diplomacy and diplomatic initiatives. In spite of all the efforts undertaken by this Organization and by others a comprehensive solution to the Middle East problem has so far eluded the international connunity. Peace will become possible only when Israel realizes that occupatic» of foreign territories and peace with Its neighbours are irreconcilable. Israel might do well to remeaber that the Palestinian people simply is its main partner in the peace process, with all tiie consequences deriving from that crucial fact.
(Hr. Bohenfellner» Austria)
In our view, peace cannot be achieved through a policy of the iron fist but must be built on respect for international law. Austria regards the following elements as vital for a comprehensive, just and lasting solutions observance of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), based on the principle of peace for land, which to this day provide the most widely accepted basis for a solution; withdrawal from occupied territories; respect for the right of all States, including Israel, to exist within secure and internationally recognized boundaries; and recognition of the national rights of the Palestinian people and participation by its legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), in the negotiating process.
Austria believes that the early holding of the International Peace Conference under the auspices of the United Nations should be vigorously pursued as the most promising path to a peaceful, comprehensive and just settlement of the conflict.
The problems of the Middle Bast are multifaceted. They have political, military and legal as well as humanitarian aspects. The violation of human rights in the territories occupied by Israel is a particularly important aspect of the problem. Just and lasting peace cannot be achieved without respect for human rights. The continuing Israeli settlement policy is a matter of serious concern to Austria. We urgently call upon Israel to change its policies in the occupied territories and live up to its obligations under international law.
All States except Israel acknowledge that the Israeli authorities are legally bound to ensure the application of the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the protection of civilians in time of war. Austria deplores those policies and practices which violate the human rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories. We urge Israel to apply the Fourth Ganeva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War to the occupied territories and to abide by that Convention in all areas.
As far as collecting taxes is concerned we should remember the slogan "No taxation without representation". Let us not forget that we are meeting in a country whose independence began with a tax strike. Beit Sahur is not Boston, but maybe it also marks a new approach. In any case Israel must desist from practices and policies likely to increase the tensions between Israelis and Palestinians and abide strictly by the provisions of international law and humanitarian standards.
Given the prevailing conditions, Austria supports the idea of on-site monitoring of the situation in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, by a personal representative of the united Nations Secretary-General.
We have to convey to the Palestinian population under occupation that they are not being left alone in their daily hardships resulting from occupation and coercion, and to help the population under occupation and the refugees in their day-to-day struggle for the bare necessities of life. Let me in this respect pay a special tribute to the United Nations Relief and works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which operates under the most adverse conditions and whose crucial activities have been hampered by actions of the occupying Power on a number of occasions. UNRWA merits our full support and my Government, giving priority to increasing its contribution to humanitarian aid and development, has recently made an extraordinary contribution in addition to our regular one.
The intifedah, now entering its third year, has bo be viewed in the context of the stalemate in the search for a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It has shown that even more than 20 years of occupation cannot destroy the aspirations of the Palestinian people. Che year after the historic decisions taken by the Palestine National Council at Algiers on IS November 1988, which reflected a change of policy, a new sense of moderation and an increased willingness on the pert of the PLO to accept a compromise solution, it is now
(Mr. Hohenfellner, Austria) incumbent on Israel to respond in a constructive my. Future generations would not forgive our letting opportunities for a peaceful settlement pass by.
Austria has consistently recognized the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right to a State of their own. My country has furthermore, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions, recognized the HiO as the sole representative of the Palestinian people. It was therefore only consistent with that position that we recognized the decision of the Palestine National Council of 15 November 1988 to proclaim the creation of a Palestinian State as an expression of their right to self-determination.
At a time when we see walls coma tumbling down after many years, when openness and the restructuring of outdated concepts prevail world wide, it is high time for the mental barrier separating Israelis and Palestinians to be torn down to open the way for better understanding and a just solution.
Austria has taken note with interest of the Israeli plan for elections in the occupied territories. The additions to this plan provided for by President Mubarak of Egypt and Secretary of State Baker are, in our view, a remarkable step towards overcoming the present diplomatic deadlock. Austria hopes that these efforts will lead to a direct and open dialogue between the two main parties to the conflict, > Israel and the rightfol representative of the Palestinian people, which in our view is the PLO.
First steps, such as a Palestine-Israeli dialogue, however, are not an end in themselves and must be geared to further progress in a comprehensive peace process. As already stated, we consider the international peace conference, with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organisation, as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, and the permanent members of the Security Council, the most suitable framework for bestowing international weight on the negotiating process and provide the necessary guarantees for an agreed solution.
There can be no doubt that last year's session of the Palestine National Council in Algiers has generated a new momentum in the diplomatic process. Unfortunately, Israel has so far not reached out through this new window of opportunity and demonstrated its readiness to talk to the Palestinians. We therefore call on the parties, and especially on Israel, to make use of those new possibilities. Time is pressing.
Mr. JAYA (Brunei Darussalam): All the statements made during the general debate at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly have acknowledged and welcomed the relaxation of tensions and manifestations of reconciliation among adversaries. Unfortunately, the trickle-down effect of such a development does not permeate the ever dire situation in the Middle Bast. It is therefore of particular concern that, despite increasing international efforts to arrive at a just and lasting solution to the problem, peace and stability in the Middle Bast remain elusive.
The perpetuation of the problem stems mainly from the flagrant disregard by Israel of the United Nations Charter. Israel has not recognized that its presence in the West Bank, Gaza, Jerusalem and the Golan Heights constitutes occupation. In its endless preoccupation with and continuous pursuit of its dream of Greater Israel, Israel has been transformed into an occupying Power. Israel enforces its right to annexation in total defiance of international law, the international community and United Nations resolutions. Conseauently, so long as Israel remains an occupying Power in Arab territories, including Palestinian territories, it is inevitable that the Arab States will he in a constant state of belligerency with the régime.
The deteriorating situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian territories has been caused by Israel's continued occupation and arbitrary practices. The cries for justice ®nd freedom in the occupied Palestinian territories, including the numerous resolutions on the same subject in various international forums, continue to be ignored. Israel remains obstinately committed to suppressing the legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian people to independence and a homeland.
The dineneions and significance of Israel’s repressive policies are unlimited and obvious. The purpose is simply to insult, huniliate and crush the valiant intifadeh,of the Palestinian people. This was clearly demonstrated by the recent incident in Beit Sahur in which houses of defenceless civilians were ransacked, properties were confiscated, public utilities were disrupted and roads leading to towns were closed. The decades of Israeli occupation have brought economic and social disorder to the occupied areas. In addition, it has been reported that the Israeli authorities have mobilised and organised groups of heavily armed settlers, the so-called company of settler militia, to carry out aggressive actions against Palestinians. The recent manifestations are nothing new, but Israeli policies are becoming more repressive, with premeditated schemes to deprive the people of their land and eliminate their national identity.
In the light of all this, my delegation would like to reiterate its belief that a just and comprehensive peace cannot be achieved unless the Palestinian issue is settled on the basis of the immediate, total and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from the territories occupied since 1967. The Palestinians must be allowed to exercise their full, inalienable national rights, including the right to return, to seif-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State on their own territory.
Accordingly, Brunei Darussalam, together with the overwhelming majority of the meshs?, of the Assembly, continues to affirm that the appropriate way to bring about peace in the Middle Bast is to convene an international conference under the auspices of the United Nations. The conference should be held with the participation of all the parties involved, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the five permanent members of the Security Council, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and all other United Nations resolutions relating to the rights of the Palestinian people and
(Mr, Jaya, Brunei Darussalam} the Arab-Israeli conflict. We believe that no settlement plan will prove acceptable unleaa it takes into consideration the right of the Palestinian people to exercise self-determination and to establish their own independent State in Palestine.
The Palestinian people have endured many years of struggle and made great sacrifices. They have made even greater sacrifices in order to promote peace, in pursuit of which their leadership initiated positive action by calling for a meeting of the Palestine National Council at Algiers at the end of last year. Brunel Darussalam once again affirms its well deserved support for the creation of an independent Palestinian State, in accordance with the declaration of the Palestine National Council in Algiers. Since then, the support of other countries, especially European States, as illustrated in particular by the Madrid Declaration, has been very encouraging. Despite the overwhelming support of the international community for the Palestine National Council's peace initiatives, peace is still an aspiration that Israel rejects, and it continues to obstruct the attainment of this objective.
Another problem that still persists in the Middle East is the crisis situation in Lebanon. We welcome the positive results reached by the Arab Tripartite High Committee and the acceptance by the Lebanese parties of the Committee's proposed peace plan. The maintenance of peace, however, remains the responsibility of the Lebanese themselves, especially through understanding, brotherhood and an honest desire to resolve outstanding problems without involving foreign elements in the civil affairs of Lebanon.
.	■	I
-	........	.	.
NS/rr	A/44/PV.65
31	।
(Me. Jaya» Brunel Darussalam}
In this regard the Assembly should continue to assist Lebanon in regaining its full independence and restoring its full sovereignty through the implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978) ; calling on Israel to withdraw from southern Lebanon. Without this undertaking» and if Israel does not cease its interference in the internal affairs of Lebanon» prospects of stability» security and peace will not prevail in the country.
A further dimension of Israel's threat to the Middle East and International security is its possession and unregulated capability of producing weapons of mass destruction. This could effectively turn the Middle East region into a single battlefield for Israel. Israel's unabated capability of building rockets and nuclear» chemical and bacteriological weapons is contrary to the universal spirit of general disarmament. Such weapons of total annihilation must be destroyed in their entirety. The long-range missile that the Israeli authorities have fired at the Libyan coast is just an example that confirms that peace and security based on rational considerations are not in the minds of Israel's leaders. To the consternation of the international community it is reported that Israel has assisted the South African regime in acquiring nuclear-weapon technology.
In reviewing the situation in the Middle East» I would be remiss if I did not express our tribute to the United Nations and its agencies delivering humanitarian services and assistance» especially to the refugees in Beirut» southern Lebanon and the occupied territories. The report of the Economic and Social Council on assistance to the Palestinian people (A/44/S37) clearly enumerates the many valuable activities of the United Nations agencies» including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)» the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)» the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)» the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World
(Mr. Jaya, Brunei Darussalam) Health Organisation (WHO) in alleviating the misery of victims of Israel's aggression.
In conclusion, it is imperative for this body to ensure the full implementation of the resolutions and decisions urging Israel's compliance with the acceptable international norms of behaviour and standards. TO sanctify Israel's perpetuation of crimes and inhumanity would be a moral defeat of the principles on which this body was established more than 40 years ago.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French), I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 12 States members of the European Economic Community. The Twelve, whose many historical, political, economic and cultural ties serve as a link to the countries and peoples of the Middle East, cannot remain indifferent to events affecting a region to which they feel so close, events that have negative consequences for international peace and security. The Twelve are particularly sensitive to the suffering that many of those peoples are enduring as a result of the persistence of conflicts and tensions in that region of the world.
The European Community and its 12 member States note that the improvement in the international climate and the progress made in the settlement of regional crises in the world, in particular as a result of the efforts of the United Nations, have given hope and deepened the conviction that peace everywhere is possible) hence they arc bound to strengthen our determination to spare no effort in pursuing negotiated solutions to the disputes that remain in the Middle East, whether the Israeli-Arab conflict, the situation in Lebanon or the state of "neither peace, nor war" still prevailing between Iran and Iraq.
The position of the Twelve with respect to those disputes is based upon the purposes and the principles set forth in the United Nations Charter and the principles of international law, in particular the rejection of the threat or use
(Mg. Blanc, France) of force, as w,L &» the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, and of the Modification of the status of occupied territories.
The position of the Twelve concerning the Israeli-Arab conflict was defined in the Venice Declaration of June 1980 and in the Madrid Declaration of last June. It is based upon the affirmation of the right of all States of the region, including Israel, to security - that is to say, to live within secure, recognised and guaranteed borders, and the right to justice for all the peoples of the region, including the recognition of the legitlKate rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to self-determination with everything that that iRplies.
The Twelve reaffirm that a peaceful solution based upon those principles Hist be found within the framework of an international peace conference under the auspices of the United Nations, which is the appropriate forum for direct negotiations between the parties concerned, with a view to arriving at a coaprehensive, just and lasting settlenent.,
We are of the opinion that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) must participate in this process.
The Twelve, which have always reaffirmed their resolve to participate actively in the search for a settlement, support all the efforts, in particular those of the permanent meabers of the Security Council, aimed at drawing the parties closer together and establishing a climate of confidence between them that would encourage the convening of the International peace conference. In this respect, the twelve note that developments last year had raised great hopes with regard to the possibility of emerging from the deadlock that had prevailed for a number of years.
, Mr. Navajas Mogro (Bolivia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
^r, Blanc, France)
Th, Keelys than welcomed the decision# adopted a year ago by the Palestine National Council to accept Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which resulted in the ESO's recognition of Israel's right to exist and its explicit rejection of terrorism. Ke were also pleased that the ^traordinary Arab Summit conference at Casablanca supported those important decisions.
Furthermore, we welcomed the efforts of the United States in their contacts with the parties concerned, in particular the opening of a dialogue with the PLO.
The TWelve believe that advantage must be taken of the new framework created by those favourable circumstances so that the spirit of tolerance, negotiation and peace nay prevail.
Tb the Twelve, a peaceful settlement seems to be all the more urgent as the situation in the occupied territories has continued to deteriorate during the past year. The Twelve, which have recently spoken on this subject in the Special Political Committee, consider that the chain of violence in the occupied territories, whatever its origin, must be broken? they renew their appeal to Israel to put an end to its repression and finally abide by the international conventions, in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention, as it is earnestly called upon to do in Security Council resolutions. In this respect they consider as null and void the unilateral decisions taken by Israel to modify the status of Jerusalem, a city holy to three religions, and reaffirm that freedom of access to the Holy Places must be guaranteed in any settlement.
During the past few months, efforts have been centred on Israel's proposal to hold elections within the occupied territories. The Twelve have already spoken on this subject. They believe that, to be effective, such elections must form pert of the process of a comprehensive settlement and take place In the occupied
NS/rr
(Mr. Bxaac, France)
territories» including East Jerusalem» with adequate guarantees for freedom.
Furthermore» no solution should be rejected» and the final negotiations must be in keeping with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) based on the
principle of exchange of territories for peace.
(Mr. Blanc, France)
It is cn the basis of these sane principles that the Twelve have acclaimed Egypt’s contribution to the promotion of the peace precess as expressed in the 10 points proposed by President Mubarak. Today the Twelve encourage the ongoing efforts, which they believe should constitute a useful step towards convening an international conference.
Any settlement must take account also of the Syrian Golan territory occupied by Israel since 1967. The Twelve reaffirm in this connection that all measures adopted by the Israeli authorities for the imposition of their laws, jurisdiction and administration in that territory are null and void.
The Twelve call solemnly on the parties concerned to grasp every opportunity to work towards peace, which can be achieved only on the basis of respect by each party for the legitimate rights of the other.
The dastardly attack that cost the life of the President of the Lebanese Republic, Mr. René Moawad, has once again drawn attention to the tragic situation in Lebanon and the serious risks to its independence, sovereignty and unity. The IWelve, which have paid their tribute to the memory of President Moawad, reiterate their unreserved condemnation of this odious crime, which took place at a time when the recent election of a Head of State had given Lebanon the opportunity for a new start. Everything must be done to avoid Lebanon’s being precipitated into a new tragedy.
In this respect the Twelve reaffirm their consistent support for the efforts of the Arab League and emphasize in particular the need to maintain and pursue the process started at Taif, under the auspices of the Arab Tripartite High Committee, to bring about national reconciliation.
The Twelve are very happy that the. Lebanese Parliament has been able to face the situation by proceeding to the election of a new President of the Republic. In
(Mr. Blanc, France) congratulating President Elias Hrawi and paying a tribute to him for the dedication to his country that he has shown by taking on his important, heavy, responsibilities, the Twelve assure him of their determination to support all the efforts he must now make to promote national reconciliation, the establishment of rehabilitated institutions and the restoration of Lebanon's sovereignty over all its territory, free from any non-Lebanese armed presence. The Twelve hope that all the Lebanese will rally to these objectives so that Lebanon, in independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and newly found freedom, may once again be fully master of its own destiny.
The persistence of Israel's occupation of part of Lebanese territory, in disregard of pertinent Security Council resolutions, in particular, resolutions 425 (1978), 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), is an obstacle to the country's return to normality and stability. That is why the Twelve have consistently given their firm support to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and insisted on the need for the Force, three of whose units cone from the European Community, to be in a position to fulfil its mandate in the best possible security conditions. They again deplore the fact that soldiers of the Force have been the targets of attacks by Israeli forces or their allies or by other armed groups, that have resulted in many casualties. They draw the attention of all Member States to the Force's financial difficulties and appeal to them to discharge their obligations in this regard.
Lastly, the Twelve again express their grave concern with respect to the fate of the hostages still held in Lebanon, among whom are several from the Community, and call urgently for their immediate liberation. They reiterate their profound indignation at the news of the assassination of Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins, who was captured ibhile on mission in connection with the peace-keeping operations.
(Me. Blanc, France)
More than a year has elapsed since the establishment, through the combined efforts of the Secretary-General and the Security Council, of a cease-fire between Iraq and Iran. While welcoming the fact that the cease-fire had held, the Twelve do not consider the present situation of "neither war nor peace" satisfactory. They call on the two parties to give all the necessary co-operation in the efforts of the Secretary-General and his collaborators to ensure the full implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) and to bring about just, honourable, comprehensive and lasting peace. The Twelve reaffirm their full support for the actions of the Secretary-General in this respect.
The Twelve express their satisfaction with regard to the Secretary-General's plan to organise meetings in New York in December with the Foreign Ministers of Iraq and Iran. They hope that these meetings will have tangible results and that the two parties will demonstrate the necessary flexibility.
The TWelve intend to continue to follow with the greatest attention the development of the situation in the Middle Bast. They will continue to spare no effort, in particular through the close contacts that they intend to maintain and develop with all the parties concerned, to promote the peaceful settlement of conflicts that are ravaging a region to which they are bound by a common destiny and whose stability is, as they see it, essential.
Mr. SÜTRESNA (Indonesia)» Before I begin my statement on the agenda item before us, permit me to express my delegation's profound sorrow at the death of one of our most distinguished colleagues. Ambassador Claudio Teehankee, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations. During his brief tenure here he attached special importance to the strengthening of the Organization so that it might be, as he saw it, mankind's best hope yet of transforming its yearning for global peace and prosperity into reality. I express our heartfelt
condolences to the delegation of the Philippines and I should be greatly indebted to them if they would convey these sentiments to the Government and people of the Philippines and to the bereaved members of the family in their hour of sorrow.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be fraught with tensions, and poses a serious threat to international peace and security. This, regrettably, is the undeniable reality in the region and it has eclipsed four decades of international preoccupation.
Events, especially as they pertain to the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, namely, the question of Palestine, throw into stark relief the seemingly limitless lengths to which Israel is willing to go in the pursuit of its aggressive and expansionist policies. In fact, the further escalation of the wanton brutality and violence directed against the innocent civilian population in the occupied territories confirms that Israel still has no intention whatsoever of entering into the peace process. Thus, Israel's continuing refusal even to consider ending the occupation of the Arab lands seized since 1967 or to recognize the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people and its sole, legitimate representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO), is and always has been the crux of the deadlock in the Middle East.
It has become a dangerous delusion for Israel to believe that it can indefinitely continue to dictate the course of events in the region through reliance on its military might. For there has emerged a qualitatively different situation both on the ground in the occupied territories and on the diplomatic front in the international arena that has radically transformed the strategic and political dimensions of the conflict.
In this regard, Israel’s extreme actions in attempting to subdue the intifadah, the heroic popular uprising of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, have shocked even its apologists, who had grown accustomed to Israeli disregard for the norms of civilized behaviour. Moreover, having withstood every attempt to subdue it and now entering its third year, the intifadah has convinced not only Israel’s friends and protectors but also many in Israel itself that the occupation nust end. Indeed, the iron fist of the occupation has only exposed how truly bankrupt Israeli policy has always been.
The fact of the natter is that today it is the Arab Palestinian people who, through their heroic resistance, are demonstrating before the world the indomitable will to be the determinants of their own future. By its persistence, scope and depth, the uprising has nullified the previous status quo of the occupation, making the occupied territories ungovernable and carrying with it serious economic, social and political repercussions for Israel. In economic terms alone, the intifadah has dealt Israel a severe blow. By boycotting products, withholding their labour and refusing to pay taxes, the Palestinians have forced the Israeli economy to pay a heavy price. Socially, the daily spectre of Palestinian youth confronting the heavily armed Israeli soldiers, only to be killed, maimed or detained for their stones and chants of freedom, has graphically brought home the moral price of occupation that Israelis are increasingly loath to bear.
Similarly# on the political front the Palestinians have seized the initiative and have registered historic strides in their liberation struggle. By its positive actions# the Palestine National Council# meeting in Algiers in November 1989# broke the stalemate in the search for a peaceful settlement under United Nations auspices to the Arab-Israeli conflict. It did so by proclaiming the independent Palestinian State in the Palestinian territory of the West Bank and Gaza# with Jerusalem as its capital. The Palestine National Council also launched a courageous peace initiative based on compliance with General Assembly resolution 181 (II) and recognition of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In this way the Palestinian people have# through realism and moderation# demonstrated their readiness to remove the barriers to peace and justice with their neighbour# thus facilitating the search for a comprehensive settlement on all the other basic elements of the Arab-Israeli conflict as an integrated whole# , including, Israel's total withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since 1967# including Jerusalem and the Syrian Arab Golan» exercise by the Palestinian people of their legitimate rights of self-determination and sovereign independence in the Palestinian territory» and ensuring of the basic need for all States in the region# including the independent State of Palestine# to live in peace within secure boundaries# free from aggression and foreign occupation.
My delegation need hardly reiterate its long-standing support for those elements as the foundation on which to build a durable structure for peace and justice in the Middle Bast. In this regard as well# we are proud to have been among the first to accord recognition to the newly proclaimed independent State of Palestine and to establish diplomatic relations with it. Furthermore# Indonesia has steadfastly supported the Arab States and regards the Pinal Communique issued by the Special Arab Ministerial Committee at its meeting in Tunis on 12 January 1989 as a constructive contribution to peace.
Consequently Indonesia remains convinced, as do the Arab nations and the international community as a whole, of the need to resolve the various interrelated aspects of the conflict through a comprehensively negotiated settlement to be achieved at the International Peace Conference on the Middle East. We further concur that such a conference, held under the auspices of the United Nations and with the participation of all the parties involved on an equal footing, including the PIO, as well as the involvement of the permanent members of the Security Council, and in accordance with all resolutions relating to the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and the Middle East conflict, is the only viable avenue to peace in the region.
Unless Israel's present course is arrested and turned around and the international consensus on the peace process prevails, there will be only more suffering, instability and violence. Israel mist be convinced that it cannot occupy Arab land and have security, violate the most fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter and be accepted as a worthy Menber of the Organization, inflict death and destruction on others and have peace. What is urgently needed is recognition by States in a position to do so to compel Israel to cease its war of annihilation in the occupied territories and to observe the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, followed by direct negotiations with the PLO and all the other parties to the conflict at the International Conference.
Lebanon too remains a victim of the Middle East conflict and of sectarian strife and turmoil. The Lebanese people have had to endure great suffering owing to the absence of peace in the country. My delegation expresses sincere condolences at the tragic demise of President René Moawad. Indonesia has followed the situation in Lebanon with concern and has supported all international efforts
(Mr. Sutresna, Indonesia) to achieve a political solution. In this regard; we laud the efforts exerted by the Arab Heads of State Tripartite Committee in bringing an end to the civil war. Specifically we endorse the Taif agreement reached between the Lebanese legislators. It is our fervent hope that the positive conditions that have been created will lead to further progress on lasting agreements for peaceful arrangements and national reconciliation.
' In the sane regard, sovereign Lebanese territory ream ins under the illegal military occupation of Israel, which is accompanied by incessant acts of further aggression deep inside the country by Israeli ground, air and naval forces. Indonesia has repeatedly condemned these actions as systematic violations of the elementary principles of international law. It is essential that Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity be restored and respected. For this, Israel must immediately withdraw to the internationally recognized boundaries. Consequently the Security Council is in duty bound to compel compliance with its own decisions on Israel's aggression against Lebanon, including resolution 425 (1978).
Mr. COMISSARIO (Mozambique) t I wish to begin ray states nt by expressing my delegation's deepest condolences to the people and Government of Comoros at the tragic assassination of President Ahmad Abdallah Abderenane. It is our firm belief that the people of Comoros will spare no effort in working for the re-establishment of calm and tranquillity in their country.
(Mr. Comissario, Mozambique) Likewise X wish to extend my delegation’s condolences to the delegation of Philippines on the loss of our colleague their Permanent Representative.
The present situation in the Middle East continues to be a natter of grave concern to the international community. The current deteriorating security situation in the region bears within it a threat to international peace and security.
The Middle East conflict is one of the most challenging issues pertaining to regional security which the United Nations has on its agenda, indeed, the political atmosphere prevailing in the Middle East does not seem to be evolving in a manner compatible with the existing climate in the international arena, which encourages settlement of disputes through peaceful means. The Seeretary-General has accurately elaborated on this issue in his report on the work of the Organization. My delegation shares his views and wishes to commend him for the untiring efforts he has devoted to the cause of peace in the area.
Sir'"•j the General Assembly discussed this issue last year, unfortunately there has been little to celebrate with regard to the political situation in the Middle East. As a matter of fact, we have continued to witness developments which constitute a serious breach of international law. In the region Israel continues to pursue its occupation of Palestine and Arab territories and its acts of aggression against neighbouring States, in total disregard of the United Nations Charter and of the relevant resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council.
We believe, like the overwhelming majority of this family of nations, that the core of the conflict in that region still lies in the denial to the Palestinian people of the enjoyment of their birthright, their right to self-determination. We are convinced, therefore, that above all an appropriate and just solution must be found to this issue.
The occupation of the Arab territories has created a situation where Palestinians are increasingly becoming refugees in their motherland. The United Nations has devoted its energy to mitigating the suffering of the people of Palestine. These efforts have continued in spite of all the difficulties resulting from the military occupation.
The violation of human rights in those territories has reached unprecedented proportions, despite condemnations by the international community. We strongly believe in the applicability of the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, as repeatedly urged by the Security Council. In this context, we call for scrupulous observance of its provisions.
The international community has time and again expressed its condemnation of the practices and atrocities perpetrated by Israel in dealing with the uprising in the occupied territories. The continuation of the uprising, despite repression of the Palestinian people, constitutes a clear indication of the need for respect of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination. The intjfadah is a clear indication that the military option will not work) it will only escalate the conflict.
The momentum created by the historic decisions taken by the Palestine National Council at Algiers in November 1988, including the acceptance of Security Council resolutions 2 42 (1967) and 33 8 (1973), and the diplomatic pragmatism displayed by the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has brought about a new climate favourable to a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question.
In this regard, on 15 December 1988, the General Assembly adopted resolution 43/176, which called for the convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East, under the auspices of the United Nations, with the participation on an equal footing of all parties to the conflict, including the PLO and the five
(Mr. Comissario» Mogawbique) permanent members of the Security Council. It further outlined fundamental principles for the achievement of a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in the region. Those principles, inter alia, called for the withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, and for security of all States in the region within secure and internationally recognized boundaries, in accordance with resolution 181 (II) of 1947.
Unfortunately, as the Secretary-General states in his report» "sufficient agreement does not exist, either within the Security Council or among the parties to the conflict". (A/44/731, para. 5) We believe that only a comprehensive political approach which takes into account the interests of all parties concerned can bring about a lasting and just solution to the question of the Middle East. We call upon the international community, in particular the five permanent members of the Security Council, to work on the differences which have so far impeded the convening of the Conference. In that regard we wish to express our endorsement of the need for the early establishment of a preparatory committee to deal with outstanding issues relating to the Conference. Above all, the parties concerned must display a true sense of political will.
The continued acts of military aggression against neighbouring States, which have resulted in widespread human suffering, are not only a violation of the most elementary norms governing relations among States but also are contrary to the diplomatic and political momentum I referred to earlier for the convening of the Conference. These acts should not be tolerated. We condemn them and we call for their cessation forthwith.
Lebanon has not known peace since its territory was brutally invaded in 1982. Its martyred people have been condemned to a life of uncertainty and grief because of the constant raids against their country. The tragic events of 22 November
HLT/cw	A/44/PV.65
49-50
(Mg. Comissario, Mozambique)	j
which claimed the life of President René Moawad cast a dark shadow over Lebanon's prospects for unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence. My delegation wishes to express its full support for the efforts currently being undertaken by the Tripartite Committee of the Arab Heads of State. We are convinced that with the collaboration of all parties the efforts of the people of Lebanon to put an end to bloodshed will œ crowned with success. We also wish to pay a special tribute to the Lebanese people for their courage and determination. We express our full solidarity with them in their struggle for the achievement of unity and full sovereignty through dialogue and without external pressure and interference.
AP/ed	A/44/PV.65
SI
My delegation wishes to seise this opportunity to contend those who have spared no efforts in the search for a political solution to the conflict in the Middle East. We welcome and encourage all positive and constructive contributions by the international community, including those of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the United States of America, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and others, which could lead to a just and comprehensive settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.
It is our conviction that the solution is to be found through a negotiated settlement and not through confrontation, violence and the military defeat of one of the parties by the other. History has shown that the security and stability of a country cannot be based upon aggression against and occupation of other sovereign States. Aggression and occupation are always sources of conflict, hatred and mistrust.
The existence of the State of Israel and of the State of Palestine is an undeniable reality. It is absurd and unwise for one to try to exist by destroying the other. In this context, let me ouote President Joacuim Alberto Chissano of the People's Republic of Mozambioue, who, when he addressed the ninth sunanit Conference of the Movement of Non~Aligned Countries, in Belgrade last September, said:
"In the Middle East there will he no peace so long as the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people are not recognized.”
We therefore call on Israel to heed the voice of the international community and accept a negotiated settlement, so that a just and lasting peace may be achieved in the Middle East.
Mr. OKEYO (Kenya): A poet once asked: "What happens to a dream deferred? Does it dry up, like a raisin in the sun, or does it explode?”
The dreams and legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, whose cause is the core of the problem in the Middle East, have been deferred. Our hopes and our actions must ensure that these dreams do not dry up in the sun or explode again in a violence that would engulf the whole of the Middle East region.
Kenya’s clear and unequivocal position on this matter was underscored by our Foreign Minister's strong commendation, in his statement in the General Assenbly on 28 September 1989, of Palestine's internationally recognized representatives and leaders for
"the positive steps they have taken towards a resolution of the Palestinian question." (A/44/PV.10, p. 71)
Kenya6ûs position on the Middle East draws its logic from its position on the Palestinian question. For us the two are inseparable. I take this opportunity to reaffirm unequivocally the Kenyan Government's continued support for the Palestinian people’s inalienable right to self-determination and for their aspirations, as well as for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which has had a resident diplomatic presence in my country since the 1970s.
On the issue of Lebanon, Kenya’s Foreign Minister, Robert Ouko, also called urgently for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Lebanese territory and expressed support for ell the efforts of the Arab League to resolve this tragic crisis. He called on the entire international community to respect fully Lebanon's territorial integrity and its right to exercise its sovereignty within its internationally recognized boundaries.
While the possibilities of the peaceful solution of these Middle East problens remain bleak, certain recent developments, quite apart from the Iran-Iraq cease-fire, provide my delegation with a muted sense of optimism. The election on 5 November 1989 of the late René Mcawad as President of Lebanon was a very hopeful sign, in the opinion of the Republic of Kenya. Mr. Moawad undertook, during his
short-lived presidency, a detailed and extensive consultative process in an attempt to overhaul the national political structure to reflect current demographic and religious realities in Lebanon. We also hoped that General Aoun's oft-stated commitment to peace and national reconciliation would lead him to provide President Moawad with badly needed support as he struggled to bring reconciliation and peace to that much troubled land.
These hopes for a peaceful Lebanon were brutally dashed and the sense of optimism that had begun to prevail changed to despair and pessimism when, on 22 November 1989, President René Moawad was savagely assassinated in Beirut. My delegation takes this opportunity to convey its deepest and most heartfelt condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the late President, as well as to the people of Lebanon. The Kenyan Government views this assassination as a major setback in the search for peace in Lebanon. It is hoped that the untimely death of René Moawad is indeed the sacrifice that will nourish the seed of hope, enabling the tree of peace to flourish, sturdily rooted in the earth of the hearts and minds of the war-weary Lebanese people. We are confident that ..ias Hrawi, recently elected Lebanon's President, will guide the nation into a process of negotiation and eventual peace.
It is within this context that the parties to the conflict that forms the Middle East problem, and the international community, must seek solutions. The emergent rapprochement of the super-Powers within the framework of their need to preserve peace and restore order in the world must be brought to bear on the almost intractable problems of the Middle East. It is our ardent wish that some attention be diverted from the interesting developments in Eastern Europe and refocused on the Middle East and southern Africa.
Hew can this be accomplished? First, we must bring to the multilateral level the successful dimensions of bilateral diplomacy and relationships between the USSR and the United States, between the United States and Israel, between the United States and the PLO and so on. The successful aspects of these relationships and dialogue must be allowed to spill over into a combined diplomacy that will begin to address comprehensively the Middle East problem by extending bilateral detente to bear on regional problems within an international framework. In this regard my delegation urgently calls for, and strongly supports, the convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East.
It is inconceivable that this Conference should still not have taken place despite the existence of useful precedents in this regard. The General Assembly and the Security Council have attempted to revive the necessary political will by adopting numerous resolutions, including Security Council resolutions 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, which called for a peace conference on the Middle East that convened in Geneva on 21 December 1973 under the chairmanship of the then Secretary-General, and 339 (1973) and 340 (1973) of 23 and 25 October 1973 respectively. The Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) also unanimously endorsed this call for an international conference, in its resolution 1211 (L) in July 1989. On 23 February 1987 the European Community, meeting in Brussels, also strongly reaffirmed that call. The Foreign Ministers of five Scandinavian States and the Non-Aligned Movement meetings of 25 to 26 March 1987 and 14 to 15 April 1987, respectively, also joined that consensus. Kenya can only once again add its voice to that unanimous demand for an international conference to be held on the Middle East.
Secondly, in keeping with the realities of the situation and the need for a step-by-step approach, my Government endorsed the 10-point plan advanced by the
(Me. Okeyo, Kenya) current Chairman of the OAU, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, and subsequently the five-point plan of the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Baker, which, after some hesitation, the Israeli Government approved. The Baker plan essentially provided for elections to produce a Palestinian delegation with which Israel would negotiate an interim period of Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories, allowing final settlement of the territories' status to be negotiated only after that period of autonomy. Our optimism over this approval was clouded when it became apparent that this endorsement would necessitate the delivery of written assurances by the United States that the Palestine Liberation Organization would be excluded from the process. We are gratified that this Israeli position is not entrenched, and we hope that the laudable mediation efforts of the United States of America, which my Government fully supports, will bear some fruit.
It is inconceivable that any peace process can even be imagined without the direct or indirect presence of the legitimate representatives and leaders of the Palestinian people and nation, namely, the Palestine Liberation Organization. In any negotiation, parties to a conflict must be represented by persons who can adequately represent their views, positions and aspirations. To assume that the Palestinian people are any different and do not need such representation is not only a dubious act with regard to the process of negotiation but also an insult to the intelligence and inherent rights of the Palestinian people and the demands of the international community. The intifadah, which started in late 1987, reflects the determination of Palestinians to demand justice in their own territories. That struggle cannot be lightly dismissed as merely stone-throwing, it is, in fact, resistance to Israeli occupation so that a peaceful resolution of the crisis can be worked out. My delegation insists that each side to the conflict choose its own representatives to the negotiations. We urge those directly affected in the negotiations to avoid hard-line, intransigent positions.
(Mr. Okeyo, Kenya)
Thirdly, my delegation encourages any concrete interim measures or confidence-building measures that would lessen the rhetoric and the reality of hate, including the justifiable violence of the intifadah, in the Middle East. We applaud the dialogue that has been going on between the United States and Palestinian representatives since the beginning of this year. We also note with satisfaction, for example, the return by the United States Government of $567 million in frozen assets to the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the remaining $243 million being retained by the United States Government ostensibly to offset further United States claims. Another confidence-building measure is the willingness of the United States to compensate the families of Iranians who died in the accidental downing by the united States of an Iranian passenger aeroplane in July 1988. Although the compensation offer of $250,000 to the families of wage earners and $100,000 to those of non-wage earners is arguably low, it does create a positive environment and foundation within which a structure of peace can eventually be built, which ultimately augurs well for the Middle East. Furthermore, the United States Government's encouragement to a United States oil company to pay the National Iranian Oil Company $325 million for Iranian crude oil delivered, and the release of 17 Iranian travellers in August this year through United States leverage, add to the general positive climate of confidence-building measures. We are confident that such measures will continue to be sought in order to lessen the antagonism that exists between protagonists in the various conflicts in the region. We strongly urge our friends on both sides of numerous conflicts that make up the Middle East crisis to limit even further tne verbal attacks they may hurl at each other not only in this Assembly but also in other forums.
As my delegation demands that external forces stop meddling in the problems of the Middle East region, we call upon the international community to continue its efforts to bring peace to the region.
^^ Okeyo, Kenya)
In the course of deliberations during this session we have noted with satisfaction that some of the regional conflicts in the world have been resolved peacefully. We have also noted with appreciation the attempts that are under way to resolve the remaining conflicts, it is the hope of my delegation that the same spirit and political goodwill will be applied in the efforts to solve the Middle East problem, which renains a threat to international peace and security. We draw strength from the fact that there is still hope among those struggling to bring to fruition the elusive but achievable goal of peace in the Middle East. In this regard, Kenya's support will not be wanting, and we pray that at some point peace will prevail in the Middle East.
Mr. PAWLAK (Poland), In contrast to promising developments in many areas of the world and some tangible results that have been achieved during the past year । with a view to the settlement of a number of regional conflicts, the situation in the Middle East continues to cause grave concern. Despite the momentum generated at the diplomatic level by the peace initiatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) at the end of 1988, the deadlock in the Middle East peace process continues.
The serious consequences of the lack of progress in the search for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the core of which is the question of Palestine, are only too evident. The Palestinian uprising, which is a direct result of the stalemate in the search for a peaceful settlement of that conflict, has been going on for almost two years now.
We are gravely concerned at the continuing deterioration of the situation in the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel. This deterioration is a result of increasingly harsh measures taken by the Israeli authorities to suppress toe Palestinian uprising. As the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices in the occupied territories concludes in its report,
(Mr. Pawlak, Poland) "the situation in the occupied territories has been marked by a dangerous level of violence and repression, which has constantly escalated since the start of the uprising of the Palestinian population against occupation in Decenber 1987," (A/44/599, para. 329)
The measures taken against the populations of the occupied territories -measures additional to those applied in previous years for the purpose of establishing settlements and expropriating property - included the closure of schools and universities, expulsions and detentions on administrative grounds, and other forms of collective punishment. Such policies and practices continue to prevent the Palestinian people from exercising its inalienable rights and pose grave obstacles to international efforts to negotiate a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The duration and explosive nature of the Arab»Israeli conflict underlines the need to intensify efforts towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict and the Palestine Question. The present international climate, which is characterized by increasing co-operation and by the political will to solve regional conflicts peacefully through negotiations, is especially conducive to the search for such a settlement.
We welcomed the constructive decisions that were adopted by the Palestine National Council in Algiers on 15 November 1988 and the Palestine peace initiative that was announced in Chairman Yasser Arafat's address, delivered in Geneva in December 1988, to the General Assembly at its forty-third session, whereby the PU) recognized Israel's right to a secure existence and expressed its readiness to negotiate with that country, within the framework of an international conference. Those decisions and that initiative have opened up prospects for a realistic search for a settlement of the Middle East conflict, and they call for a constructive response by all the parties concerned.
(Mr, Pawlak, Poland)
We note with interest the Arab States' commitment to seek a settleBent of the problem through political means, as confirmed by the Arab sunmdt held at Casablanca, Morocco, in May 1989. Another welcome development was the initiation of a dialogue between the United States and the FLO, which has helped to redress the imbalance between the parties.
As the Secretary-General stated in his message of 13 March 1988 to the meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
"The fact that there are now contacts between each of the five permanent members of the Security Council and all the parties is a new and positive development, and we must capitalize on this."
The response of Israel to those various initiatives has so far been inadequate as it has missed some of their essential points. Israel's own initiative is equally inadequate. Elections in the occupied territories would be meaningful if they were aimed at articulating the will and aspirations of the Palestinian people and if the Israeli proposals were to include the proposed convening of the International Conference on the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations. The Palestinian question can be solved only by political means that take into account all aspects of the problem and the legitimate concerns and interests of all parties.
Poland supports all efforts to have the International Peace Conference on the Middle East, under the auspices of the United Nations, convened at an early date. All parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization (FLO), should participate on an equal footing, and the five permanent members of the Security Council should also take part. This would be based on Security Council resolutions 2 42 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on recognition of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people, primarily their right to self-determination. The complexity of the Arab-Israeli conflict calls for joint action as an efficient
(Mr. Pawlak, Poland) means of searching for solutions that take into account the legitimate interests and rights of all parties.
Poland stands for a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict - a settlement based on recognition of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people, primarily the right to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, as well as the right to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States of the region, including Israel.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General and the steps he is taking with a view to the establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict - a settlement that will ensure stability in the region.
Mr. KAGAMI (Japan): The world is witnessing the dawn of a new era. Decades-lonq confrontation among nations and peoples is giving way to reconciliation. The super-Powers are embarking upon a path of co-operation on a range of issues, including the search for solutions to reaional conflicts in various parts of the world.
One region that has so far seemed to be resistant to the beneficent contagion of peace and reconciliation, however, is the Middle East. In that part of the world hostilities rage intractably and in some areas the flames of violence burn with even greater intensity. In view of the generally encouraging developments that we are witnessing elsewhere in the world the situation in the Middle East is all the more distressing.
That is not to say, of course, that efforts to find peaceful solutions to the conflicts in the region are not being made. We note and deeply appreciate the dedication with which the United Nations, the League of Arab States and a number of key United Nations Member States, as well as the parties directly involved, are striving to bring peace and stability to the region. Nevertheless, the complexity of the situation demands that even greater efforts he made by the international community, in particular the United Nations, bring about regional peace and stability. Indeed, we earnestly hope that the emerging international trend towards reconciliation and co-operation - a trend whose limits have already extended far beyond our realistic expectations - will become apparent in the Middle East as well.
In addressing the issues relating to the situation in the Middle East I feel compelled first of all to touch upon the question of Palestine, although my delegation wishes to address this issue in greater detail whr., it is taken up by the plenary Assembly later this week. As we work to attain a comprehensive peace in the Middle East we must never lose sight of the need to resolve the question of

(Mr. Kagami, Japan) Palestine; for, until that auestion is resolved and Israeli forces are withdrawn from all the territories occupied since 1967, the Arab-Israeli conflict will not be settled. The auestion of Palestine can be resolved only if the Palestinians are guaranteed their right of self-determination, including the right to establish an independent State. At the same time Israel's right to exist must also be recognized. Finally, any realistic peace process reauires the involvement of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which represents the Palestinian people.
Significant progress towards peace has been made following the meeting of the Palestine National Council in Algiers in November of last year. The Government of Japan appreciates in particular the courageous initiative which PLO Chairman Arafat took during the meeting of the General Assembly in Geneva last December. Among other things the PLO's clear acceptance of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), its recognition of Israel's right to exist and its renunciation of all forms of terrorism are heartily welcomed. This new initiative resulted in the commencement of a dialogue between the United States and the PLO - a truly significant development in the search for peace.
We are aware of the serious efforts being made at present by all the parties concerned to initiate, as a first step towards a comprehensive settlement, a dialogue between Israel and the Palestinians. The Government of Japan joins other member States which support and encourage such efforts. At the same time my Government maintains the view that the convening of an international conference on this issue would help to promote negotiations for peace.
Although commendable efforts are being made, we cannot but feel that the pace of the peace process is unacceptably slow, especially when we consider the suffering and the danger to which the Palestinian people in the occupied
(Mr. Kagami, Japan) territories are subjected in the course of their daily lives. The worsening situation in the West Bank and the Gara Strip is particularly distressing. Violence by any side must be condemned. As in any situation where tensions are high and violence is endemic, restraint by all the parties concerned is crucial.
It should be stressed, however, that, as the occupying Power, Israel bears the responsibility for protecting the civilian population in the occupied territories. In this context the Government of Japan once again urges Israel to comply fully with the fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
The Government of Japan would also urge Israel to respect the activities conducted by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing humanitarian assistance to Palestine refugees in the occupied territories. It is a matter of great concern that, as Commissioner-General Giacomelli of UNRWA states in his report,
"A number of local staff were arrested and detained without charges being levelled against them or the Agency being informed of the reasons for their detention." (A/44/13 and Corr.l and Add.l, para. 12)
In particular, the Government of Japan is deeply disturbed by the incidents on 18 October in which Israeli soldiers broke into the premises of UNRWA installations in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, detaining staff and confiscating documents.
UNRWA's operations provide an invaluable service not only in easing the plight of Palestine refugees but also in maintaining a degree of stability in the region, and they must not he jeopardized. UNRWA deserves the support of the entire international community. The Government of Japan reiterates its intention to continue to support UNRWA financially and in every way possible and calls on other Member States to do so as well.
(Mr. Kagami, Japan)
The tragic assassination of President René Moawad, who only 17 days earlier had been duly elected President of the Republic of Lebanon by its Parliament, is only the most recent and dramatic example of the violence and chaos that have convulsed the country this past year. The late President, whose election was made possible through the tireless efforts of the Arab League, and particularly its Tripartite High Committee, as well as by the determination of the Lebanese people themselves, was a symbol of peace and national unity. The Government of Japan condemns this outrageous act of terrorism in the strongest possible terms. The assassination was particularly egregious in that it was committed just at the time when the Lebanese people, with the support of neighbouring States, were beginning to achieve a degree of unity in their government and to regain full sovereignty over all Lebanese territory.

(Mr. Kagami# Japan)
The gravity of this act notwithstanding# we are heartened that the Lebanese Parliament succeeded# just two days later, in electing Mr. Elias Hrawi as President of the Republic. The prompt election of a new President is an encouraging indication that the people of Lebanon are committed to working together to restore to their country respect for the values for which Lebanon was once known and admired. The Government of Japan commends the Parliament for its vigorous efforts# under extremely difficult conditions# to restore normalcy to the Government. My delegation joins the Secretary-General of the United Nations in appealing to the Lebanese not to resort to further violence# but to adhere to the Charter of National Reconciliation which was adopted by the Parliament earlier this month. We urge all sectors of the population to come to the support of their new President so that the unity# independence and sovereignty of Lebanon will be restored throughout its territory.
The situation in southern Lebanon likewise remains volatile and reauires our	'
constant attention. It is imperative that we pursue more vigorously implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which calls for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanese territory, the restoration of international peace and security# and the re-establishment of the Lebanese Government's effective authority in the area.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my Government's profound gratitude to all United Nations peace-keeping operations in the Middle East for the indispensable role they are playing in ensuring a degree of stability in the region. The Government of Japan pays particular tribute to the soldiers of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), who often face great personal danger in carrying out their responsibilities. We were reminded of this fact again this year as we heard the tragic reports that Colonel Higgins and several other
(Mr, Kagami, Japan) members of the ¿eace-Iceaping forces had lost their lives and that many other soldiers had been injured.
I am also saddened by the fact that during the past year we again witnessed a series of terrorist incidents, including the taking of hostages. The Government of Japan condemns these criminal and cowardly acts against innocent people, and calls upon all parties concerned to do their utmost to prevent further acts of this kind. We demand that all those being held hostage in Lebanon be released unharmed and without delay.
Now let me turn to a related and eaually distressing issue, the situation between Iran and Irac. More than two years ago the Security Council adopted unanimously resolution 598 (1987), in which, among other things, it demanded that, "as a first step towards a negotiated settlement, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraa observe an immediate cease-fire, discontinue all military actions on 'and, at sea and in the air, and withdraw all forces to the internationally recognized boundaries without delay". (Security Council resolution 598 (1987), para. 1) although a cease-fire between the two countries was put into effect in August last ear, a comprehensive peace in the region has yet to be attained. And we are all ■niy too well aware of the fragility of the present cease-fire. The need to secure he implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) in its entirety cannot e overemphasized.
In this respect my Government highly commends the efforts being made by the : ecretary-General and his Personal Representative, Ambassador Eliasson. My wernment once again urges both countries to co-operate to the best of their bility with the Secretary-General, who has the firm backing of the entire ¡ternational community.
(Mr. Kagami, Japan)
Precarious as it may be, the present cease-fire provides a precious basis on which both parties can build mutual confidence. The partioo’ efforts to honour the cease-fire should be commended and further encouraged. In this connection my Government pays a high tribute to the United Nations Iran-Irao Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG) for the role it has been playing along the border between Iran and Irao, and calls on both countries to co-operate fully with this effort.
Situated at the crossroads of several great world civilizations, the Middle East has a unique potential to play a stabilizing role in the international community. It is our sincere hope that all the parties in the region will draw upon the wisdom of their rich heritage to overcome the age-old enmities that have inflicted untold tragedy and suffering on their people. Let us all redouble our efforts to ensure that the countries and peoples of the Middle East can contribute to and enjoy the blessings of the more peaceful and stable world that is evolving with each passing day.
Mr. RANA (Nepal): The situation in the Middle East has been the foremost concern of the United Nations ever since the Organization came into being. The United Nations has been instrumental in arranging a cease-fire after each of the many destructive wars fought in the region. It has adopted scores of resolutions on various aspects of the problem and has mounted a number of peace-keeping operations in different sectors in the region. While these efforts underline the continued concern over the volatile situation in the Middle East, they represent also the interest of the international community in finding a just and lasting peace in the region. Over four decades of sustained efforts have also made it clear that the involvement and efforts of the United Nations can be effective only if the parties concerned demonstrate the political will and spirit of accommodation necessary to ensure that peace is to be extended to the Middle East.
(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
The war between Iran and Iraa provides an example. This tragic conflict
caused enormous destruction and suffering in both countries and contained the seeds
of wider conflagration, threatening international peace and security. For over a	j
year now a cease-fire, however tenuous, has been holding; it is being supervised by	j
the United Nations observer mission in the area. This fragile arrangement is the	j
result of the confidence placed in the United Nations by both Iran and Iraa -	।
confidence in the ability of the Organization to promote a negotiated political	!
settlement that will ensure a just and lasting peace in the region and progress and	i
prosperity for both countries. Fundamental differences between the two sides have,	j
however, thus far stalled all efforts to implement other aspects of Security
Council resolution 598 (1987). My delegation fully supports the Secretary-General	।
and his Special Representative in their efforts to break the deadlock. We	1
reiterate our appeal to both Iran and Iraa to display the political will and a spirit of co-operation in transforming the fragile cease-fire into a lasting peace.
(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
The deepening tragedy of Lebanon is yet another instance of the danger in allowing the states quo in the Middle East to continue. The fratricide in Lebanon has been a matter of deep concern to us all. The recent assassination of President Rene Moawad has once again demonstrated that the road to peace and reconciliation in Lebanon is extremely difficult. Nepal condemns this brutal and barbaric act and unequivocally supports the heroic efforts of the Lebanese people to uphold the constitutional process, despite tragedies and grave threats.
We also reiterate our support for the Ta if Agreement, as we are convinced that the full implementation of the constitutional process without outside interference is the first necessity in Lebanon now. The success of the process demands respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon by all. Nepal's commitment to the independence and the territorial integrity of Lebanon is reflected in our continued participation in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
We are approaching the second anniversary of the uprising of the Palestinian people in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967. The uprising symbolizes a spontaneous rejection by the Palestinian people of a life under alien occupation. Nepal deeply deplores the resort to excessive force and repression by the occupying Power to quell the popular uprising. We also strongly deplore the refusal by Israel to comply with its responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention, despite repeated demands by the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The immediate challenge before the international community is to ensure protection of the Palestinian people under Israeli occupation. A comprehensive peace in the Middle East will, however, remain elusive as long as the basic realities are not acknowledged and addressed. We reiterate our conviction that a just and lasting political settlement can be achieved only through negotiations undertaken in good faith and on the basis of the principles set forth in Security
(—‘ ^na, Nepal)
Council resolutions 2 42 (1967) and 338 (1973). The negotiations would have to address the two fundamental and valid concerns of the two peoples - the realization of the rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to a State of their own, and ensuring the right of Israel to live in peace within recognized boundaries free from threats or acts of force. The settlement would also have to ensure the withdrawal of Israel from the territories occupied since 1967.
Decades of wars and violence have left a terrible legacy of hatred and mistrust in the Middle East region. Bold and imaginative statesmanship is reauired to break the vicious cycle and to give peace a chance in the Middle East.
We are witnessing unprecedented changes in international relations. The visible relaxation of tensions has enhanced the capacity of the United Nations to work even more effectively towards solutions of outstanding regional conflicts, including that of the Middle East. My delegation believes that we should seize the opportunity afforded by the new climate in international relations and convene an international conference on the Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations. Such a conference, with the participation on an eaual footing of all the parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, offers the best hope for peace in the Middle East.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.83
2 January 1990
.	ENGLISH
■anHVaBßMflBMMMraMMBnBnBIHHMBMaMaKanSMMMBMI Forty-fourth session GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VE I® AT IM RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters» New York» on Tuesday, 19 December 1989» at 3 p.m.
President:	Mr. GARBA	(Nigeria)
-	Tribute to the memory of Herbert Augustus Blaize( Prime Minister of Grenada
-	Development and international economic co-operation? report of the Second Committee (part I) [821 (continued)	,
(a) Preparation of an international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade (1991-2000) : report of the Second Committee (part II)
(c)	Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States: report of the.' Second Committee (part IV)
(d)	Effective mobilization and integration of women in development: report of the Second Committee (part V)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned» within one week» to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section» Department of Conference Services» room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza» and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-64586/A 6286V (E)
(9)	Desertification and drought: report o£ the Second Committee (part XX)
(h)	Human settlements
(i)	Report of the Second Committee
(ii	) Report of the Fifth Committee
Training and research: United Nations Institute for Training and
Research: report of the Second Committee (87]
Special economic and disaster relief assistance: report of the Second Committee [88]
Financial reports and audited financial statements» and reports of the
Board of Auditors: report of the Fifth Committee [121] (continued)
Joint Inspection Unit: report of the Fifth Committee [127] (continued)
Personnel questions: report of the Fifth Committee [130] (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments [17] (continued)
(a)	Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: report of the Fifth Committee
(b)	Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions: report of the Fifth Committee
(c)	Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors: report of the Fifth Committee
(d)	Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee: report of the Fifth Committee
(e)	Appointment of members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal: report of the Fifth Committee
(f)	Appointment of members of the International Civil Service Commission: report of the Fifth Committee
Organization of work
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE HMORY OF HERBERT AUGUSTUS BLAIZE, PRIME MINISTER OF GRENADA
The PRESIDENT; It is with deep sorrow that I learned this morning of the tragic death of His Excellency Mr. Herbert Augustus Blaize, Prime Minister of Grenada. He had a long, useful and constructive career, first as Chief Minister, then as Premier and, finally, as Prime Minister of Grenada. Grenada in particular, and the Caribbean community in general, have lost a committed and distinguished leader.	.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the representative of Grenada to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government and the people of Grenada and to the bereaved family.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: it is with deep sadness that the news of the passing of Prime Minister Herbert Augustus Blaize of Grenada was received a short time ago at United Nations Headquarters. Prine Minister Blaize had served his country through a long and distinguished public life. He assumed responsibility for the stewardship of its Government at a difficult moment in Grenada's history. He consistently extended support to this Organization.	
The President has already spoken for the Assembly. I would only ask, therefore, that the Permanent Representative of Grenada convey to his Government and to the bereaved family my most sincere condolences.
The PRESIDENT: I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Herbert Augustus Blaize.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRES JENT? I now call on the representative of Liberia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. JARRETT (Liberia): The duty I am about to perform on behalf of the African Group is indeed a sad one, and that is to pay tribute to the memory of a distinguished statesman, the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaise, Prime Minister of Grenada, whose sudden and untimely death occurred this morning in St. George's, the capital city of Grenada.
The deceased was first elected to Parliament in 1957 and retained his seat in that body throughout his political career. He was the first Premier of Grenada as an associated State with Britain, and in 1984 he assumed the leadership of the New National Party, which won 14 out of 15 seats at the general elections held on 3 December 1984.
At the age of 19 the Premier suffered a spinal injury and had to live with soma physical impairment all his life. Nevertheless, he was a man of exceptional courage, strong determination and sterling qualities. He was one of an array of distinguished personalities who addressed the Assembly during the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. At that time he stated:
"On the auspicious occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, my delegation wishes to associate itself and the people of Grenada with the sincere expressions of support for the work of the United Nations which many representatives before me have pledged. We in Grenada recognize the United Nations as still the central instrument for world peace and security through co-operation internationally.
"Indeed, the founders expected this to be so when they proclaimed at the beginning of the Charter their determination to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small." (A/40/PV.35, p. 47)
(Mg. Jarrett, Liberia)
Grenada has lost an illustrious leader and the international conununity a strong supporter. On behalf of the African Group I extend to Mrs. Blaize and the bereaved family, the Government and the people of Grenada and the Permanent Mission of Grenada to the United Nations profound condolences for the great loss they have sustained.
The- PRESIDENT». I now call on the representative of Cyprus, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. EFTYCHIOU (Cyprus) s On behalf of the members of the Group of Asian States, I wish to extend our most sincere and profound condolences on the passing of a distinguished son of Grenada, Prime Minister Herbert Augustus Blaize. The Bight Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize, a distinguished lawyer, devoted more than half his life in the service of his country. His illustrious political career commenced in 1957 when he was elected to Parliament and assumed the duties of Minister for Trade and Production. Ever since, he never ceased being in the forefront of the political life of his country. Undoubtedly his passing will be deeply felt in his homeland as well as in the international community, especially for his devotion to his country and deep love for its people.
On tiiis sad occasion we should like, on behalf of the Asian Group, to convey through you. Sir, our sympathy and profound condolences to the Government of Grenada, its people and the members of the bereaved family.
The-PRESIDENT, I now call on the representative of the German Democratic Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. KUEGK (German Democratic Republic), The duty I have to perform is a sad one. On behalf of the members of the Eastern European States I have the honour to join with the speakers of the other Groups in expressing the deepest sympathy of our delegations to the Government and the people of Grenada on the death of His Excellency the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize, Prime Minister of Grenada.
6	I
(Mr. Kueck, German Democratic Republic!
X would ask the delegation of Grenada to convey our sincere condolences to the people of Grenada and to the family of the deceased Prime Minister.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group.
Mr. PCM IEY (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): It was with the profoundest sorrow and regret that we, the members of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, learned of the death of the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize, Prime Minister of Grenada, a Meitber State of our Group.
He was an indefatigable foe of oppression and exploitation of people everywhere. He leaves behind a legacy of achievements which will always be remembered and cherished by all who are committed to the ideals and principles of the United Nations. Prime Minister Blaize, one of the longest-serving Prime Ministers in the Caribbean, was a statesman and a regional is t who dreamed of a political union of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and eventual unity of the wider Caribbean. His credentials as his country's political leader won him the respect and admiration of people within and outside his country.
Grenada has lost a distinguished leader and a son of the soil, and the Caribbean and the international community a friend and statF^man. On behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean countries, I wish to express heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of Grenada and to Prime Minister Blaize's sorrowing relatives in this, their hour of grief. May the Almighty grant them the strength and courage to sustain their great loss.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of New Zealand, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Dame Ann HEROJS (New Zealand): It was with great sadness that menbers of the Group of Western European and Other States learned this morning of the death of the Prime Minister of Grenada, the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize.
Prime Minister Blaize played a central role in Grenada’s transition to independence, as Chief Minister and then as Grenada’s first Premier. Subsequently, after independence, Mr. Blaize became his com try’s second Prime Minister, a post he had held continuously since 1984. In all, he served his country as a Member of Parliament for over 30 years.
Mr. Blaize was of course no stranger to this Hall, and participated in the for tie th—anniversary celebrations of th' United Nations. His passing is a matter of deep regret for all the Member States of the Group I have the honour to represent.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I should like to convey our most sincere condolences and profound sadness to the family of Mr. Blaize and to the Government and people of Grenada.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. IBRAHIM (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The Group of Arab States learned today that the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize, the Prime Minister of Grenada, had passed away. On behalf of that Group, I should like to express our profound sadness at this hour. I would request the delegation of Grenada to convey our Group’s condolences to the people and Government of Grenada and to the bereaved family of the deceased. The international community is proud of all his achievements.
The PRESIDENT» I now call on the representative of the United States of America, the host country.
Mr. PICKERING (United States of America), As the host country, the
United States expresses its deep sympathy to the Government and people of Grenada	।
on the death of Prime Minister the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize.	j
A man of determination and foresight, Herbert alaize was widely respected as a j strong advocate of democratic values. One of Grenada's most experienced leaders,	।
he led his naticn through a period of transition, building a solid foundation of representative institutions. His courage and his leadership will be greatly missed. । Wfe extend our deepest sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the family of
Prime Minister Blaize and to the Government and people of Grenada on their great loss.	'
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Grenada. Mr. STANISLAUS (Grenada) » My delegation is deeply moved by the many expressions of sympathy extended to the Government and people of Grenada and to the bereaved family of the Right Honourable Herbert Augustus Blaize, whose sudden and irreparable passing we mourn at this time. The Assembly’s condolences will be transmitted to their destination in my capital, and I assure members that they will be a source of comfort and consolation in our hour of need.
Little did I know when I spoke to the Prime Minister at his official residence in Grenada by overseas telephone this morning at 7.15 that it would be my last communication with him in the flesh. Two hours later he was gone.
In accepting your sympathy, Mr. President, and the sympathy of so many representatives here expressed, I should like to end with this thought,
"And when it is morning, take heed that thou mayest not live to see the evening, and when eventide is come, presume npt to promise thyself another day. Be ye therefore in readiness stand, so that when death comes it will not find thee unprepared."
My Prime Minister was fully prepared, and is at peace with his God.
AGENDA HEM 82 (continued), 82 (a), 82 (c), 82 (d), 82 (g), 82 (h), 87 and 88
DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION» REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART I) (A/44/ 746)
(a)	PREPARATION OF AN INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FOR THE FOURTH UNITED NATXH6 DEVELOPMENT DECADE (1991-2000)» REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART II) (A/44/746/Add.l)
(c)	CHARTER OF ECONOMIC RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF STATES» REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART IV) (A/44/746/Add. 3)
(d)	EFFECTIVE MOBILIZATION AND INTEGRATION OF WCMBi IN DEVELOPMENT, REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART V) (A/44/746/Add. 4)
(g)	DESERTIFICATION AND DROUGHT, REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART IX) (A/44/746/Add.8)
(h)	HUMAN SETTLEMENTS
(i)	REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (PART X) (A/44/746/Add.9)
(ii	) REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/831)
TRAINING AND RESEARCH, UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTE FOR TRAINING AND RESEARCH» REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (A/44/833)
SPECIAL ECONOMIC AND DISASTER RELIEF ASSISTANCE, REPORT OF THE SECOND COMMITTEE (A/44/864)
The PRESIDENT, I call on the Rapporteur of the Second Committee to introduce the reports of that Committee on the agenda items now before the Assembly.
Ms. DUENAS de WHIST (Ecuador), Rapporteur of the Second Committee (interpretation from Spanish), It is an honour for me to introduce the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746) on agenda item 82, entitled "Development and international economic co-operation", and the reports dealing specifically with sub-item (a) (A/44/ 74 6/Add.l) , sub-item (c) (A/44/74 6/Add.3)» sub-item (d) (A/44/746/Add. 4)» sub-item (g) (A/44/746/Add.8)» and sub-item (h) (A/44/746/Add.9). I shall introduce also the Second Committee’s reports on agenda item 87 (A/44/833) and agenda item 88 (A/44/864).
In document A/44/746/Add.l, the Second Committee recommends a draft resolution entitled "Preparation of the international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade”. This draft resolution was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
In document A/44/746/Add. 3, the Second Committee recommend, a draft resolution entitled "Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States". It was adopted by the Committee by 103 votes to none, with 23 abstentions.
In document A/44/746/Add.4, the Second Committee recommends a draft resolution entitled "Integration of women in development,. It was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
I wish to inform the Assembly that Yugoslavia should be added to the list of sponsors that appears in paragraph 2 of the report.
In document A/44/746/Add.8, the Second Committee recommends a draft resolution entitled "Plan of Action to Combat Desertification". This draft resolution also was adopted without a vote.
In document A/44/746/Md.9, relating to agenda item 82 (h), the Second Committee recommends two draft resolutions. Draft resolution I, "Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000", was adopted without a vote» draft resolution II, "Living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory", was adopted by a recorded vote of 127 to 2, with 7 abstentions.
In document A/44/833, which concerns agenda item 87, the Second Committee recommends a draft resolution entitled "United Nations Institute for Training and Research". It was adopted without a vote.
With regard to document A/44/864, on agenda item 88, entitled "Special economic and disaster relief assistance", the draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee were adopted without a vote.
I would draw the Assembly's attention to the fact that the original text of draft resolution I in document A/44/864 was in French. The delegations of French toother tongue have therefore asked that an amendment be made to the French version of paragraph 6 (a) of that draft resolution. They believe that the present English
(Ms. Duenas <fe Whist» Rapporteur» Second Committee)
text has been incorrectly translated into French and that the words "des contribuants" should be replaced by the words "bailleurs de fonds et donnateurs".
An amendment should also be made to the last preambular paragraph of draft resolution I. The paragraph should end with "contributors" - in other words» the phrase "in 1990" should be deleted.
The PRESIDENT; If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure» I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Second Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the various recommendations of the Second Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind representatives that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401 the General Assembly agreed that
"When the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting» a delegation should» as far as possible» explain its vote only once» i.e.» either in the Committee or in plenary meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee."
I would also remind delegations that in accordance with General Assenbly decision 34/401 explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by- delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the recommendations contained in the reports of the Second Committee» I should like to advise representatives that we shall
(The President) proceed with the voting in the same manner as in the Second Committee. This means that where recorded votes were taken in the Committee, we shall take such votes here) and we shall not take votes on those recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the Committee, unless delegations have already notified the Secretariat that they wish to proceed otherwise.
We shall first turn to part I of the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746) on agenda item 82, entitled "Development and international economic co-operation".
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to take note of this report?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: We now turn to the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746/Add.l) on agenda item 82 (a), entitled "Preparation of an international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade (1991-2000)". The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. That draft resolution, entitled "Preparation of the international development strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade", was adopted by the Second Committee without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/169).
The PRESIDENT: We have concluded our consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 82.
We turn next to the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746/Add.3) on agenda item 82 (c), entitled "Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States".
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution contained in paragraph 5 of ’•hat report. A recorded vote has been requested.
,. e corded vote was taken.
In favoutt Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Bur in di, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Uicia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against» United States of America
Abstaining} Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 131 votes to 1, with 23 abstentions (resolution 44/170).

The PRESIDENT^ I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their votes.
Mr. MARKS (United States of America): The draft resolution under agenda item 82 (c), "Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States"» was presented quite late into the work of the Second Committee, and at that time, not having had a chance to study it, my Government abstained. New that we have had a chance to study the document, the United States has voted against it, because my Government does not accept many of the key provisions contained in the Charter, which is a non-binding recommendation and not a statement of international law. The United States does not consider the Charter a constructive basis for encouraging harmonious economic relations among nations. We object, for example, to the following claims enunciated by the Charter.
A right to permanent sovereignty over natural resources, wealth and economic activities is claimed without regard to relevant international legal principles. This right could infringe foreign trade and private property rights of other States.
A right to nationalize or expropriate foreign property ignores international legal obligations, including the duty to pay prompt, adequate and effective compensation under international law.
A right to form primary products producer cartels interferes with actions of other States to protect their legitimate interests.
Finally, a duty to provide restitution or compensation to countries, territories and peoples which have experienced colonialism, neo-colonialism, apartheid, racial discrimination and occupation is a political indictment having no place in a charter designed to provide guidelines for harmonious economic relations.
Mr. TANLAY (Turkey) (interpretation from French): The Turkish delegation considers that the legal principles relating to the new international economic order have not been fully identified, defined or universally accepted. Since the fundamental principles which are to be used are not universally accepted by the international community, it would be premature to codify the principles and norms governing economic relations among States. Therefore my delegation is convinced that it would not be appropriate to start codification unless the international community is agreed on the applicability of these principles.
On the other hand, we consider that the draft resolution entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law relating to the new international economic order" recommended by the Sixth Committee and adopted by the General Assembly at its 72nd meeting, on 4 December 1989, does not take into account the elements I have just emphasized.
For that reason, as in the case of similar draft resolutions in the past, the delegation of Turkey abstained on this draft resolution, which provides for such codi fica tion.
Thus my delegation, which voted in favour of draft resolution A/C.2/44/L.9 in the Second Committee, was compelled also to abstain on the draft resolution that has just been adopted.
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has now concluded its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 82.
We now turn to the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746/Add.4) on sub-item (d) of agenda item 82, entitled "Effective mobilization and integration of women in development".
■ The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution contained in paragrafi 7 of the report. The draft resolution is entitled "Integration of women in development". The Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
(The President) adoption of that draft resolution. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt it?
?^e draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/171).
The PRESIDENT? The Assembly has concluded its consideration of sub-item {d) of agenda item 82.
We turn now to the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746/Add.8) on sub-item (g) of agenda item 82, entitled "Desertification and drought".
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft resolutions A and B contained in paragraph 9 of the report of the Second Committee and on the draft decision contained in paragraph 10.
Draft resolution A is entitled "Implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification". The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution 44/172 A).
The PRESIDENT? Draft resolution B is entitled "Implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification". The Second Committee adopted this draft resolution also without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 42/172 B).
Si,. S^SPENT, The draft decision in paragraph 10 of the report of the Second Committee is entitled "Countries stricken by desertification and drought in Africa". It was adopted by the Second Committee without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The PRESIDENT.- The Assembly has concluded its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 82.
We turn now to the report of the Second Committee (A/44/746/Add.9) on sub-item (h) of agenda item 82, entitled "Human settlements".
The Assembly will now take a decision on the two draft resolutions contained in paragraph 12 of the report of the Second Committee.
Draft resolution I is entitled "Global strategies for shelter to the year 2000". The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 44/173).
The PRESIDENT: Draft resolution II is entitled "Living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory". The report of the Fifth Committee on the progranne budget implications of draft resolution II is contained in document A/44/831.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan» Albania» Algeria» Angola» Antigua and Barbuda» Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, lbgo» Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Canada, Dominica, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Germany, Federal Republic of, Grenada, Netherlands, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution II was adopted by 146 votes to 2, with 8 abstentions (resolution 44/174).
The PRESIDENT, The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 82.
I now invite the Assembly to turn its attention to the report of the Second Committee (A/44/833) on‘agenda item 87, entitled "Training and research, United Nations Institute for Training and Research".
The Assembly will now take a decison on the draft resolution contained in paragraph 10 of the Second Committee's report. The draft resolution, entitled "United Nations Institute for Training and Research", was adopted in the Second Committee without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/175).
The PRESIDENT, We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 87.
The Assembly will now consider the report (A/44/864) of the Second Committee on agenda item 88, entitled "Special economic and disaster relief assistance".
The Assembly has before it seven draft resolutions and one draft decision. I shall put the recommendations of the Second Committee to the Assembly one by one. After all the decisions have been taken representatives will again have the opportunity to explain their vote or position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the seven draft resolutions recommended by the Second Committee in paragraph 42 of its report.
Draft resolution I, which is entitled "Special economic assistance to Chad", was adopted in the Second Committee by consensus. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 44/176).
The PRESIDENT; Draft resolution II is entitled "Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Djibouti". The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution by consensus. May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 44/177).
The PRESIDENT; Draft resolution III is entitled "Emergency assistance to Somalia,. The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution by consensus. May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 44/178).
The PRESIDENT; Draft resolution IV is entitled "Assistance to Democratic
Yemen". The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution by consensus. May I consider that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 44/179).
The PRESIDENT, We now turn to draft resolution V, entitled "Assistance for the reconstruction and envelopment of Lebanon". The Second Committee adopted that draft resolution by consensus. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 44/180).
The PRESIDENT, Draft resolution VI is entitled "Special assistance to front-line States".
A recorded vote has been requested.	.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour, Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Kampuchea» Democratic Yemen» Denmark» Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji» Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mun^olia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe» Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sidan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	None
Abstaining: United States of America	.
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 154 votes to none, with 1 abstention (resolution 44/181).
The CHAIRMAN: Draft resolution VII is entitled "Special Plan of Economic
Co-operation for Central America".
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution by consensus. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 44/182).
The PRESIDENT; Finally, we turn to the draft decision contained in
paragraph 43 of the report of the Second Committee (A/44/864).
The Second Committee adopted by consensus the draft decision, entitled "International strategy for the fight against locust and grasshoppper infestation, particularly in Africa". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The PRESIPatTt The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 88.
AGENDA ITEMS 121, 127, 130 and 17 (a) to (f) (continued)
FINANCIAL RESORTS AND AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, AND RESORTS OF THE SOARD OF AUDITORS! REEORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/674)
JOINT INSPECTION UNIT, REEORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/675)
PERSONNEL QUESTIONS! REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/880)
APPOINTMENTS TO FILL VACANCIES IN SUBSIDIARY ORGANS AM) OTHER APPOINTMENTS,
(a)	APPOINTMKiT OF MBSBERS OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUKTBNS, REPORT OF THE FIFTH CCMMITTEE (Part II) (A/44/560/Add.l)
(b)	APPOINTMENT OF MBiBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON CONTRIBUTIONS , REPORT OF THE FIFTH CCMMITTEE (A/44/840)
(C)	APPOINTMENT OF A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF AUDITORS, REPORT OF THE FIFTH CCMMITTEE (A/44/841)
(d)	CONFIRMATION OF THE APPOINTMBÏT OF MEMBERS OF THE INVESTMOJTS COMMITTEE, REEORT OF THE FIFTH CCMMITTEE (A/44/842)
(e)	APPOINTMENT OF MB4BERS OF THE UNITED NATIONS ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL, REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/843)
(f ) APPOINTMENT OF MBiBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION, REPORT OF THE FIFTH CCMMITTEE (A/44/844)
The PRESIDENT, If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee which are before the Atsesbly today.
It was so decided.
The PRPSXOWT, Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote and position.
The positions of delegations regarding the various recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members once again that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
■iT -,■
JP/ASW
A/44/PV.83 25 (a-z)
(Thejjresident)
"When the sane draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee."
May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth Committee, I would advise representatives that we shall proceed with the voting in the same manner as in the Fifth Committee. This means that where recorded votes were taken in the Committee we shall take such votes here; and we shall not take votes on those recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the Committee unless delegations have already notified the Secretariat that they wish to proceed otherwise.
(The President)
We shall new consider the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/674) on agenda item 121, entitled "Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors".
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/183).
The ERIS IDENTs We have concluded our consideration of agenda item 121.
We turn next to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/675) on agenda item 127, concerning the Joint Inspection Unit.
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph 6 of the report. This draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth Committee without objection. May I take it that the General Assembly also wishes to do so?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 44/184).
The PRESIDENT; We have concluded our consideration of agenda item 127.
I now ask the Assembly to turn to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/880) on agenda item 130, entitled "Personnel questions".
The Assembly will take decisions on the recommendations in paragraphs 18 and 19 of that report.
In this regard we shall turn first to the draft resolutions recommended by the Committee in paragraph 18 of the report. Draft resolution I (A to D), which concerns personnel questions, was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I (A to D) was adopted (resolution 44/105 A to D).
The PRESIDENT, Draft resolution II» entitled "Respect for the p,. Alleges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations", was also adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 44/186).
The PRESIDENT, The Assembly will now turn to the draft decisions in paragraph 19 of the report of the Fifth Committee.
Draft decision I is entitled "taencbnents to the Staff Rules". It was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The PRESIDENT, Draft decision II is entitled "Respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations". This was also adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
££¿£1 decision II was adopted.
The PRESIDENT, I call on the representative of the Netherlands, who wishes to explain his position on one of the draft resolutions just adopted.
Mr, CORNELISSEN (Netherlands), The Netherlands delegation is grateful for the considerable effort that went into the preparation of draft resolution II, on agenda item 130, under the able chairmanship of the representative of Sweden, and considers that the resolution we have just adopted on this item constitutes an adequate reflection of the consultations in the Fifth Committee. Upon reflection on toe results achieved, my delegation nevertheless wishes to make three observations on the issues involved.
I :
(Mr» Cornelissen, Netherlands)
First, the primary concern and main focus of the resolution should be to promote and enhance respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations. While it may be appropriate to highlight the obligation of all officials of the Organization and the specialized agencies to observe fully in the conduct of their duties the laws and regulations of Member States, the Netherlands delegation is of the opinion that this obligation is explicitly brought out in the sixth preambular paragraph. There is therefore no need, in our view, for any reference to it in the first preambular paragraph of the resolution.	.
Secondly, the Netherlands delegation strongly supports the appeal directed in operative paragraph 6 to concerned Member States to co-ordinate efforts with the Secretary-General or the executive heads of agencies with a view to resolving with all due speed the cases mentioned in the Seci„:-ary-Ge neral’s reports. In our view, however, this paragraph should have been strengthened with an additional appeal to the Member States involved to release immediately all those detained, or at least to allow access to them by a legal counsellor.
Thirdly, while the efforts rf the Secretary-General to promote knowledge of and compliance with the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment are highly valued by this delegation, it is our view that the Member States themselves should also promote acceptance of these principles.
In view of the efforts that went into the preparation of this resolution during consultations in which this delegation took an active part, we did not wish to stand in the way of consensus. We would, however, welcome the Assembly's devoting its attention to the points just raised by my delegation in the future consideration of this item, to which we shall return next year and to which we attach the greatest importance.
The PRESIDENT! The Assembly has concluded its consideration of agenda item 130.
We shall now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on sub-items (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of agenda item 17, "Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments,.
I invite members to turn their attention first to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/560/Add.l) on agenda item 17 (a), entitled "Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions".
(The President)
The Fifth Committee recommends in paragraph 6 of its report that the General Assembly appoint the following persons as members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990; Mr. Carlos Casap» Mr. Yogesh Kumar Gupta» Mr. Tadanori Inomata» Mr. Ulrich Kalbitzer» Ms. Irmeli Mustonen and Mr. Yang Rushan? and for a two-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990 Mr. Lawrence Agubuzu. May I take it that the Assembly appoints those persons to be members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT? We come now to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/840) on sub-item (b) of agenda item 17» entitled "Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions".	'
In paragraph 4 of that report the Fifth Committee recommends the appointment of the following persons for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990: Mr. Bagbeni Adeito Nzengeya» Mr. Sergio Chapparo Ruiz» Mr. Peter Gregg» Mr. Atilio Norberto Molteni» Mr. Mohamed Mahmoud Olid El Ghaouth and Mr. Dimitri Rallis. May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to appoint the persons recommended by the Fifth Committee?	-.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I now invite members to turn their attention to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/841) on sub-item (c) of agenda item 17, entitled "Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors".
In paragraph 5 of that report the Fifth Committee recommends that the General Assembly should appoint the Chairman of the Commission on Audit of the Philippines
(The President)
as a member of the United Nations Board of Auditors for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 July 1990. May I take it that the Assemby wishes to approve that appointment?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT) I now invite members to turn their attention to the report of the Fifth Committee 9A/44/842) on sub-item (d) of agenda item 17, entitled "Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee".
The Fifth Committee recommends in paragraph 4 of its report that the General Assembly confirm the appointment by the Secretary-General of the following persons as members of the Investments Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990, Mr. Yves Oltramare, Mr. Emmanuel Noi Omaboe and
Mr. Juergen Reimnitz. May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to confirm the appointment of the persons recommended?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT) We come now to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/843) dealing with the appointment of members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal under sub-item (e) of agenda item 17.
In paragraph 4 of the report the Fifth Committee recommends that the General Assembly appoint Mr. Jerome Ackerman and Mr. Arnold Wilfred Geoffrey Kean as members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990. May I consider that the Assembly appoints those persons?
It was so decided.
,H/jl
The PRESIDENT, Lastly, we turn to the report of the Fifth Committee (A/44/844) on sub-item (f) of agenda item 17, concerning the appointment of members of the International Civil Service Commission.
In paragraph 6 of its report the Fifth Committee recommends that the General Assembly appoint the following persons as members of the International Civil Service Commission for a four-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990: Mr. Michel Jean Bardoux, Ms. Claudia Cooley, Mr. Antonio Fonseca Pimentel, Mr. Alexis Stephanou and Mr. Ku Tashiro, and for a one-year term of office beginning on 1 January 1990, Mr. Ladislav Smii, May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to appoint those persons?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes the Assembly's consideration of suh-items (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of agenda item 17.
ORGANIZATION GF WORK
The PRESIDENT: The remaining reports of the Second and Fifth Committees will be considered at the next plenary meeting.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PRO VIS IO NAL
A/S-16/PV.1
15 December 1989
ENGLISH
Sixteenth special session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FIRST MEETING
Held at Headauarters, New York, on Tuesday» 12 December 1989, at 10 a.m.
Temporary President:	Ms. ATTAH	(Nigeria)
later:	Mr. GAEBA	(Nigeria)
(President)
later:	Mr. JAYA	(Brunei Darussalam)
(Vi ce - Pr es i dent)
-	Opening of the session by the Temporary President, the Chairman of the delegation of Nigeria
-	Minute of silent prayer or meditation
-	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
-	Credentials of representatives to the sixteenth special session of the General Assembly
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
/. ..
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-600 03/A	5 751V (E)
, .4ft» -»Ki W ' • '.^
Election of the President
Statement by the President
Statement by the Secretary-General
Organization of the session
Adoption of the agenda
Address by Mr. Kenneth D. Kaunda, President of the Republic of Zambia
Address by Mr. Robert Gabriel Higabe, President of the Republic of Zimbabwe
Apartheid and its destructive conseauences in southern Africa [7]
Address by Mr. Vasil Tbpurkovski, Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
ITEM 1 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
OPENING OF THE SESSION BY THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, CHAIRMAN OF THE DELEGATION OF NIGERIA
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure, I declare open the sixteenth special session of the General Assembly.
ITEM 2 OF THE PROVISIONAL AŒNDA
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The nembers of the General Assembly observed a minute of silent prayer or meditation.
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORT IO WENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; Before turning to the next item on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with the established practice, to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/S-16/3, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he informs the Assembly that one Member State is in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I remind delegations that under Article 19 of the Charter
"A Member of the United Nations which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding two full years." May I take it that the General Assembly decides to take note of this information?
It was so decided.
ITEM 3 OF THE PROVISIONAL A (END A CREDENTIALS OF REPRESENTATIVES TO THE SIXTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(a) APPOINTMENT OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that a Credentials Committee shall be appointed at the beginning of each session and that it shall consist of nine members, to be appointed by the General Assembly on the proposal of the President.
With a view to expediting the work of the special session, and in accordance with precedents, I propose that the Credentials Committee consist of the same members as those appointed for the forty-fourth session, namely: Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, China, Colombia, Malawi, the Philippines, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America and Zaire.
If there is no objection, I shall consider the Credentials Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided.
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Members will recall that at the 1st plenary meeting of the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly the Temporary President proposed that, as the sixteenth special session would be held within the period envisaged for the forty-fourth session and in order to permit the special session of the Assembly to use the limited time available to it for consideration of the substantive question before it, the Credentials Committee of the forty-fourth session should be authorized to examine and report not only on the credentials submitted for representatives to the forty-fourth regular session but also to the extent possible on those submitted for representatives to the special session. The Assembly decided to authorize the Credentials Committee to proceed accordingly.
The Credentials Committee has submitted two reports to the General Assembly (A/44/639 and Add.l) by which the Committee reported that it had accepted the credentials of representatives of Member States participating in the present sixteenth special session of the General Assembly, it being understood that credentials in proper form of representatives to the present session for whom only provisional credentials have so far been submitted will be communicated to the Secretary-General as soon as possible.
The two reports of the Credentials Committee dealing with the credentials of representatives to the sixteenth special session have already been approved by General Assembly resolutions 44/5 A of 17 October 1989 and 44/5 B of 11 December 1989.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to take note of the fact?
It was so decided.
ITEM 4 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I now invite the Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of the General Assembly. In this connection it has been proposed that the President of the forty-fourth session, His Excellency Major-General Joseph Nanven Garba of Nigeria, be elected by acclamation as President of the General Assembly at its sixteenth special session.
I take it that the Assembly adopts that proposal?
It was so decided.
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I extend my sincere congratulations to Major-General Joseph Nanven Garba and invite him to assume the presidency.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the President to the podium.
Mr. Garba took the Chair.
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT? I should like to thank all the members of the Assembly for their continued confidence in me and for electing me to preside over this very important special session of the General Assembly on apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa. In convening this special session the General Assembly has accorded the question of apartheid the highest possible priority on its political agenda.
The global campaign against apartheid has entered a new and decisive phase and has been given a tangible and constructive impetus by the fact that this special session, the first ever on apartheid, is being held at all. While I am highly honoured to preside over this special session, the entire exercise will be totally meaningless to me personally, and indeed to the international community, if at the end of it all we fail to send, unanimously, a clear and unambiguous message to Pretoria that apartheid must end.
In this global situation, when numerous anachronistic regimes, ideological facades and political barriers are crumbling, the apartheid system cannot escape being dismantled in its turn.
Having served as Chairman of the United Nations Special Committee against Apartheid over the last five years I cannot but express a sense of deep satisfaction and my belief and acknowledgement that the United Nations, in deciding to hold this special session, is finally determined to pronounce itself with one voice and in no uncertain terms on this protracted issue.
This special session is not a session for recriminations. It is not a session for acrimony or divergence of opinions. Indeed, it is not a session aimed at cataloguing the well-known evils of the apartheid system. Rather it is a session
that is in consonance with the prevailing global atmosphere of peace and the
(The President) lessening of tension. It is a session which we, as responsible members of the international community, are determined to use as a vehicle for ending apartheid -a crime against our collective conscience and dignity. It is a session that offers us an opportunity collectively to express our long-overdue consensus on how best to eradicate apartheid.
This special session should therefore be seen as a joint venture between the international community and the entire people of South Africa, a venture in which the international community, by lending its voice, ideas and impetus to the apartheid debate, is offering co-operation and assistance that should contribute in a concrete and meaningful way to the immediate resolution of the complex problems and issues emanating from the policy and practices of apartheid.
Furthermore, it is an excellent opportunity for the international community categorically to reaffirm its stand and while acknowledging that in South Africa some recent developments have taken place which may be deemed positive they fall woefully short of what is expected of the authorities in Pretoria. Those developments, while addressing peripheral questions, have failed to touch the foundations of the apartheid system.
More importantly, this special session is being held at a time when the proliferation of global efforts to end conflicts through negotiations is gaining currency and ascendancy. South Africa and the crisis in that country can in no way be an exception to this new reality. This special session must therefore reiterate the fact that, as in other conflict situations around the world, a conjuncture of circumstances exists which if exploited by a show of demonstrable readiness on the part of the authorities in Pretoria, and indeed on the part of the entire South African people and ourselves, their friends and allies, could lead to an end to apartheid through negotiations. This conjuncture of circumstances would call for
all South Africans to get together and negotiate an end to the apartheid system. These same circumstances would make it incumbent on all of us to render every support necessary to help enhance that negotiation process.
This special session is about changes change of the unacceptable system that today exists in South Africa. It is about the change in the lives of millions of people in southern Africa who daily live with the destructive consequences of apartheid. It is about change that will bring enduring peace and security and thus social progress and development to the entire southern African subregion. This special session is about embarking on the process of creating a new South Africa -a united, non-racial and democratic South Africa.
In convening this special session the international community is offering its hand once more in partnership to the authorities in Pretoria and to all South African people in order to start a positive process of change. This, I am convinced, is done in absolute good faith and in furtherance of the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
There is something that this special session can never be purported to be. This session is not an attempt to usurp the rights of South Africans. It is not about, or tantamount to, Members of the Assembly arrogating to themselves the right to determine the fate or outcome of domestic affairs of a particular Member State of the Organization. Far from all this, we have a duty which we are bound by honour and morality to perform» a duty to end apartheid peacefully and through negotiations» a duty collectively to absolve ourselves from the harsh judgement of history.
If the South African authorities are irrevocably committed to the creation of a new South Africa based on a free and equitable constitutional social and economic system, then they should have no fears about the outcome of this special session. If, indeed, it is true that apartheid is no longer the South African Government’s policy, why then, I ask, does discriminatory legislation like the Group Areas Act and oppressive laws like the Internal Security Act remain unrevoked on its statute books? The truth is that the recent letter on the special session by the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Secretary-General raises more questions than it attempts to answer. This special session, therefore, remains very vital indeed.
If there is a compelling factor, a clear message, that this session must convey, it is that Pretoria can no longer repackage with impunity the tenets of apartheid while further denying the majority of the South African people their long-deserved equality. It is that Pretoria must refrain from cosmetic reforms and take substantive steps towards fundamental changes which, through negotiations, will lead to the peaceful eradication of apartheid in all its forms and the establishment of a truly democratic, non-racial society in South Africa. It is
this vision which requires the whole-hearted support of all.
The international community must not only assist the people of South Africa in fulfilling their just and noble aspirations but act in unison and in a decisive manner to induce Pretoria to end a system that has been the cause of profound embarrassment to our civilization and of so much suffering to the people of southern Africa. Let us go from this sixteenth special session to support the establishment of a more humane South Africa; a South Africa in which the dignity of each and every person is restored, respected and guaranteed; a South Africa which is committed to the maintenance of peace and security and the promotion of mutually beneficial co-operation.
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General of the United Nations wishes to address the General Assembly at this time. I call on him.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The issue that the General Assembly is addressing today has been of unremitting concern to the United Nations since its inception. Throughout all the twists and turns of international affairs over the past four decades the point of principle involved in the issue has remained absolutely clear. No ambiguity has lurked in, nor has any dissent been caused by, the proposition that the racial discrimination entrenched in the system of apartheid violates one of the basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations and is, therefore, totally impermissible.
The proposition has been reaffirmed in a large number of resolutions and has become an integral part of the jurisprudence of the United Nations. The
International Court of Justice has stated in very clear terms that

"To establish ... and ... enforce, distinctions, exclusions, restrictions and limitations exclusively ... on grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin which constitute a denial of fundamental human rights is a flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter." (International Court of Justice, Advisory Opinion, 21 June 1971, para. 131) I need hardly refer to the various international legal instruments, beginning with the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which are, and will remain, germane to any consideration of the issue at the international level. As we look back at the history of the question from the vantage point of today, it is quite apparent that the categorical position adopted by the United Nations has neither stemmed merely from sentiment nor been influenced by ulterior political considerations. On the contrary, it is squarely based on the universally shared perception that the institution of apartheid constitutes a threat to international peace and security and that to permit or condone it would be to strike at the very root of the justice and stability of international relations envisaged in the Charter.
Considering the legitimacy and intensity of the international concern, the plea advanced by South Africa that the question of its racial policies falls essentially within its domestic jurisdiction has not been acceptable to the United Nations.
Over the years the United Nations has explored whatever avenues have been open towards a pacific settlement of the problem. Appeals have been addressed to the South African authorities, negotiations attempted, commissions of inquiry instituted and contacts pursued between the South African leaders and the
Secretary-General.

A particular effort that needs to be mentioned relates to the recommendations by a group of eminent persons established by the Secretary-General in 1964 for the purpose of examining methods by which the South African situation could be resolved. That group recommended the formation of a national convention fully representative of the people of South Africa so that the people could be consulted and the future of their country decided at the national level. Moreover, it urged that an amnesty be granted to all opponents of apartheid, whether on trial, in prison, under restriction or in exile.
Had those recommendations been accepted at the time, South Africa would have been spared the tragic and costly confrontations that have since taken place. The recommendations of the expert group remain, in essence, as valid today as they were at the time they were presented to the Security Council 25 years ago.
We should all be clear about our objectives. Our efforts must continue to be directed towards the complete dismantlement of apartheid. Current laws that deny the participation of a majority of the population in the political process or allow the authorities to interfere arbitrarily with the privacy, freedom and conditions of life of families and individuals must be abrogated and replaced by a system of laws that ensure justice for all without regard to race or colour.
We have now reached a stage at which the prospects of a negotiated solution of the problem are far more hopeful than at any previous time. Currents of positive change in international life as a whole are bringing about a better understanding of issues that had long remained subjects of fruitless polemics and contentious stalemate.
As far as the present problem is concerned, the realization seems to have dawned at long last that the days of racial supremacy are over. Indeed, in the region of southern Africa developments during the course of this year have provided
grounds for guarded optimism that peaceful and fundamental change is now possible.

The tripartite agreements signed earlier this year have brought about the withdrawal of South African forces from Angola and a halt to cross-border raids. The Namibian question, which had long been an issue of contention between South Africa and our Organization, is now well on its way to a peaceful and permanent settlement. The Namibian people have exercised their right to self-determination through national elections held under the supervision and control of the United Nations. The co-operation that has taken place between South Africa and the United Nations in conducting those elections and the respect shown by the parties concerned for their obligations under the United Nations plan give hope for the future of the region. But more needs to be done.
A reassuring step would be the complete termination, without danger of recurrence, of policies directed against the stability and security of neighbouring States. We have seen the results of these policies - 1 million refugees and 4 million internally displaced people. A United Nations study estimates that the cost to member States of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) has been over $60 billion and 1.5 million lives.
Twenty years ago the United Nations General Assembly endorsed the Lusaka Manifesto, in which Africa offered a hand of co-operation and friendship to South Africa if it would undertake to dismantle apartheid. Tragically, that opportunity was lost. This year the Organization of African Unity has repeated that offer through the Harare Declaration, which called again for a peaceful settlement of the situation in South Africa. It is my hope that a formula for a just solution will soon emerge that will assure for all the people of South Africa a peaceful and harmonious future.
In my view the present time is opportune for increased efforts in overcoming the obstacles that impede the dismantling of apartheid. At the international level
we must continue to do all we possibly can to induce the South African Government
to bring an end to its racial	policies. Within South Africa support must be given to initiatives for a dialogue between the Government and the acknowledged leaders of the majority of the people of South Africa. Of course, a prerequisite to such a
dialogue must be the release of Mr. Nelson Mandela and all opponents who are under detention, and the return of those in exile. Equally important is the need for the creation within the country, through other positive measures, of an atmosphere conducive to negotiations.
The presence here at this special session of the General Assembly of the Heads of State of Zambia and Zimbabwe underscores the sense of urgency which the people and Governments of southern Africa continue to attach to the ending of apartheid in South Africa I hope this session will strengthen all efforts towards a negotiated solution to this long-standing problem and the early end of a system that has cost far too much suffering.
ITEM 5 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ORGANIZATION OF THE SESSION (decision 44/408 of 13 November 1989)
The president: On the basis of the practice of previous special sessions, I should like to propose that the Chairmen of the Main Committees and the Vice-Presidents of the forty-fourth session serve in the same capacity at the sixteenth special session.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that proposal? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Accordingly I should like to inform the Assembly that the following Chairmen are present at this special sessions the Chairman of the Special Political Committees Mr. Guennadi I. Oudovenko of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic; the Chairman of the Second Committeees Mr. Ahmed Ghezal of
(The President) Tunisia the Chairman of the Third Committee: Mr. Paul Desire Kabore of Burkina Faso, the Chairman of the Fourth Committee: Mr. Robert Van Lierop of Vanuatu, and the Chairman of the Fifth Committee: Mr. Ahmad Fathi Al-Masri of the Syrian Arab Republic.
On the basis of the practice at previous special sessions, it is proposed that the Chairmen of the Main Committees who are not present at this special session may be replaced by members of their delegations. Accordingly the following replacements have been communicated to the Secretariat: for the Chairman of the First Committee: Mr. Andres Aguilar of Venezuela; and for the Chairman of the Sixth Committee: Mr. Thomas Hajnoczi of Austria.
The following States will serve as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at this special session: Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, China, Congo, Costa Rica, France, Gambia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Morocco, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Sudan, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Zimbabwe.
I should like to remind members that by its decision 44/408 of
13 November 1989 the Assembly recommended that an ad hoc committee of the whole of the sixteenth special session should be established. The task of the ad hoc committee of the whole would be to hear non-governmental organizations and individuals having a special interest in the question of apartheid and to prepare a draft declaration to be considered by the Assembly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that that proposal is adopted by the Assembly?
Concerning the election of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the sixteenth special session, who will also be a full member of the General Committee, following consultations it has been proposed that The Honourable Dame Ann Hercus of New Zealand be elected Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole.
As I hear no objection, I declare The Honourable Dame Ann Hercus elected by acclamation Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the sixteenth special session. I congratulate her on behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf and wish her well in the important and onerous responsibilities that she has just assumed.
The General Committee of the sixteenth special session of the General Assembly has now been fully constituted.
In accordance with General Assembly decision 44/408 of 13 November 1989, it is proposed that the representative of the national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity be permitted to participate in the discussion in the plenary Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Also in accordance with General Assembly decision 44/408 of 13 November 1989, it is proposed that non-governmental organizations and individuals having a special interest in the question of apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa be heard in the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole.
May I take it that that proposal also is acceptable to the Assembly?
The PRESIDENT? In view of the large number of representatives who have already inscribed their names on the list of speakers, it is proposed that the schedule of plenary meetings be from 9.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. for the morning meetings, and for the afternoon meetings from 3 p.m. until the list of speakers for that meeting is exhausted.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Furthermore, in accordance with General Assembly decision 44/408 of 13 November 1989, it is proposed that owing to time constraints the length of the statements, with the exception of those by Heads of State or Government, be limited to 15 minutes. A white flashing light will be activated at the rostrum to let speakers know that the 15-minute limit has elapsed.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I might add that if the white flas/nlug light does not stop speakers from continuing past the 15-minute limit, I may remove them bodily.
ITEM 6 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The PRESIDENT: The provisional agenda of the sixteenth special session appears in document A/S-16/1. In order to expedite our work the Assembly may wish to adopt the provisional agenda in plenary meeting without referring it to the General Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: May I take it, then, that the General Assembly adopts the provisional agenda as it appears in document A/S-16/1?
It was so decided.
ADDRESS BY MR. KENNETH D. KAUNDA, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now hear an address by the President of the Republic of Zambia.
Mr. Kenneth D. Kaunda, President of the Republic of Zambia, was escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly I have the honour and privilege of welcoming to the United Nations the President of the Republic of Zambia, His Excellency Mr. Kenneth D. Kaunda, and of inviting him to address the Assembly.
President KAUNDA: It is a matter of distinct honour and great pride for me to see a distinguished son of Africa presiding over this special session of the General Assembly. Your country, Nigeria, Mr. President, together with the other front-line States, is in the forefront of the struggle against apartheid. May your presidency see us through to a successful conclusion of our deliberations.
This session has been specially convened to address the vexing problem of the evil system of apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa. In
(President Kaunda) this regard, I wish to take this opportunity to express my profound gratitude to the General Assembly for its decision to convene this special session. It gives the international community an opportunity once again to focus on the issue of apartheid, that abominable and despicable system in South Africa under which millions of people throughout the region continue to suffer and die.
When I last addressed the Assembly, in 1987, I reaffirmed Zambia's faith in the United Nations. I wish once again to reiterate that faith and to pledge our continued support for the purposes and principles of the United Nations. We continue to believe that the United Nations provides the necessary - nay, indispensable - forum for the peaceful resolution of international conflicts and disputes, as well as for the promotion of international co-operation and economic and social development.
Recent developments in international relations have enhanced the image and credibility of the United Nations as an instrument for the preservation and promotion of international peace and security. Far from the United Nations being seen as a club for endless discussions, there is now renewed public confidence in our Organization. This welcome development has been due in part to a number of significant successes achieved by the world body through the collective efforts of its Member States and the active leadership provided by the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar. Let me commend him most sincerely for his determined efforts to bring peace to conflict areas of the world and, in particular, for his special role in the implementation of the United Nations settlement plan for Namibia.
The period before the elections in Namibia was difficult and challenging. Despite the initial setbacks arising from practical deficiencies in logistical support, the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG), under the firm
(President Kaunda) leadership of the Secretary-General, performed commendably. We pray for the peaceful and successful transition of Namibia to national independence so that the people of that country may soon freely determine their own destiny and prepare for the challenges of nation-building and development.
The world is currently witnessing dramatic political changes with far-reaching ramifications. Indeed, the winds of change are blowing throughout the world. Super-Power rapprochement has produced a force which is breaking down barriers erected to block the winds of change. These changes are significant, for they reflect the noble ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular the promotion of international peace and security and the realization of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms as embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It is a matter of profound regret that the winds of change have yet to blow in the direction of South Africa. South Africa will need its own perestroika before the winds of change begin to blow in its direction. True to its character, the apartheid regime continues to maintain its campaign of disinformation in order to pre-empt the concerted international effort to ensure the eradication of its system of apartheid.
There is no need for me to define or explain in detail the nature of apartheid. Its reality is well known and has been extensively documented world wide. Suffice it for me to say that apartheid is based on the denial of that fundamental bond that unites all humanity, namely, that all of us, despite the various races to which we happily belong, are in fact equal children of the same God in whose image we are all created.
Nothing better illustrates that denial of human equality than the policy of the South African Government both to exclude the black majority from the exercise of political power and to use that power to oppress and exploit them purely for the reason that they are black.
As the General Assembly is well aware, the South African Government has, a matter of official policy, created artificial divisions within its society based on race and has used those divisions as a basis for granting or denying political, economic and social rights and opportunities, with the non-white population being denied those rights and opportunities that the white population takes for granted, whether they concern land, housing, education or, above all, the vote.
A social system based on the denial of basic human rights and extreme inequality would inevitably give rise to problems anywhere in the world. Where that denial of rights and that inequality are artificially based on racial grounds,
serious conflicts are bound to arise sooner rather than later.
That is the predicament in which South Africa finds itself today. The tragedy is that the crisis has been self-imposed by the Government itself.
The Assembly has rightly characterized and condemned apartheid as a crime against humanity. For us in southern Africa apartheid represents State terrorism and is the source of the existing tension, unrest and conflict in the region. It has assumed a regional dimension and its spill-over effects have revealed themselves in the form of acts of destabilization against neighbouring and other independent States in southern Africa. Such acts have had serious consequences for the peace, stability, security and development of the region.
A report commissioned by the United Nations Steering Committee on the United Nations Plan of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 has quantified the cost of destabilization. The number of people who have died in the region as a result of war has reached 1.5 million, of which over half are children under five years of age. The largest number of deaths, 900,000, have occurred in Mozambique. Angola takes second place with 500,000 people dead. In addition, 50 per cent of the populations of Mozambique and Angola have been displaced from their homes or rely on food support for their survival. The number of those wounded, maimed, mutilated and malnourished runs into millions.
In terms of economic losses the story is equally alarming. The total regional cost of destabilization is now estimated to be running at around $10 billion a year, or of the order of 40 per cent of the achieved regional gross domestic product. Over the period 1980 to 1988, the cost is estimated at $60 billion - far in excess of the total aid received by the region.
The independent African countries in southern Africa and the liberation movements in South Africa have always been ready and willing to engage in genuine
(President Kaunda) negotiations with the South African regime. It will be recalled that for 50 years the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) engaged in peaceful protest against injustice and resorted to armed struggle only after it was banned in I960. That was because all that time the black majority hoped that the white minority would in a reasonably short time see sense and create a political environment in which all South Africans, irrespective of their colour, would be allowed to participate fully in the affairs of their country.
Alas, these peaceful protests by the oppressed people of South Africa were met with brutal repression, mass arrests and imprisonment. With such vicious reaction by the South African authorities, how, we wonder, were the people of South Africa to liberate their motherland? For the black South Africans it was a choice between perpetual bondage in which there was no difference between life and death and recourse to armed resistance. As one black victim of apartheid recently told me, the choice for the black leadership was to die either on their knees as slaves of apartheid or on their feet as its opponents.
Our readiness to negotiate with successive South African Governments was first documented in the Lusaka Manifesto on Southern Africa, adopted in 1969. In that Manifesto the leaders of eastern and central Africa decided to engage the South African authorities in serious negotiations to bring about a peaceful end to apartheid. To us, the Lusaka Manifesto has over the last two decades remained a reference point in the struggle against apartheid. Over this period many other ideas have evolved, all of which have been aimed at drawing up a broad-based document which would serve as a blueprint for bringing about the desired change in South Africa.
The changing circumstances in South Africa spurred the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to conclude that a conjuncture of circumstances existed which, if there were a demonstrable readiness and willingness on the part of the Pretoria regime to engage genuinely and seriously in negotiations, could create the possibility of ending apartheid through negotiations. Such an eventuality could be an expression of the long-standing preference of the majority of the people of South Africa to
arrive at a political settlement.
It was against this background that the OAU Declaration on the question of South Africa was adopted in Harare last August. As the Assembly knows only too well, this Declaration has already been adopted by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I wish to state emphatically that this Declaration is the single most important international document ever elaborated on the question of South Africa since the Lusaka Manifesto.
I now wish to outline the main elements of the Harare Declaration, which is divided into five parts.
Part I contains the preamble setting out the principles generally recognized and accepted by the international community. This part of the Declaration, inter alia, recognizes the reality that permanent peace and stability in southern Africa can be achieved only when the system of apartheid in South Africa has been eradicated and South Africa transformed into a united, democratic and non-racial society.
Part II of the Declaration is a statement of principles for the establishment of a new constitutional order. This part stresses, among other things, that all South Africans shall have the right to participate in the Government and administration of the country on the basis of universal suffrage, exercised through one person, one vote, under a common voters roll, and that all shall enjoy universally recognized human rights, freedoms and civil liberties protected under an entrenched Bill of Rights. This part of the Declaration also stipulates that a democratic South Africa shall respect the rights, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries and shall pursue a policy of peace, friendship and mutually beneficial co-operation with all peoples.
It is important to stress here that, as the Declaration states, agreement by South Africa to the principles enunciated in this section of the Declaration will constitute the foundation for an internationally accepted solution which will enable South Africa to take its rightful place as an equal partner among the community of nations.
Part III of the Declaration contains a list of what South Africa should do in order to create the necessary climate for negotiations. These are the pre-conditions for negotiations that we have repeatedly stated. They require that South Africa should., first, release all political prisoners and detainees unconditionally and refrain from imposing any restrictions on them; secondly, lift all bans and restrictions on all proscribed and restricted organizations and persons; thirdly, remove all troops from the townships; fourthly, end the state of emergency and repeal all legislation, including the Internal Security Act, designed to circumscribe political activity; and, fifthly, cease all political trials and political executions.
Let me stress here that, while we welcome the recent release of eight political prisoners by South Africa, that act in itself is inadequate. South Africa must therefore unconditionally release all political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, so that they can participate in the negotiations for a free and democratic South Africa. As the Declaration states, the fulfilment of the measures I have outlined earlier should precede the negotiations.
Part IV of the Declaration contains guidelines to the process of negotiations based, inter alia, on the followings first, discussions should take place between the liberation movements and the South African regime to achieve the suspension of hostilities on both sides by agreeing to a mutually binding cease-fire; second, negotiations should proceed to establish the basis for the adoption of a new Constitution by agreeing, among other things, on the principles enunciated in the Declaration; third, having achieved agreement on the principles, the parties should then negotiate the necessary mechanism for drawing up a new Constitution; fourth, the parties should define and agree on the role to be played by the international community in ensuring a successful transition to a democratic order; fifth, the parties should agree on the formation of an interim government to supervise the process of drawing up and adopting a new Constitution, govern and administer the country, and effect the transition to a democratic order, including the holding of elections; sixth, after the adoption of the new Constitution, all armed hostilities would be deemed to have formally terminated; and, seventh, the international community, for its part, would lift the sanctions that have been imposed against apartheid South Africa.
The final part of the Declaration sets out the programme of action on the necessary measures to be taken by the international community, measures which, in the interim, before a climate for negotiations is established, would be necessary to secure South Africa's co-operation. One important measure is to intensify the campaign for mandatory and comprehensive sanctions against apartheid South Africa and, in this regard, to work for the imposition of a mandatory oil embargo and for the full observance by all countries of the arms embargo.
In our view, the Harare Declaration provides a realistic plan for bringing apartheid to a peaceful end and for replacing it by democracy. The international
community should support negotiations along these lines in order to help bring democracy to South Africa and peace to our region. For our part, we have already started to encourage dialogue by supporting efforts by the liberation movements to meet their compatriots of all races and political orientations from South Africa in order to exchange views and narrow the gulfs that currently separate them.
Last August, in anticipation of South Africa's good conduct in Namibia, I took the opportunity to meet the then Acting State President of South Africa, Mr. F.W. De Klerk. As I have publicly indicated, I found him to be an honest man. However, I am not sure whether he will be able to analyse correctly the situation in his country in the context of the aspirations of the black population. I am also not sure that, assuming he succeeds in analysing the situation correctly, he will be able to reach the right conclusion and implement it. The internal forces opposed to change that he faces are quite formidable.
The five-year plan announced by the National Party earlier this year illustrates the dilemma of South Africa: its inability to face the reality. The plan does not address the issue of apartheid or the question of power relations. It is premised on group rights rather than individual rights. It therefore perpetuates the very elements - basic elements - of apartheid that we are trying to see eliminated. The world should ignore this plan because it does not address the central issue, democracy, which is really what the black grievance is all about. The rest of the matters are only consequences of this.
As I have already stated, we welcome the recent release of some political prisoners but, as I have said elsewhere, one political swallow does not make a political summer. In the meantime, and until South Africa agrees to meaningful
negotiations leading to the establishment of democracy, sanctions should continue
(President Kaunda) and be tightened. This is the only realistic way of dealing with apartheid. In this regard, let me reiterate Zambia’s strong condemnation of the recent arrangements to reschedule South Africa’s external debt.
There can be no peace or stability in southern Africa until apartheid is eradicated. The oppressed people of South Africa are doing everything possible to end apartheid. In this struggle against injustice they need the unqualified support of the international community. Ib this end I wish to make this appeal to the Member States of the United Nations? until South Africa complies with the resolutions and decisions of this Organization, the international community should step up its isolation of the racist regime. In this respect, I appeal to the countries violating the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa to cease their collaboration. The collaboration of States and organizations with South Africa in the military and nuclear fields has contributed to the instability in southern Africa.
Similarly, I wish to appeal for strict observance of the oil embargo against South Africa. The sale of oil to racist South Africa strengthens its military capacity to strike at any part of the region. The United Nations should work for the tightening of the oil embargo against South Africa.
We also make a special appeal to the international community to support the peace initiatives now under way in Angola and Mozambique. In this regard, we call on the United States of America to cease all its support for UNITA in Angola so that the peace plan initiated by the Angolan Government may yield fruit. South Africa must end its support for the RENAMO bandits, who have caused so much suffering among the innocent people in Mozambique.
Our commitment to the attainment of peace and stability in southern Africa cannot be compromised. We remain fully committed to the eradication of apartheid in South Africa, so that the people of that troubled country may exercise their inalienable rights to self-determination and nationhood in a democratic and non-racial South Africa.
Let me now conclude my address. The situation in South Africa and the international climate are now both favourable to the peaceful ending of apartheid. The question that remains is: Will South Africa respond to the call of the international community to end apartheid and allow democracy and peace to prevail in that country? It remains to be seen.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Zambia for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. Kenneth D. Kaunda, President of the Republic of Zambia, was escorted from the General Assembly Hall.
ADDRESS BY MR. ROBERT GABRIEL MUGABE, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE
The PRESIDENT; The Assembly will now hear an address by the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Robert Gabriel Mugabe, President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, was escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to the United Nations the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, His Excellency Mr. Robert Gabriel Mugabe, and to invite him to address the Assembly.
President MUGABE: Mr. President, the Zimbabwe delegation has had an opportunity to convey to you its felicitations upon your election to preside over the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly. I cannot, however, let this important occasion pass without expressing my own delight at seeing you preside over this special session. We from the front-line States have, over the years, worked closely with your great country, Nigeria, to achieve the very same objectives to whose attainment this special session intends to contribute.
I also wish to take this opportunity publicly to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, and his United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) team in Namibia, on a job well done. The peoples of Africa, especially those of us living in the southern half of the continent, feel greatly indebted to him for the steady hand he has shown during the last eight historic and often tempestuous months in Namibia. We now look forward to his piloting the "Steamship Namibia" safely into independence harbour during the
remaining part of the voyage.
Today we are witnessing extraordinary developments on the world stage, changes only the wildest of dreamers amongst us could have dared to predict. But, as the Berlin walls of this world come tumbling down, in apartheid South Africa high-voltage electric fences are going up on its borders with us. The fences are being erected to protect apartheid. Forward bases continue to be constructed or upgraded for aggressive purposes, and new dissident battalions are being put together in readiness for the destabilization of neighbours, including the soon-to-be Republic of Namibia. And while elsewhere the peoples are on the march towards a new order of greater freedom and cohesion, in South Africa apartheid continues to divide, imprison and kill wantonly, with killer gangs on the increase.
African leaders meeting in Harare in August this year provided Mr. De Klerk with a navigational manual, called the Harare Declaration, by which to found freedom, justice and progress. This manifesto for peaceful negotiations in South Africa has been on the table for the last four months. Since then it has been endorsed and adopted by the non-aligned countries and welcomed by the Commonwealth nations in Kuala Lumpur. It is our hope that the special session will throw its weight behind this historic document in favour of peace.
The special session has been called to address apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa. This is a timely theme, as some among us might be confused by recent noises about reform into believing that apartheid is dead or dying. The reverse is the reality. Apartheid is very much alive. True, some petty apartheid regulations and practices that unduly interfere with the running of a modern economy and unnecessarily tarnish the self-image and political control of the minority regime have been modified or repealed. Yet the very bedrock on which white minority supremacy is built, as embodied in the Group Areas Act, which is based on the Land Acts of 1913 and 1936, the Population Registration Act, the Bantu Education Act and the bantustan policy, has hardly been addressed. And each time De Klerk has been quizzed about these core pieces of legislation, he has hedged and ducked. He talks confusedly about his commitment to group rights and maintaining "our own" schools and so on. But these are well-known code words for maintaining apartheid. He is opposed to the democratic principle of majority rule, which he dismisses as "majority domination", and argues for "minority veto", which he ironically calls "power sharing". Mr. De Klerk's signals have been equivocal. While he has released some eight prominent political prisoners, Nelson Mandela and hundreds of other political activists are still incarcerated. He meets with some Church leaders and yet shuns leaders of the liberation movements. It has been acts of deception right through.
How can we trust South Africa when five years after the signing of the Nkomati agreement it has not respected this solemn and binding treaty and continues to sponsor RENAMO and its murderous and destructive activities in Mozambique? Since 1980 the physical destruction caused by South Africa in the region - according to a report published in October this year by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, entitled "South African Destabilization: The Economic Cost of Front-line Resistance to Apartheid" - has been estimated at over $60 billion. In that period thousands of people in the region have lost their lives as a result of deliberate decisions taken in Pretoria. Between 1980 and 1988 thousands more of the people of Angola and Mozambique have been forced to seek refuge in other countries or have been displaced internally. And, as the last United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) report on the region has shown, nearly a million little Angolans and Mozambicans under the age of five have died needlessly, since 1980 because of the destabilization activities of South Africa.
Recently we have read that herds of elephants have been wiped out in southern Angola by UNITA at the instigation of South Africa. This exermination campaign has turned the area into what one observer has described as a veritable "sterile lifeless green desert". Besides the extermination of animals, there has been the assassination of political opponents by murder squads. Africa is astounded by the mute reaction of some countries, especially Western countries, to the recent revelations of how South Africa abused its diplomatic bag to deliver explosives to murder its opponents in foreign countries. We are sure that if this had been done by some poor developing country there would have been an immediate outcry in the international media, and indeed reprisals might well have been taken against that
country.
While to date developments towards the independence of Namibia have been quite encouraging, we need, however, to view these developments in their proper perspective. South Africa did not wake up one morning and, like Saul on the road to Damascus, see the light and undergo a sudden conversion. South Africa was forced out of Namibia by pressure. The war in Namibia proved too costly in financial and political terms. South Africa was badly beaten at Cuito Cuanavale in southern Angola and its mounting casualty list had become politically unacceptable. Furthermore, international sanctions, especially the accion of the international banks, had adversely affected its financial position. To this must be added the resistance inside Namibia, plus the pressure exerted by democratic forces in South Africa itself, whose total effect forced Pretoria to withdraw south of the Orange River.
It would be disastrous if we were ever to entertain the illusion that Pretoria had undergone a sudden conversion and therefore should not be put under pressure any more. If anything, more pressure may well be needed in the future to keep Pretoria moving forward, however reluctantly. Some of the pressures that produced the conditions favouring the Namibian independence process have already been undermined.
To begin with, and thanks to Israel's shameful collaboration with Pretoria, it now appears that Pretoria has regained its supremacy in the skies over southern Africa through its acquisition of the Jericho-type intermediate-range strategic missiles, which are capable of hitting all our capitals. Thus the strategic gains of Cuito Cuanavale have been negated by Israeli support. Israel has chosen to travel such a low road by propping up the defences of racism. Secondly,
international bankers have, unfortunately, relaxed pressure on Pretoria by agreeing
(President Mugabe)
to reschedule its foreign debt. Finally, some powerful friends of South Africa are already working hard to have existing sanctions measures lifted and are using the powerful media machines to whitewash apartheid and present every minor adjustment by De Klerk as if it were a fundamental political reform.
The challenges facing the General Assembly at this special session are formidable indeed. It must define the stage that we are at in our struggle against apartheid. It must restate our goal in South Africa. Most important, it must show how we can get there. We believe that the Harare Declaration has a well-thought-out position to guide us all towards a peaceful, just and prosperous South Africa. I therefore ask this body to endorse and adopt the principles outlined in that document. That document invites the United Nations urgently to examine the monitoring mechanisms in force, with a view to making sanctions more effective. There are too many loopholes in the present monitoring mechanisms, as revealed by the recent report of the Group of Eminent Church Persons on the activities of the transnational corporations in South Africa and Namibia. The Committee against Apartheid must lead the way in this task. As a member of that Committee, Zimbabwe intends to play a constructive role in this regard. Our call for additional sanctions against Pretoria is motivated by a desire to bring South Africa to the negotiating table and keep it there until apartheid is eradicated.
The new South African leader must clearly demonstrate that what he is up to is not the preservation of apartheid in a repackaged and rearranged form. He must now set the country on a meaningful course, which can be brought about only through negotiations between Pretoria and the genuine representatives of the South African people. Only the commencement of such negotiations can be considered a decisive first step towards change in South Africa. But the negotiations cannot begin under conditions in which the state of emergency and associated restrictions on political activity continue - conditions in which political parties remain banned and in which Pretoria employs assassination squads to eliminate opponents of apartheid.
South Africa must, therefore, first create a climate conducive to the commencement
(President Mugabe) of negotiations, and this requires at least the unconditional release of all political prisoners and detainees and an end to the practice of imposing restr ictions.
The neighbours of South Africa are closely watching its actions in Namibia - in particular, its attitude in the negotiations for the enclave of Walvis Bay. Equally important to their judgement is South Africa's continued support for RENAMO and UNITA. This is the litmus test by which we shall make up our minds whether or not Mr. De Klerk wants peace and normalization in our region. Africa has shown its preference for peaceful negotiations in resolving conflicts in southern Africa. The rest is up to Pretoria. It is by its actions, and not by its words, that we shall judge Pretoria. For now, there has been too little of the former but too much of the latter - talk, talk, and more talk. In the meantime, we ask, in the name of common humanity and morality, for the General Assembly's support for those struggling for decency and freedom in South Africa. It is my hope that we shall get this support from all representatives.
The PRESIDENT; On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. Robert G. Mugabe, President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, was escorted from the General Assembly Hall.
AGENDA ITEM 7
APARTHEID AND ITS DESTRUCTIVE CONSEQUENCES IN SOUTHERN AFRICA
The PRESIDENT; Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to remind members that, by its decision 44/408 of 13 November 1989, the Assembly recommended that the list of speakers in the debate should be closed today at 6 p.m.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt this recommendation? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names in the list as soon as possible. ADDRESS BY MR. VASIL TUPURKOVSKI, MEMBER OF THE PRESIDENCY OF THE SOCIALIST FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA
The PRESIDENT; The Assembly will now hear a statement by the Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Mr. Vasil Tupurkovski, Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, was escorted to the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT; I have great pleasure in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Vasil Tupurkovski and inviting him to address the General Assembly.
Mr. TUPURKOVSKI (Yugoslavia): We are pleased to see you, Sir - the representative of non-aligned Nigeria, which has always been in the forefront of the struggle against apartheid, and a man of vast diplomatic and political experience - presiding over this extremely important special session of the General Assembly on apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa. Let me, therefore, express my delegation's conviction that under your wise guidance the General Assembly will succeed in achieving its goals at this session.
The fact that this special session of the United Nations General Assembly has been convened is telling proof of the gravity of the situation facing the countries of southern Africa and of the importance that the international community attaches to the eradication of apartheid. The system of racial discrimination and segregation that persists in South Africa despite the long-standing efforts of the world Organization and other forums causes the resentment and indignation of the entire international community. More than four decades after the adoption of the
(Mr. Tupurkovski, Yugoslavia) Universal Declaration of Human Rights the Government of South Africa continues systematically to turn a deaf ear to the calls of the international community to guarantee to the South African majority population even the basic human rights.
It is therefore obvious that the vast majority of the international community consider this special session of the General Assembly a unique opportunity to launch broad-based action with the aim of bringing pressure to bear on the regime in Pretoria to put an end to the obnoxious system of apartheid. Yugoslavia - the current Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries - along with all other non-aligned countries, considers the policies and practices of apartheid an insult to human dignity. Apartheid cannot be reformed and must be unconditionally and immediately eliminated.
Today, at the threshold of the twenty-first century, when mankind is making efforts to overcome the accumulated antagonisms of the past and create the pre-conditions for entering a new era of co-operation and prosperity, the policies and practices of apartheid are an anachronism that harks back to the darkest pages of human history.
The contrast between the existence of apartheid and the current trends in international relations, characterized by abandonment of confrontation in favour of the emerging processes of understanding and dialogue, is obvious. The overall positive international climate of the past two years has been reflected also in developments in southern Africa. The process of the termination of the colonial occupation of Namibia by South Africa has been almost completed and we look forward to seeing independent Namibia take its rightful place in the community of nations. Various important actions have been initiated to alleviate the grave consequences of South Africa's policy of destabilization in the region have been initiated. Unfortunately, these dynamic and positive developments have so far met with no adequate response in South Africa itself. In such conditions, the paradox of the persistence of apartheid, which is the root cause of the long-lasting, deep crisis in southern Africa and which poses a constant threat to international security, is more striking than ever before.
Although there has been a change of leadership in South Africa, and in spite of its attempts to create an impression that it is ready to undertake major reforms, no concrete steps have yet been taken to indicate that there exists genuine readiness on the part of the regime in Pretoria to put an end to apartheid. The release after long captivity of a number of political prisoners, prominent fighters against apartheid, is a positive sign, but it is by no means
sufficient proof of the commitment to fundamental changes.
There is abundant evidence that the situation in South Africa remains basically unchanged. The state of emergency has practically turned into a permanent state of affairs. The activities of anti-apartheid organizations, primarily the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) and the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), are still banned. The media are subject to strict censure. The majority population is still subjected to the most brutal repression and deprived of its fundamental political and human rights. The magnitude and severe consequences of the continuance of such practices are also demonstrated by the fact that the Security Council, the General Assembly and other bodies of the United Nations are constantly seized of this situation and that this special session has been convened.
While trying to convince the international community of its readiness for genuine change, in order to reduce the international pressure to which it is exposed, the regime in Pretoria continues to employ all the instruments that ensure the maintenance of its domination over the majority and strict racial segregation within the society. But, despite all its efforts to curb the opposition the racist regime faces ever stronger resistance at home and increasing isolation at the international level. The growing resistance testifies to the determination of the majority population, despite the sacrifices it has to make, to preserve its dignity and fulfil its legitimate right to self-determination and to live in freedom. The national liberation movements, the ANC and PAC, supported by trade unions, those in religious circles and part of the white population, continue their just struggle for the complete elimination of apartheid and the establishment of a new system in South Africa based on democracy and respect for fundamental human rights.
The efforts of the international community aimed at bringing about the final elimination of the policy and practices of apartheid have a long history. To that end numerous resolutions and declarations have been adopted by the United Nations, and international conventions have been concluded. Yet the policy and practice of apartheid still persists.
The non-aligned countries have for decades been in the forefront of all activities aimed at eradicating apartheid. At their ninth summit Conference the non-aligned countries reiterated that one of their priority objectives was the urgent and complete elimination of this evil of the present-day world. At its meeting in Belgrade the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries endorsed in its entirety the Declaration of the Organization of African Unity Ad Hoc Committee on Southern Africa adopted at Harare last August.
This document constitutes a platform for the negotiations between the majority population and the regime in Pretoria, which should lead to the transformation of South Africa into a non-racial society based on democracy and freedom. Therefore it deserves to be fully supported by the entire international community at this special session of the General Assembly. The fact that the liberation movement of South Africa, the vast majority of its population, the whole of Africa and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries have rallied behind this platform of peace and negotiation should be understood as being of paramount importance. It is now the turn of the regime in Pretoria to respond positively to this constructive approach, particularly since the General Assembly has unanimously agreed, at its current forty-fourth session, on the basic conditions for the opening of the process of negotiation, that is: the lifting of the state of emergency the immediate and unconditional release of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners and
detainees; the lifting of the ban on all individuals and political organizations opposing apartheid and the repeal of restrictions on the press; withdrawal of the troops from black townships; and the cessation of all political trials and political executions. Only after the implementation of these measures will it be possible to ensure the necessary conditions for initiating a genuine process of negotiation between the racist regime in Pretoria and the representatives of the majority population.
Yugoslavia, together with other non-aligned countries, believes that the realistic basis for this programme of action aimed at reaching a political solution to the apartheid problem deserves full endorsement by the international community as a whole. Therefore, there is no doubt that the role of the United Nations in this respect is of crucial importance. That is why the non-aligned countries consider that the current special session of the General Assembly provides a unique opportunity for the international community to bring pressure to bear on South Africa, through concerted action, to accept the process of negotiation leading to the definite and complete elimination of apartheid.
Yugoslavia, in its own name and as Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, wishes to underline once again that, for the sake of the people of South Africa and peace and stability in the region, in Africa and in the world as a whole, the abhorrent policy of apartheid must be unconditionally and completely eliminated. We are encouraged by the fact that this opinion is shared by the vast majority of the Members of the United Nations.
However, we believe that until the complete elimination of apartheid becomes a reality it is essential to continue to pursue all the efforts aimed at intensifying pressure on the regime in Pretoria. Past experience has shown that that is the
(Mr. Tupurkovski, Yugoslavia) only way to exert influence on the ruling circles in South Africa. In this context, we are still of the view that comprehensive sanctions remain an important option of the international community in its endeavour to put an end to the policy of apartheid, which poses a constant threat to international peace and security.
The general climate of relaxation in international relations and particularly the recent developments in southern Africa provide perhaps a historic opportunity to launch the process of the definite elimination of the system of apartheid, rightly proclaimed a crime against humanity.
The United Nations has a responsibility to do its utmost to ensure that this opportunity is not missed and that the people of South Africa at long last realize and enjoy their inalienable right to live in a society based on equality, without racial segregation, and that a united and democratic South Africa joins the world community of equal nations. The non-aligned countries, for their part, will continue to do whatever is in their power to see that this goal may be achieved as soon as possible.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly I wish to thank the Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. Tupurkovski, Member of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, was escorted from the rostrum.
Mr. GHAFAR (Malaysia): It is indeed a pleasure to greet you, Mr. President, and to pay a tribute to you on your skilful stewardship of the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly. It gives the Malaysian delegation added pleasure to see you, the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, presiding over this special session, which is indeed the crowning achievement of the work of the Special Committee, of which you have been the driving force and source of inspiration.
The convening of this special session of the General Assembly on apartheid is testimony to the international community's continuing strong support for the campaign against the inhumane system that prevails in South Africa. It is a demonstration of our protest against the violation of the political and human rights of the black majority people of South Africa. It is our indictment of the minority racist regime for treating its majority population as a distinct deprived
sub-class in their own homeland. It is, above all, an expression of the firm
(Mr. Ghafar, Malaysia) support of the international community for the oppressed people of South Africa in their struggle for the restitution of their God-given rights.
We are gathered here today to remind ourselves that in spite of the international community's efforts over these past four decades this evil system of apartheid remains unabated in South Africa; in fact it has become entrenched in its laws, its regulations and its mores. There is not the slightest doubt that this corrupt system has proved to be far more tenacious than expected. It has proved to be a far more nimble adversary than we had reckoned with and, like a chameleon, far more adaptive to the changing situation.
The apologists of the system have made much about the "positive changes" that are taking place in South Africa. They claim that these changes, or the so-called reforms, reflect the changing nature of the regime and therefore would augur well for the transformation or evolution of the system. They further claim that the regime is responsive to the need for change and as such should be encouraged to effect the desired transformation of South African society without the necessity for tougher sanctions. Indeed, they argue that increased sanctions would hurt the black majority much more than the white minority, for whom they are intended. They seem to intercede on behalf of the Pretoria regime when they argue for more time to be given to the regime to work out the country's complex political and social arrangements.
In the view of my Government these appeals for understanding are misplaced. Concern or sympathy should be placed not on the side of those who perpetuate the evil system of apartheid but on its victims, who are dehumanized by it. Malaysia fully shares the view that the few changes that have taken place or are being effected in South Africa are much too little to make any significant impact on the
lives of the black population. They are not even cosmetic in nature, since
(Mr. Ghafar, Malaysia) they do not address the question of freedom, which the people of South Africa rightly and justly deserve as a basis for a durable solution to the problem.
I dare to say that these changes are a clever ploy which represents nothing short of a tactical shift in South Africa's overall strategy to blunt the thrust of the international campaign against apartheid. They are intended to take the wind out of our sails. To all intents and purposes they serve to deflect the international fury against the policies and practices of apartheid. By diverting attention to the purported measures of reform, the régime hopes to create a semblance of confidence in the minds of the international community that it is at least mindful of the latter's repeated calls for a change of policy.
My Government is fully aware of this latest strategy of pacification by South Africa. It is therefore my Government's submission that we must never allow South Africa or its apologists to change the issue or deflect the thrust of the debate on apartheid. We know full well the extent of the destructive effects of the Colour Bar Act, the Native Lands Act, the Group Areas Act, the Population Registration Act, the policy of bantustans, and the separate educational system. These institutions of apartheid remain intact, with no sign of their being repealed or replaced with more humane laws.
The truth of the matter is that the so-called reforms in South Africa are merely a facade to mask a continuing system of exploitation and segregation based on race. There has been no fundamental change at the core of the apartheid system. This special session must tell the South African regime clearly and bluntly that apartheid cannot be refurbished, modified or transformed. In short, it must be totally and absolutely eliminated. The white racist regime in South
Africa must be ostracized and condemned.
In the face of the stubbornness of the Pretoria regime it is imperative that the international community intensify the campaign for the dismantling of the evil system. It is clear that the political, diplomatic and economic pressures being exerted by the international community have had a significant impact on Pretoria. This is particularly true in respect of sanctions imposed against the régime.,
Mr. Jaya (Brunei Darussalam), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The various reports that have been prepared on the subject, including those by the United Nations, the Commonwealth and various international organizations, all indicate that sanctions have hurt the South African regime and have been instrumental in compelling it to make the concessions that we have seen, including those on the question of Namibia.
However, with the connivance of some of its trading partners it has been partly successful in frustrating the internationally imposed sanctions, particularly on oil, on imports of which it is highly dependent. It has also been rather successful in getting round the arms embargo, again with the collusion of certain arms-producing countries. What is particularly disturbing is the report that there has been increasing military collaboration between South Africa and a few of these countries, including collaboration on the development of advanced military aircraft, submarines, missiles and, possibly, nuclear weapons. These trends must be arrested immediately if we are to ensure the overall impact of sanctions in the campaign against apartheid.
There should be greater vigilance on the part of the international community, particularly the United Nations, on these circumventions of sanctions against South Africa. Breaches of sanctions should be monitored and publicized and the violators asked to answer for their actions. In this regard, there is merit in the proposal to expand the work of the Committee of the Security Council established under resolution 421 (1977) so that it may monitor more actively breaches of the arms embargo against the Pretoria regime. Among other things, the Committee should be given more teeth, for instance by the establishment as a matter of priority of a monitoring group to assist it in its work. It should also conduct more frequent hearings, including public ones, as has been suggested by some members of the
Committee.
If the international campaign against apartheid is to be successful there must be a series of measures covering the short and medium terms as well as the long term. In the short and medium terms, efforts should be focused on ensuring full co-operation and compliance by the international community with the current body of sanctions measures. At the same time, greater efforts should be made to cover all existing loopholes.
In this connection, I should like to refer to the agreement reached by the leaders of the Commonwealth at their summit meeting in Kuala Lumpur in October 1989. In a comprehensive statement on southern Africa, the Commonwealth leaders, with the notable exception of one, stressed that this was not the time for any relaxation of existing sanctions and pressures. With the exception of that one member, they agreed that such measures should be tightened, and decided, inter alia "To develop new forms of financial pressure on the Pretoria regime by seeking to intensify and extend financial sanctions, in particular by calling on all relevant banks and financial institutions to impose tougher conditions on day-to-day trade financing, specifically through reducing the maximum credit terms to 90 days; and calling on relevant Governments to make trade credits harder to get by taking South Africa 'off cover' with official government agencies for official trade credit and insurance purposes;". (A/44/672, para. 10 (a))
The Commonwealth Heads of Government, with the exception of the one member, also agreed to establish
"an independent agency to review and report on South Africa's international financial links on a regular basis, and to gather and publicize factual information on financial flows to and policies towards South Africa." (ibid., para. 11)
My Government believes that only a sustained and co-ordinated effort on the part of the international community to bring pressure to bear on the Pretoria regime will influence its policies in the direction that we desire. There should therefore be no let-up in our efforts during the critical years ahead. The international community should not allow itself to be sidetracked by South Africa’s seeming flexibility of approach in its dealings with the nationalist opposition groups or its overtures vis-à-vis the front-line States under its current leader. De Klerk. Nothing that has been said or done by Mr. De Klerk justifies any optimism on our part that apartheid will soon be dismantled.
In the long term it may be necessary for the international community to think of other more drastic measures to ensure the jettisoning of the apartheid system, should it prove to be as stubborn as it appears to be. Comprehensive and mandatory sanctions backed by the full authority of the Security Council, as provided for in the Charter of the United Nations ought to be imposed. My Government stands ready to give its support to such measures should the current level of sanctions prove to be inadequate. It will also be ready to support the convening of future special sessions of the General Assembly on apartheid.
In a world where men everywhere are free, apartheid constitutes the ultimate humiliation of the black man in South Africa, where he is being treated as an outcast in his own homeland. It is an affront to human decency, dignity, a sense of fair play and justice. It has to be stopped.
Clearly, the time has come for the international community to mobilize the entire arsenal of political, diplomatic and economic pressure at its command in a systematic campaign to bring to an end Pretoria’s arrogant, irresponsible and brutal exercise of power.
Mr. GHARE KHAN (India) •• My Minister for External Affairs, Shri I. K. Gujral, has asked me to convey to the President, Mr. Garba of Nigeria, and to the Assembly his profound disappointment at not being able, despite his keen desire to do so, to participate personally in the deliberations at this important special session of the General Assembly, and to assure all members of his strong support of any measures that the Assembly may adopt to expedite the eradication of apartheid from South Africa.
It is fitting that the special session on apartheid should be held under Mr. Garba's leadership. His name has become synonymous with the struggle against apartheid during the last several years. Under his chairmanship the Special Committee against Apartheid has succeeded in generating and increasing awareness among the international community of the evils of the apartheid system. We have full confidence that, given his personal commitment and contribution to the struggle against apartheid, the special session will reach a purposeful conclusion.
This is the first time that a special session of the General Assembly is being devoted to the issue of apartheid. I hope it will also be the last; the winds of reform and resurgence blowing across the world should ensure that. The Pretoria regime must, in reason and justice, bow to international pressure and the growing resistance of the people of South Africa. Apartheid, an anachronism at the best of times, is a pernicious relic of an out-dated world order and has no place in the present and emerging scheme of things. But apartheid, as we have seen for ourselves, will not disappear of its own accord. Our desire to see it eradicated
has to be matched by concerted efforts by all of us towards this objective.
India, on its part, has (tonsistently opposed the policy of racial discrimination in South Africa for its inhumanity and for the persistent threat it poses to peace and stability in the region. The struggle for our own independence owed a great deal to the experience gained by Mahatma Gandhi in South Africa in the organization and conduct of resistance campaigns against unjust racist laws of the time. It was therefore only natural that India should have been the first to come to the United Nations to intetnationalize the campaign against racial discrimination. That was 4$ years ago. Since then we have had the privilege of working alongside our African and other colleagues in the effort to root out apartheid and restore to that part of the world the rights its people claim and are entitled to.
Last month saw the elections taking place in Namibia under the United Nations independence plan. We are glad for the well-deserved victory of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) in those elections and hope for the early emergence of Namibia as an .independent State. The people of Namibia have long struggled and are now well on the way to casting aside the yoke of colonialism. We look forward to welcoming an independent Namibia as the one hundred and sixtieth Member of the United Nations early in the new year.
The Namibian dream is Hearing realization. The vast majority in South Africa too have a dream, a dream Of being able to live in their own country in freedom and dignity. As Nelson Mandela, a Crusader in the valiant struggle of the South African people, said a quarter century ago:
"During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the African people. I have fought against white domination and I have fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if need be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die".
If the ultimate sacrifice of the oppressed - as exemplified in those words of Nelson Mandela - is to have any meaning, apartheid must become a thing of the past. Our experience tells us that such determination will one day achieve its objective.
It is tragic that the racist Pretoria regime continues to obstruct realization of this dream. It continues to thwart the legitimate aspirations of the South African people. Under the renewed state of emergency it has persisted in repressive measures. Innocent people, including children, are detained without trial for long periods and those who are brought to court are not assured of a fair trial. How can they expect fairness of a judiciary which is part and parcel of the apartheid system - a system in itself unfair and unjust, and clung to by an illegal regime?
Apartheid , s depredations are not confined within the borders of South Africa alone its violence spills over into the whole region. The Pretoria regime's military aggression against and destabilization of its neighbours, according to a recent United Nations study, cost the southern African region 310 billion in 1988 and over 360 billion, not to mention the lives lost, in the first nine years of the current decade. Pretoria's policy of destabilization is part of a calculated strategy to entrench the economic dependence of the front-line States on South Africa. Permitting such a policy to continue is only permitting injustice, exploitation and aggression to continue. There is thus every justification for us here in this world body to work together to bring such injustice and aggression to an end.
The Pretoria regime has recently taken a few steps calculated to give the impression of moving towards the long-delayed and long-demanded change, but these actions fall far short of the expectations of the majority in South Africa and of
the international community. Indeed, they fall far, far short of what is required
to be done. Some political prisoners have been released, but most, including Nelson Mandela, are not yet free. Some public beaches have been desegregated, but most of the racist segregation laws, including the infamous and all-important Group Areas Act, remain intact. Some changes have been stipulated in the national security system, but the state of emergency is kept in place. Some peaceful demonstrations have been permitted, but political activity remains banned and dissent remains a criminal act on Pretoria’s statute books. In short, while a few cosmetic changes have been taken, the ugliness of apartheid remains unremedied. Indeed, the people of South Africa themselves have rejected these measures as nothing more than attempts to reform and reshape apartheid to make it more palatable to them and, more importantly, to the international community. The Conference for a Democratic Future, which met in Johannesburg last week and brought together prominent anti-apartheid groups, adopted a declaration noting that the Pretoria regime was not interested in a democratic South Africa or in genuine negotiations. The declaration added that the régime was only buying time to reorder the forces of minority domination.
There can be no compromise with apartheid. Tinkering with apartheid is like making patchwork repairs to a crumbling monument: the obsoleteness and decline of the structure and the corresponding inadequacy of the repair measures are apparent. Neither reform nor fine-tuning will do. Apartheid is evil and abhorrent and must be eradicated. Nothing short, nothing less, would be acceptable - either to the people of South Africa or to us.
The people of South Africa have long been committed to peaceful change. It was only when lawful modes of expressing opposition to the apartheid policy were closed that they chose to defy the unjust laws - but in a manner that avoided any recourse to violence. When the racist régime used force and violence to crush this opposition, it became necessary for the people to resist such violence and defend
themselves. Their long-standing preference for a solution by peaceful means was reiterated in the Declaration adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee on Southern Africa of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) at Harare in August this year.
For a peaceful transition to take place the Pretoria regime must first demonstrate its readiness for real change and create a climate conducive to genuine and serious negotiations. This would require lifting the state of emergency; unconditionally releasing Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners, as well as detainees,, lifting the ban on political activity by individuals and political organizations; repealing the restrictions imposed on the media; terminating all repressive measures; and ending violence all around. The Pretoria régime must unequivocally affirm that the objective of such a negotiating process would be the eradication of the apartheid system and the estabishment of majority rule on the basis of universal suffrage exercised through one-person, one-vote, under a common voters’ roll in a united and non-fragmented South Africa within a specified time frame.
The international community can ill afford any let-up in its pressure on the Pretoria régime. On the contrary, it has to intensify this pressure in order that apartheid1s inevitable, if delayed, demise is hastened. Sanctions must be strengthened and more effectively implemented. That sanctions have worked has been demonstrably proved by their effect on the South African economy. Indeed, enforcement of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions may be the only effective way to persuade the Pretoria régime to giving up apartheid peacefully.
In conclusion I should like to reiterate India's traditional commitment to the struggle of the people of South Africa for the eradication of apartheid. The Prime Minister of India Shri V. P. Singh, in his very first broadcast to the nation, on 3 December, declared, "We are committed to fighting apartheid in South Africa". We are with the people of South Africa in their quest for freedom and justice, for equality and dignity, for their legitimate rights which they have been denied all these years. Archbishop Desmond Tutu once asked, "Are you on the side of goodness or the side of evil?" Our own experience in India during our freedom struggle places us squarely in the camp of the adversaries of apartheid. All of us must unambiguously undertake to work together to put an end to it. This we owe to our brethren in South Africa, and indeed to our own conscience.
Mr. BONDEVIK (Norway): The Norwegian Government had the privilege of being present at the Conference for a Democratic Future for South Africa, held last week in Johannesburg. We felt privileged because of the importance of that conference: more than 4,500 participants representing approximately 2,000 organizations made decisions of the utmost importance to a future democratic and non-racial South Africa. The participants agreed on the basic principles for negotiations, endorsed the Harare Declaration and arrived at a common position on a number of other important issues concerning the future society of South Africa. To use the words of the recently released leader of the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC), Walter Sisulu, the conference was the most important gathering in South Africa since the People's Congress some 35 years ago.
It is our hope that this willingness to negotiate a new future for South Africa can yield results. Let us not forget that in spite of our efforts the situation in South Africa is basically unchanged. A large number of political prisoners remain in South Africa's gaols. The principal liberation movements in
the country are still banned. The nation-wide state of emergency has been extended for a third consecutive year. It has now become part of everyday life in a vast network of laws, regulations, practices and attitudes that characterize the apartheid State that has grown up in recent decades.
The oppression of the majority has, however, not succeeded in stifling political dissent and protest. The continued resistance has made it clear that the authorities are facing a formidable and ultimately unwinnable challenge.
Confronted with the unrelenting determination of the majority population to overcome apartheid, the South African Government has taken some steps in the right direction. For the first time in many years it has allowed protest marches. It has released Walter Sisulu and other leaders of the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania. The Government has also proclaimed its intention to abolish the Separate Amenities Act. That should be welcomed, just as we welcome any move away from racism. But the fundamental corner-stones of apartheid still remain in place. It is consequently imperative that international pressure on South Africa be maintained. We therefore urge other countries to emulate the measures introduced by the Nordic countries.
Moreover, South Africa's destabilizing policy in the region has for many years been a cause of deep concern. Though South Africa's designs on the region still remain unclear, the welcome developments in Namibia have contributed to an easing of tension in southern Africa. I call on South Africa to continue to act in good faith so the people of Namibia can enjoy the national independence for which they have struggled for so many years. Likewise, I urge South Africa to assume a
constructive approach towards the front-line States.
Still, there can be no doubt that peace and security in the region are dependent on the elimination of apartheid. That is yet another reason why that inhuman system must be eradicated. We express our solidarity with all the front-line States and assure them of our continued support in countering the destructive consequences of apartheid.
That is the background against which this sixteenth special session of the General Assembly is being held. Our aim is to make serious efforts to end the unacceptable situation in southern Africa resulting from apartheid, through negotiations based on the principles of justice and peace for all. It is our hope that this can be achieved by an exchange of views on all aspects of apartheid as well as through combined efforts to arrive at a universally acceptable declaration. At this critical juncture it is vitally important to arrive at an agreed position on apartheid which can be supported by the international community as a whole. It is only through concerted international action that decisive pressure on the South African Government to dismantle apartheid can be kept up. The winds of change that are now sweeping the world and offering a new future for millions of people can clearly not leave South Africa unaffected.
Enormous obstacles still stand in the way of the free political activity that is needed to get negotiations about a new political arrangement in South Africa off the ground. At the core of the problem is a sytem which through subjugation and repression has created a privileged class traditionally bent on retaining minority control at all costs. It has now become increasingly clear that this is no viable option. The new South African Government under President De Klerk seems to have acknowledged that fact by expressing a willingness to negotiate a new dispensation for South Africa. Its commitment to a truly democratic and non-racial future South Africa is, however, less clear.
It is not for my Government to present a blueprint for post-apartheid South Africa. For us, the essential requirement is that apartheid be abolished in all its forms. It must be replaced with a democratic, non-racial society with equal rights for all people and with guarantees that nobody shall be oppressed. A first step would be for the South African Government to show a genuine willingness to enter into negotiations with the true leaders of the majority. It is paramount that the climate necessary for negotiations be created in order for negotiations to take place. We believe that the Organization of African Unity Declaration adopted at Harare on 21 August 1989 constitutes a useful platform in that respect. To that end we agree that the present Government should, inter alia, end the state of emergency and repeal all repressive legislation, release all political prisoners unconditionally, lift all bans and restrictions on all proscribed and restricted organizations and persons, and cease all political trials and executions.
The policy of attempting to abolish apartheid through a dialogue with South African authorities has been tried repeatedly without success. The limited progress so far is not attributable to dialogue, but rather to continued international pressure combined with domestic protest. That has forced the Government to allow a series of multiracial demonstrations against apartheid in a number of cities. It was international pressure that was instrumental in achieving the release of eight political leaders of the black majority, and it was international pressure that paved the way for the recent announcement to abolish the Separate Amenities Act.
While there is broad consensus that international pressure must be maintained, there have been suggestions that the South African Government be given the time and scope to follow up on its rhetoric. It has been indicated that the new Government needs some time to prove its sincerity. Such an idea would of course have advantages if it could promote a climate conducive to change, based on assurances that the Government would respond in kind. A deadline might even be set by which the Government’s actions could be judged. But we are not convinced that such a strategy would work. We favour instead a two-pronged approach whereby changes are encouraged while international pressure remains firmly in place.
Norway has for several years actively sought to implement comprehensive measures to combat apartheid. Thus, our national legislation bans practically all economic relations with South Africa. It includes a general ban on imports and exports, the carriage of crude oil by Norwegian vessels to South Africa, the granting of loans and investments, as well as other measures. Our measures have been closely co-ordinated with the other Nordic countries.
Further to those restrictive measures, I would like to stress the need for positive support for those who suffer the effects of apartheid. South Africa’s
(Mr. Bondevik, Norway) neighbours find themselves in a particularly precarious situation. To ensure sustained development independent of South Africa's economic power, Norway has for several years offered assistance to the Southern Africa Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) and to the SADCC countries. The Norwegian Government has also made it clear that we are prepared to consider increasing our assistance to the SADCC countries in the event of further South African reprisals against those countries. We have followed the positive developments in Namibia closely and have taken an active part in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group operation. In September this year, we hosted an informal donors' consultation on Namibia in co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme to sensitize donors to the needs of an independent Namibia. Norway stands ready to assist the new Government of Namibia in furtherance of greater well-being for all Namibians.
Norway also provides humanitarian assistance to liberation movements, refugees and other victims of apartheid. Our support to victims of apartheid has increased considerably during the last few years. Norway will continue its assistance to organizations and individuals in need of such support, as well as to the front-line States, the SADCC countries and SADCC co-operation.
Lastly, I conclude this statement on a more optimistic note than I would have thought possible only a few months ago. Our optimism is guarded, however. The obstacles to a South Africa free from aparthe id and racial discrimination cannot be underestimated. But the latest developments give reason to hope that the political change now unfolding all over the world will also reach the tormented land of South Africa. Let this special session be the last on the road to a free, non-racial and democratic South Africa. Through concerted international action we can play our part by keeping up pressure on the South African Government.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
A/44/PV.M 20 February 1990
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-NINTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on ,niesday, 20 February 1990, at 9.30 a.m.
President,
Mr. GARBA
(Nigeria)
Tribute to the memory of Sir Ignatius Kilaqe, Governor-General of Papua New Gu inea
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments, appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit [17] (continued)
This record contain the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the-General’Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750. 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-64003/A 6546V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.a.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY of SIR IGNATIUS KILA®, GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA The~ PRESIDENT Before we consider the item on the agenda for this meeting, it is my sad duty to recall to the General Assembly the death of Sir Ignatius Kilage, Governor-General of Papua New Guinea, which occurred on 31 December 1989.
Sir Ignatius Kilage, who was appointed the first Chief Ombudsman after the independence of Papua New Guinea, in 1975, and who later became the fourth Governor-General of his country, will be remenbered for his untiring dedication to his country and for the support he extended to the guest for peace and justice for the world. His death is a tragic loss for his country.
May I extend to the members of his family, as well as to the Government and people of Papua New Guinea, my most profound condolences.
I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL:It was with deep sadness that I heard of the passing of Sir Ignatius Kilage, Governor-General of Papua New Guinea, who served his country with such great distinction. I wish to associate myself with the tribute paid to his memory by the President of the General Assembly. May I also take this opportunity to extend my most sincere personal condolences to the family of Sir Ignatius Kilage and to the Government and people of Papua New Guinea.
The PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Sir Ignatius Kilage.
The meabersof the-General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT, I call on Mr. Noel Rakotondramhoa of Madagascar, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
$	BBS /dl	A/4 VPV. 89
3
Mr. RAKOTONDRAMBOA (Madagascar) (interpretation from French) s On behalf of the Group of African States, I wish to loin previous speakers in expressing our deep sadness at the death, on 31 December 1989, of the Governor-General of Papua New Guinea, Sir Iqnatius Kilaqe.
Unassuming in his ways, even after having acceded to the highest responsibilities of his State, Sir Iqnatius was deeply dedicated to the traditional ; customs and values of his people, to whose service he devoted the whole of his brilliant career.
I should like to convey the African Group's most sincere condolences to the ' Government and people of Papua New Guinea and to the family of the deceased.
The PRESIDENT, I call on Mr. Gharekhan of India, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. GHAREKHAN (India), I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
We were saddened by the news of the passing, on 31 December 1989, of Sir Ignatius Kilaqe, Governor-General of Papua New Guinea. Sir Iqnatius had a long and distinguished record of public service spanning nearly two decades, during which he held several important positions in his country. He impressed all who met him with his courtesy, simplicity and dignity. He personified the traditional values that so often provide a auch-needed balance to the impatience and self-indulgence of the modern world. Although he ceased to be a pastor in 1974, he carried with him throughout his life the beliefs and convictions that moulded his , contributions to his country and to the international community. The untimely demise of Sir Iqnatius at the early age of 48 is a tragic loss, not only for his country but for the world.
BBS/dl
(Mr, Gharekhan, India)
I should like to convey the condolences of the Asian Group to the members of the bereaved family and to the Government and people of Papua New Guinea. We share their sense of loss and wish them solace in their bereavement.
The-PRESIDENT# I call on Mr. Stanislaw Pawlak of Poland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. PAWLAK (Poland)t Please allow me, on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States to express our sincere condolences and sympathy to the Government and the people of Papua New Guinea at the passing away of their Governor-General Bis Excellency Sir Ignatius Kilage who devoted his life and career to his nation. We share the sorrow of the people of Papua New Guinea at the loss of their leader a distinguished statesman and a great patriot. He will not easily be replaced but we are convinced that his deeds in the development and promotion of his country will live long in the memory of his compatriots.
The PRESIDENT; I now call upon Ms. Marjorie Thorpe of Trinidad and Tobago who will speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States.
Ms. THORPE (Trinidad and Tobago); On behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States I would like to express our profound sorrow at the recent death of His Excellency Sir Ignatius Kilage Governor-General of Papua New Guinea.
Ordained a Catholic priest in 1968 Sir Ignatius first served his people in that capacity for six years. But his devotion to public service did not end in 1974 when he was granted a papal release from Holy Orders. Rather, Sir Ignacius went on to become, in 1975 the first Chief Ombudsman of Papua New Guinea, a position to which he was reappointed in 1978.
In 1989 Sir Ignatius was made Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George by Queen Elisabeth II after he had been elected the fourth Governor-General of Papua New Guinea by the National Parliament. His elevation to that high office represented a fitting tribute to a distinguished nationalist who, for more than two decades, had worked tirelessly to promote the traditional customs and values of his country a nationalist who to the very end remained committed to the ideal of a just and free society.
(Ma. Thorps, Trinidad and Tobago) Our sympathy goes out to the family of the late Governor-General and to the Government and the people of Papua New Guinea.
The BIBSBBiTt I now call upon Hr. Fernando José Heino of Portugal, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. REINO (Portugal) , It was with deep distress that the members of the Group of Western European and Other States learned about the untimely death of Ris Excellency Sir Ignatius Milage, Governor-General of Papua New Guinea.
Sir Ignatius had a distinguished and long career at the service of his country as ,pua New Guinea's first Ombudsman and as Governor-General. He was a staunch defender of a just society in which man could be free and traditional customs and values respected.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States I would like to convey our most sincere condolences to the bereaved family and tn the Government and the people of Papua New Guinea.
The- PRESIDENT I now call upon Mr. Thomas Pickering, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr; PICKERING (United States of America), As the representative of the host country and on behalf of the President and the Government of the United States, I wish to express our profound condolences to the people of Papua New Guinea and to the family of the late Sir Ignatius Milage, Governor-General, whose recent untimely passing has saddened us all.
The life of Sir Ignatius Ki lags was devoted to the service of his fellow man and guided by his deep spiritual and ethical values. He was an enemy of corruption deeply committed to democratic principles who laboured tirelessly to uphold the rights and dignity of his fellow citizens. His life is a example to us all, and his loss will be felt by -ur all. Sir Ignatius Kilage will be sorely missed.
(Mr. Pickering, United States)
In keeping with the subject on which we are speaking, I would also like to express proSound regret to toe Secretary-General at the news that two mesfeers of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) were killed and six wounded over the weekend. I request that the condolences of the United States Government and people be conveyed to the families of these men, who were serving the cause of i peace in the Middle Bast under the United Nations flag.
Th PRESIDENT, I now call upon Mr. Kanagi Kanagi lohia, Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. IONIA (Papua New Guinea) t On behalf of the people and the Government of Papua New Guinea and the family of Sir Ignatius Kilage, may I take this opportunity to thank you most sincerely for your expressions of condolence and sympathy for the late Sir Ignatius Kilage, Governor-General of Papua New Guinea.
Sir Iqnattus was a simple but highly educated and committed man, committed to the principles of human rights and the dignity of mankind. Be was a man of peace and honour. Sir Ignatius will be long remembered for his invaluable contribution and dedication to the people of Papua New Guinea and to our nation.
Papua New Guinea is Ride up of many different linguistic groups with more than 750 languages and dialects. The unity of our nation and our people is of paramount importance to all Papua New Guineans. Sir Ignatius was a true nationalist who used his viceregal post to promote peace, unity, justice and equal rights for all, not only in Papua New Guinea but throughout the world. Sir Iqnatius believed that the rights of all peoples must prevail throughout the whole of society and, therefore, that the Government and leadars, whether traditional leaders or business leaders, have to serve the people in the right way, with equality.
(NgxJtejhia^j?^
Your messages, your sympathy and condolences, have been heard in our traditional way by the spirit of Sir Ignatius, who is with us today. However, those messages will be conveyed and relayed to his family and to the people and the Government of Papua New Guinea. I thank you again tost kindly for your gracious words.
AGENDA ITEM 17 (continued) APPOINTMENTS  PILL VACANCIES IN SUBSIDIARY ORGANS AND OTHER APPOINTMENTS! (h) APPOINTMENT 0? MEMBERS OF THE JOINT INSPECTION UNIT
The.JRISIDHgTt In connection with agenda item 17 (h) four notes have been circulated in documents A/44/803 and Addenda 1, 2 and 3. Mesbers will recall that, as indicated in document A/4V813, the General Assembly is required during its current session to appoint four nesbers to fill the vacancies in the Joint Inspection Unit that will arise free the expiration of the term of office on 31 Decesber 1990 of Mr. Alain Gourdon of France, Mr. Richard Hennes of the United States of America, Mr. Ivan Kojic of Yugoslavia and Mr. Kabongo Tuns a la of Zaire.

^e President)
Pursuant to document A/44/813/Add.l, the General Assebbly at it, 82nd plenary meeting, on 15 December 1989, by its decision 44/316 appointed Mr. Andrzej Abras sew ski of Poland and Mr. Kabonqo Tuns a la of Zaire for a term of office beginning on 1 January 1991 and expiring on 31 December 1995.
However, as indicated in document A/44/813/Add. 2, on 15 December 1989 the number of candidates from the Western European and other States still exceeded the number of vacancies from that region and, therefore, the Assembly, on my proposal, at that same meeting selected by secret ballot two countries, namely, Greece and the United States of America, which were then requested to propose candidates.
As indicated in document A/44/813/Add.3, as a result of further consultations in accordance with article 3, paraqraph 2 of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with the President of the Economic and Social Council and with the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairm of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, I now propose to appoint, with the concurrence of the General Assembly, Mrs. Erica~Irene Daes of Greece and Mr. Richard Hennes of the United States of America as members of the Joint Inspection Unit for a term commencing on 1 January 1991 and expiring on 31 December 1995.
May I take it that the General Assembly concurs with those appointments?
It was so decided.
The RRESIDaaTt I take this opportunity to congratulate Mrs. Daes and Mr. Hennes on their appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
That concludes our consideration of sub-item (h) of item 17.
The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/S-17/PV.1
23 February 1990
ENGLISH
Seventeenth special session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FIRST MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 20 February 1990, at 10 a.m.
Temporary President:	PrincezBOLA AJIBOLA	(Nigeria)
later:	Mr. GARBA	(Nigeria)
(Pres ident)
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Nigeria
- Minute of silent prayer or meditation
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
Credentials of representatives to the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly (a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee Election of the President
Address by Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba, President of the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session Statement by the Secretary-General
Report of the Preparatory Committee for the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly Organization of the session Adoption of the agenda General debate
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed ^n the Officiai Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-60003 6548V (E)
EM S/4
The meeting was called to.order at 10.30 a.m. -	- J .■■■■...	- ..... ^>-.~'	.	.	.■■-.._
IfEM 1 OF.THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA OPENING OF THE SESSION BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE DELEGATION OF NIGERIA
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT! I declare open the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly, to consider the question of international co-operation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs, with a view to expanding the scope and increasing the effectiveness of such co-operation.
ITEM 2 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I now invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silent prayer or medi ta tion.
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (A/S-17/5)
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: In keeping with the established practice, I call the attention of the General Assembly to document A/S-17/5, which contains the text of a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he informs the Assembly that 14 Member States are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
According to Article 19 of the Charter:
"A member of the United Nations which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two full years."
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of that information?
It was so decided.
ITEM 3 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
CREDENTIALS OF REPRESENTATIVES TO THE SEVENTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(a) APPOINTMENT OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly, at the beginning of each session, shall appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of nine members.
In conformity with precedents, I propose that the Credentials Committee for the seventeenth special session be the same as that for the forty-fourth session of the Assembly, namely: Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, China, Colombia, Malawi, the Philippines, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America and Zaire.
If there is no objection, I shall consider the Credentials Committee thus cons ti tuted.
It was so decided.
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; In this connection, may I call the attention of members of the Assembly to a note verbale from the Secretary-General, dated 15 January 1990, in which it was stated that credentials should be issued for all representatives to the special session in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. I urge all members to submit the credentials of representatives to the Secretary-General at their earliest convenience.
ITEM 4 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: By its decision 44/410, of 14 November 1989, the Assembly proposed that the special session should take place under the presidency of the President of the forty-fourth session, Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba of Niger ia.
I take it that the Assembly wishes to elect him President of the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session by acclamation.
It was so decided.
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; I extend my sincere congratulations to Mr. Garba and invite him to assume the presidency.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the President to the podium.
Mr. Garba took the Chair.
ADDRESS BY MR. JOSEPH NANVEN GARBA, PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AT ITS SEVENTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
The PRESIDENT: I am honoured to have been elected by the General Assembly to preside over this special session. I must once again convey to the members of the Assembly the profound appreciation of my country, Nigeria, and my personal gratitude for the trust they continue to repose in me.
Our world is going through momentous changes in various spheres of our social, political and economic endeavours. While we are witnessing positive changes in the political configuration of the world, social and humanitarian problems appear to be on the increase and, indeed, to defy solution. One such problem is that of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the attendent scourge on our societies.
This historic session is the first special session of the General Assembly ever convened for the purpose of discussing the issue of the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Drug abuse world wide, with its deleterious effects, is an immense problem which affects all of us and poses an increasing threat to international peace and security.
In recognition of the dangers this problem poses to the international community, the United Nations already has in place various treaties and conventions on narcotic drugs. Notable among these are the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and its Protocol of 1972, the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances and the recently concluded 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. In spite of those conventions, the
global problem persists.
The special session has therefore been convened to demonstrate and articulate the continued grave concern of the international community over the rising menace of drug cultivation, trade and abuse. While many efforts have been made to contain its many-sided effects, the scope of the challenge we all face was poignantly reflected by the events in Colombia in 1989 following the assassination of the presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galan.
Only last week, the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and the United States of America held a historic summit in Cartagena, Colombia. I believe that I speak for all representatives and the countries they represent when I pay tribute to those Presidents for their welcome initiative. The Charter of the United Nations obliges Member States, in the appropriate circumstances, to evolve regional initiatives for many outstanding problems. In different degrees, drug problems affect every region of our world. It is for that reason that I wish to encourage other regional groups to emulate the Cartagena initiative.
The President of Colombia, Virgilio Barco Vargas, in a courageous statement to the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly last September, expressed in the firmest terms the conviction that the war against illicit drug traffickers can and must be won. This special session of the General Assembly must send a clear ultimatum to those merchants of death that their cause will not prosper and that if they continue along that evil path it will lead only to their own destruction. The combined efforts of the international community will ensure that when they are beaten in one country they will find no sanctuary elsewhere. By our united efforts we will surely defeat them.
The fight against drugs is indeed a war in which the battle lines are drawn world-wide. They exist in towns and cities of all countries in the world where
drugs are illicitly consumed. They are to be found in our harbours, airports and
international highways. None of us can be safe in this war. We all therefore have a responsibility to help to defeat the enemy.
There is no doubt that while demand for druqs exists, there will be criminals prepared to exploit it. Simple economics dictate that while demand remains hiqh, the more successful we are in the task of reducinq production, the qreater the rewards to undetected traffickers will be. We must therefore pursue a comprehensive campaiqn against drug abuse in all its aspects, concentrating not only on the eradication of supply and the suppression of illicit trafficking but also on prevention and reduction of demand. We must therefore develop effective programmes to treat and rehabilitate drug abusers.
The United Nations system has been involved in druq-abuse control since its inception, in particular through its three core drug-control units located in Vienna. Substantial co-operation between Member States in druq-abuse control has already been developed in the United Nations system. The International Conference on Druq Abuse and Illicit Traffickinq in 1987 drew two key documents on the subject: the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug-Abuse Control and, of course, the Political Declaration.
The work in drug-abuse control that the United Nations has done in the past gives us a useful foundation upon which we can now build. Therefore, at this special session, we must reaffirm existing mandates and, where possible, look for ways and means of strengthening those mechanisms.
While we recognize the efforts so far made by the United Nations and the various initiatives at regional and unilateral levels, it is becoming evident that the United Nations must at this stage set up a monitoring mechanism that will oversee the works of the various druq-control units and ensure implementation by States parties. Such a unit must meet regularly to appraise the efforts of the
States and recommend appropriate measures where defaults have been detected.
We must also take a very hard look at the resources allocated to the international organizations engaged in the fight against drug-abuse control. They need and indeed deserve far greater allocations than those prevailing now. I urge Member States, when considering what more to ask of the United Nations in drug-abuse control, to be realistic about the cost. What has become the old cliche "within existing resources" may no longer be appropriate at this stage.
The drug-abuse problem can never be solved unless it is seen in a wider context. Drug abuse is not a phenomenon that can be viewed in isolation. The reasons why people abuse drugs, while not in many cases clearly understood, appear to be related to many other social problems. The reasons why people engage in illicit cultivation, manufacture and trafficking in drugs are of course largely economic. Solutions must therefore be sought in the context of general improvements to our society.
The key issue in many countries is overall peace and development. When considering drug abuse, we must therefore not forget the needs of the developing countries as they struggle to come to terms with and to overcome that dreadful malaise. General Assembly resolution 44/142 calls for the establishment of an intergovernmental group of experts to study the economic and social consequences of illicit drug traffic. I commend those proposals, which I believe can lead to much greater understanding of that difficult but vitally important issue.
Let me conclude by returning once more to the theme of the war against drugs. This is a war in which no quarter is asked and no quarter is given. It is a war none of us can afford to lose. It is therefore imperative that we combine our efforts to ensure that we are victorious. There are grounds for optimism that recent world political events have given us the opportunity we so badly need to
tackle those issues with real vigour and on a scale commensurate with the size of
JB/5
A/S-17/PV.1 9
(The President)
the problem. Let us avail ourselves of the opportunity provided by the lessening of tensions world-wide to build a truly multinational commitment to win this war.
I call on all States Member of the United Nations assembled here for this special session to devote all their energies to ensuring that we do not let this opportunity slip from our grasp.
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, who wishes to address the General Assembly at this time.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL:We are assembled here today in response to the threat posed by drug abuse. Let us not underestimate this threat. We are talking about personal tragedy, severe damage to health, the disruption of society, economic breakdown, the undermining of democratic institutions, corruption, intimidation, violence and death.
Drug abuse is now right at the top of the list of priorities requiring urgent attention from the international community. It is by its nature truly international, and it demands a co-ordinated international response. Only the United Nations can orchestrate that response. The Assembly has the solemn responsiblity to take appropriate and effective action.
Drug abuse causes damage at all levels; to the individual, to the family and to the community. It has implications for public administration locally, nationally and internationally. The scale of the damage that can be caused has become all too clear to the people of certain countries, and is becoming clearer to most others.
Many States are affected, but Colombia deserves special mention because of the huge illicit trafficking problem it faces and because of the true courage and heroism in fighting it shown by its President, Government and people. Colombia has


made many sacrifices over a long period in combating the evil power of the trafficking cartels.
This war is not over, nor is it by any means confined to Colombia. But the steadfast resolve of Colombia's Government, as well as that of the Governments of Bolivia, Peru and others, has demonstrated that it is possible to confront, to match and to overcome the awesome power of the cartels. It is an example and an inspiration to all of us.

In this connection, the Cartagena meeting of the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and the United States is a very encouraging sign of strengthened regional co-operation in this fight.
The United Nations has been given an important mandate to combat the problem of drug abuse in all its manifestations. All countries threatened by the drug scourge can turn to the Organization for advice and material assistance. We are here now to decide how the international community, in particular the United Nations, can more effectively counter a threat that has been dramatically magnified in recent years.
With this background no one can doubt the importance of this special session of the General Assembly. We must tackle the issues head-on in the course of this week. We must focus our minds from the outset on the need to achieve real results. We have no time to spend in simply redefining the problem or making statements about what we have done up to now. The last regular session of the General Assembly provided ample opportunity for the issue to be debated in a general sense. Many fine and important statements were made about it on that occasion.
Let us not forget that much substantive work in international drug abuse control has been in progress since the League of Nations. Today the three United Nations drug abuse control units located in the United Nations Office in Vienna and certain other elements of the United Nations system have clear mandates for a wide range of activities, and over the years plans of action have been drawn up to focus and co-ordinate these activities.
The beginning of a new era of international consensus was marked by the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, held in Vienna in 1987. The declaration adopted at that Conference and the Comprehensive
Multi-Disciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control agreed upon

by the 138 States that participated established the political framework and broad strategy to be followed by the international community at all levels.
Legal instruments drawn up over the years culminated in 1988 in the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. This provides measures more far-reaching than ever before to enable Governments, through closer co-operation, to deprive traffickers of their ill-gotten gains and deny them safe havens anywhere in the world.
The 1988 Convention is still not in force. I urge States to ratify it without further delay and, even before this, to implement its provisions vigorously.
This special session gives us a unique opportunity, which we cannot afford to squander, to transform the agreed strategy into a clear-cut global programme of action designed to bring this dramatic problem of drug abuse and illicit trafficking under control. There is a general consensus that this programme must be based on global collaboration, with no country remaining indifferent or outside the alliance that must be created. To be effective, such global collaboration requires joint action, without reservation, action that is both decisive and uncondi tional.
Certain obstances commonly cited as justification for not taking the necessary action will have to be overcome. Drug abuse and trafficking are problems of such magnitude that in order to address them effectively we must rise above political differences and find ways to work more closely together.
It is most certainly not my intention to play down the importance of bilateral assistance. However, we have seen on a number of occasions that bilateral anti-drug action can be hampered by political concerns. This is not the case with a multilateral approach. The United Nations, because of its international status and its basic Charter principles, serves no single country and plays a neutral and
objective role. It is therefore vitally important to strengthen the pivotal role

of the United Nations in the global fight against drug abuse.
During the next four days the General Assembly, besides reaffirming our existing mandates in drug abuse control, has the opportunity to strengthen the United Nations system by agreeing on new mandates. It is essential, however, to ensure that commensurate resources are made available. The modest resources currently available to the United Nations for drug abuse control are already well known to members. In order to make a really significant impact on drug abuse and illicit trafficking world wide, very considerable additional funding will be required. It is not too much to say that the international struggle against illicit drugs amounts to a war that must be fought with the kind of resources wars command.
In these days of continued budgetary constraints and with a ceiling on the regular budget, it is understandable that Member States look to the Secretary-General to meet new priority requirements by first exhausting all possibilities of absorption. In the case of the regular budget, the additional sums required for drug abuse control, while minuscule in relation to the vast size of the problem, are too large to be obtained by normal redeployment. Exceptional situations demand exceptional remedies. The threat to humanity of drug abuse is so grave that I feel obliged to urge Member States to find ways and means of providing additional funds to the regular budget for the fight to overcome it.
Extrabudgetary resources greatly in excess of what is currently available are also needed, in particular for the field operations financed by the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control (UNFDAC) .
I am, of course, at the same time acutely conscious of the need to make the very best use of the resources already available. The system-wide plan of action now in an advanced stage of preparation should ensure that the activities of the
different components of the system are mutually reinforcing.

A/S-17/PV.1
14-15

It is also necessary, in the words of General Assembly resolution 44/141, "to enhance the efficiency of the United Nations structure for drug abuse control ..."
It will be the task of the expert group mandated by the same resolution to advise me on how best to do that. I would only stress, again in the interest of maximizing resource use, that a major concern of mine in this exercise will be to avoid unnecessary disruption of the important work that is in progress. The emphasis must be on streamlining and making more effective our existing arrangements, not creating additional bureaucratic structures.
Tn ironic contrast to our own lack of resources, illicit drug trafficking has created such vast profits that in some cases national economies have been distorted and democratic institutions threatened. There is, moreover, a close link with development: the production of illicit drugs is in many instances a manifestation of the economics of poverty and the lack of viable alternatives, while extensive drug abuse jeopardizes development,, and in too many countries the prospects of sustained development are already blighted by the shadow of debt.
No lasting solution can be hoped for without a concerted and comprehensive attack, encompassing all the ramifications of the problem, including enhanced co-operation for development, some measure of debt relief and the assurance of markets and reasonable prices for legal export commodities.
Market forces apply to drugs as they do to any other traded commodity, hence our endeavours will be frustrated if we fail to bring about a drastic and rapid reduction in demand for drugs. It is accordingly a source of encouragement that the first major international conference on this complex and critical subject, convened by the Government of the United Kingdom in association with the United Nations, will be held in London in April.

The campaign that must be waged on so many fronts at once will inevitably be long and demand all our reserves of energy and endurance. Yet we should not underestimate the human potential for rapid adaptation, particularly as we are meeting during a period of rapid political change in many parts of the world. In the short period since the last meeting of the General Assembly, events in Eastern Europe in particular have moved in a direction and at a pace that none could have foreseen.
These developments will also have effects on the relationships between East and West and between North and South, not least because they are already giving rise to massive new requirements for development co-operation, for which overall resources are also limited. Yet I believe that this potential dichotomy in interest could, with resolve and imagination, be shown to be false. Rather, as tension between East and West is relaxed, there is now a real opportunity for more resources to be channelled into the war against poverty, a war fought in order to win sustainable development in its true sense of a better livelihood for millions of deprived people all over the world. Unless we make progress on that front, we shall not win the war against drugs.
The excellent and much-quoted address to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session by President Virgilio Barco of Colombia was entitled "The international fight against drugs cannot be a war of words". Let us resolve that at this special session of the General Assembly words lead to action and that this action leads to success. Drug abuse is a time-bomb ticking away in the heart of our civilization. We must find measures to deal with it before it explodes and destroys us.

The PRESIDENT: I call on the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, Mr. Peter Hohenfellner of Austria.
Mr. HOHENFELLNER (Austria), Chairman of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Seventeenth Special Session: I have the honour to present to the General Assembly the report of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Seventeenth Special Session (A/S-17/4).
The Preparatory Committee held its first session on 6 and 7 December 1989 and its second session from 12 to 14 February 1990. Section IV of the report contains the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee and a decision taken by the Committee. Paragraph 25 of the report states:
"The Preparatory Committee, in informal meetings, considered a draft political declaration and a draft programme of action. It was agreed to continue the consideration of those two draft documents at the special session."
The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly is grateful to the Chairman and those who participated in the Preparatory Committee for their efforts to expedite our work and, in particular, to get the special session off to a very good start.
May I take it that the General Assembly endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Seventeenth Special Session (A/S-17/4) and the recommendations contained therein?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; On the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, the title of the topic to be considered by the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session will be "Question of international co-operation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, with a view to expanding the scope and increasing the effectiveness of such co-operation". On the same basis and in accordance with the practice of the Assembly at previous special sessions, the Chairmen of the Main Committees at the forty-fourth session will continue in the same posts for the seventeenth special session. Accordingly, I have to inform the Assembly that the following Chairmen are present at this special session: the Chairman of the Second Committee, Mr. Ahmed Ghezal of Tunisia; the Chairman of the Third Committee, Mr. Paul Desire Kabore of Burkina Faso; the Chairman of the Fourth Committee, Mr. Robert Van Lierop of Vanuatu; and the Chairman of the Fifth Committee, Mr. Ahmed Fathi Al-Masri of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In paragraph 35 of the report just endorsed by the Assembly it is recommended that the Chairmen of the Main Committees may be replaced by members of their delegations or members of the delegations of States belonging to the same regional group. Accordingly, the following replacements have been communicated to the Secretariat: for the Chairman of the First Committee, Ms. Adriana Pulido-Santana of Venezuela; for the Chairman of the Special Political Committee, Mr. Nikolai Makarevitch of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic; and for the
Chairman of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Philippe Kirsch of Canada.
The Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, who will serve in the same capacity at the seventeenth special session, are the representatives of the following Member States: Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, China, Congo, Costa Rica, France, Gambia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Morocco, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Sudan, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and Zimbabwe.
In endorsing the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, the Assembly has established an ad hoc committee of the whole, which will be designated Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventeenth Special Session. In accordance with the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee will be a full member of the General Committee of the seventeenth special session The Preparatory Committee recommends that the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, Mr. Peter Hohenfellner of Austria, serve in the same capacity in the Ad Hoc Committee.
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to elect Mr. Hohenfellner by acclama tion.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, and on my own behalf I congratulate Mr. Peter Hohenfellner and wish him well in the discharge of the important and onerous responsibilities that he has just assumed.
The General Committee of the General Assembly at its seventeenth special
session has now been fully constituted.
On the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, one meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee shall be reserved to hear United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations that have received a standing invitation to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly, and one representative from non-governmental organizations. No statement shall exceed 10 minutes.
It was also decided that the NGO Committee on Narcotics and Substance Abuse should designate one representative to speak in the Ad Hoc Committee on behalf of all interested non-governmental organizations.
In a related matter and pursuant to consultations in the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee, it is proposed that the Assembly decide that the Ad Hoc Committee hear the Mayor of New York City, Mr. David Dinkins, at its meeting this afternoon.
I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that proposal.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform members that some Member States have supported requests that the Observers of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Holy See, the Republic of Korea and Switzerland take part in the debate in plenary meeting during the seventeenth special session.
It may be recalled that, in accordance with established practice of the General Assembly, non-Member Observer States may normally make statements in the Main Committees and, accordingly by implication in the Ad Hoc Committee at a special session. However, following consultations with the Chairmen of the regional groups, it is proposed that the General Assembly take a decision, without setting a precedent for the future, to hear the Observers of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Holy See, the Republic of Korea and Switzerland in the course of the debate in the plenary meeting during the seventeenth special session.
If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: In view of the large number of representatives already inscribed on the list of speakers, it is proposed that plenary meetings should start punctually at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
In this connection, I should like to assure the Assembly that I shall be in the Chair punctually at the scheduled time. I sincerely hope that all delegations will make a special effort to co-operate in this regard as usual.
If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Furthermore, it is proposed that, owing to time constraints, the length of statements, with the exception of those by Heads of State or Government, should be limited to 15 minutes. A flashing white light will be activated at the rostrum to let the speaker know that the 15-minute limit has been reached.
If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
ITEM 7 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA (A/S-17/1)
The PRESIDENT; By adopting the report of the Preparatory Committee, the Assembly endorsed the provisional agenda contained therein. In order to expedite our work, the Assembly may wish to adopt the provisional agenda in plenary meeting without referring it to the General Committee.
I take it that the General Assembly agrees to this procedure, in which case I declare the agenda adopted.
The agenda was adopted.
The PRESIDENT; Regarding the allocation of items, on the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly, agenda items 9 to 13 will be dealt with by the General Assembly in plenary meetings and considered concurrently under
agenda item 8.
The Assembly has also allocated agenda items 14 and 15 to the Ad Hoc Committee, which is entrusted, inter alia, with the task of preparing a draft political declaration on a draft global programme of action to be considered by the Assembly in plenary meeting.
AGENDA ITEM 8
GENERAL DEBATE
The PRESIDENT; in accordance with the decision just taken by the General Assembly, the Assembly will also consider agenda items 9 to 13.
I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the general debate be closed this afternoon at 6 o'clock.
I hear no objection.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the general debate to put their names on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
Mr. LONDONO (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish); Before beginning my statement, I should like, on behalf of the people and Government of Colombia, to express the condolences of our delegation to the people and Government of Papua New Guinea on the passing of Sir Ignatius Kilage, its Governor-General.
Similarly, I wish to express to the Government of Kenya and to the family of my friend, Mr. Ouko, the Foreign Minister, our most sincere feelings of sympathy and solidarity on his tragic death. I had the good fortune to know and admire his leadership and his professional and personal qualities. That is why I wish to protest before the Assembly at the terrible crime of which he was the victim.
BHS/ve
I congratulate you. Sir, on your election to preside over this special session of the General Assembly. I am sure that your acknowledged ability, intelligence and experience will guarantee the success of this session.
Similarly, I express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for the interest that he has always shown in the subject that we are to discuss at this session.
Above all, I must express to this Assembly the gratitude of the Government of Colombia for the favourable reception given to the request made by President Virgilio Barco for the convening of a special session of the General Assembly on the question of international co-operation against the production, supply, demand, trafficking and illicit distribution of narcotics, as well as on the search for an appropriate solution.
Action against drug trafficking would seem to have been limited exclusively to the idea of a mechanism for the suppression of the production of and, in particular, trafficking in and the processing of drugs and psychotropic substances. With the end, recently, of the last decade, it seemed that the long series of fluctuating divergent and frequently contradictory positions with regard to what should be done about the problem had begun slowly to peter out.
The 1980s were marked by a lack of leadership in dealing with this extremely delicate matter and by a failure to face up to the responsibility incumbent upon each State in the fight against this scourge. Instead, there was a widespread and simplistic notion that the countries producing and processing the coca plant were the ones that should be seeking, alone and at all costs, a solution to the problem.
Unfortunately, that meant that the burden of the struggle was borne exclusively by a small number of developing countries that were at the same time seeing their incomes and their economies decline because of the discriminatory and unjust treatment being meted out to their exports by the industrialized countries and, in some cases, because of the crushing burden of their foreign debt.
Although the situation has not substantially changed, there are today encouraging signs that change is beginning to occur. The recent Cartagena summit meeting between the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, the United States and Peru and the present special session of the General Assembly are clear indications of that. After a number of years it now appears that the problem is beginning to be understood, or that at least a first step is being taken. We should not forget, however, that the long route ahead of us cannot be covered in a single step, one that some, out of false modesty, political expediency or a distorted view of what economic co-operation should be, have not yet dared take. For them, their most convenient and comfortable course would seem to be to disguise their true responsibilities by posing as prosecutors and thereby avoiding the dock, which is where they really belong, or, in some cases, to adopt the policy of giving an insignificant amount of ma terial co-operation, thereby easing their consciences or the internal political pressures exerted upon them.
The problem of drug trafficking is a many-faceted problem. No State, no
matter how large and powerful, and how sophisticated or efficient its police or
(Mr. Londofio, Colombia) border-control systems may be, can remain free of the problem of drug trafficking without co-operating faithfully and constructively with the States most affected by drug production and processing.
Similarly, the determined and even heroic struggle of some countries to eliminate the trafficking and processing of narcotic drugs will serve no purpose if at the same time no action is taken against the export of precursor chemicals; if no action is taken to discourage consumption; if there is no control over the transport of the additives and base products needed to manufacture drugs; if there is no proper control of the production of raw materials; if no effective action is taken against corrupt officials and civilian, military and police authorities in certain countries who, through their action or inaction, promote trafficking in narcotic and precursor substances; if no legal action is taken against property and nothing is done to prevent the laundering of moneys derived from those activities; if there is no close co-operation with States that have taken up the struggle and if there is no just and equitable assistance of the economies of the developing countries most affected by drug production and processing.
We are witnessing an evolution towards a comprehensive, concerted and joint confrontation of the problem, with recognition of the effects of demand and consumer abuse as the determining factor in this complex area. In this connection we would draw attention to the initiative taken by the Prime Minister of Great Britain, Margaret Thatcher, which was designed to lead to the convening next April of a summit meeting to deal with the problem from the point of view of drug consumption and drug abuse.
We feel that the time has come to set up a working group that, within the framework of the United Nations, would embark upon an in-depth and frank analysis
of drug consumption and demand and lay the groundwork for a comprehensive plan of action in support of the will of our Governments to deal in an integral manner with that scourge, with sincerity and determination, for the benefit of mankind.
The bases of that plan were enunciated by President Barco in his statement at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly on 29 September 1989. His ideas were developed at the eleventh meeting of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at Vienna and at the Preparatory Committee for this special session. The initiative for that plan of action has today been strengthened by the valuable inputs of the various States that make up the international community.
The plan of action has been taking shape on a comprehensive basis, seeking as it does to deal with all the underlying aspects of that terrible scourge, including prevention, interdiction, production and consumption, in addition to rehabilitation. The plan will therefore have to include programmes and policies in education, health, the law, economics and finance.
We say a comprehensive plan, because it cannot claim to be an overall and exclusive instrument but must be undertaken in conjunction with other agreements; given the social, economic, geographical and political conditions of each State. We do not feel, therefore, that co-operation can be limited merely to the allotting of resources to countries with economic problems that suffer the most from the illicit trafficking in narcotics. Furthermore, it must be accompanied by the will to promote and improve the conditions that govern non-concessional economic relations, namely, foreign trade, making it possible for developing countries, on a reciprocal, bilateral and multilateral basis, to strengthen and secure access to international markets without the fear that protectionist trade barriers will be erected. That plan should include an intensification of the campaigns of drug
prevention and rehabilitation.
The magnitude of the problem should prevent us from assuming that those who are today unaffected by the problem will be exempt from becoming centres of production in the future. One need only recall the situation that prevailed with marijuana, the predecessor of the coca phenomenon. The same can happen with that drug and with similar drugs. We must put into motion effective machinery to halt the transfer of resources under the pretext of legitimizing profits derived from any aspect of drug trafficking.
In calling for international co-operation in our work, we feel it necessary to emphasize the responsibility incumbent upon every Member to deal with every aspect of drug trafficking and the need for concerted actions to be taken, actions respectful of the independence and sovereignty of nations and in strict compliance with the principle of non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of States, without pre-conditions and without using the fight against drug
trafficking as a lever to exert economic or political pressure.
The co-operation we need should be aimed at strengthening our economies by the elimination of tariff barriers and subsidies in the industrialized countries, since they affect our basic exports; at the granting of preferential treatment to exports from the zones affected by drug trafficking at any of its stages; and at the promotion of foreign investment in those regions, channelled primarily to the social and economic rehabilitation of their inhabitants.
The problem of illicit drug trafficking has also had a serious effect on the administration of justice. Those who have been given the responsibility of administering justice have had to face intimidation and threats. Many judges have paid with their lives for faithfully doing their duty. Frequently the task is made even more painful by the lack of the means necessary for assembling proof that would enable the investigations to be carried out expeditiously and effectively.
The United Nations could make a decisive contribution to the drafting of a plan that would allow our judges to improve their professional qualifications, to modernize their investigative techniques, to enjoy the guarantee of personal safety and to obtain the equipment and resources that would enable them to carry out their functions more thoroughly.
The city of Cartagena de Indias, in Colombia, has just been the setting for a historic meeting of the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, the United States and Peru. The phenomenon of drug trafficking affects the countries that met there in different ways. The Cartagena summit had the merit of approaching the problem of drug production, trafficking, demand and consumption sincerely and realistically, for the first time. The United States, the world's largest consumer of drugs, recognized the great responsibility it bears in the struggle, which until only recently was left to one country or a small group of countries producing or processing drugs. Everyone recognized that the problem of drug trafficking is
global and collective and that its various aspects are interrelated; that each of these aspects must be combated; and that the failure of any of the elements that make up the entire problem will threaten the success of all the others.
The document that was signed contains a novel element which is of undoubted importance and which makes it different from the way the subject has traditionally been dealt with. I refer to the recognition of the negative effects on the economies of the Andean countries caused not only by drug trafficking but also by the efforts to eliminate the production and sale of drugs deriving from coca.
An understanding was reached that the best support that can be given to the developing countries in their struggle against drug trafficking is the adoption of measures to strengthen their economies, to improve their production infrastructure, to promote their exports and to provide incentives for investment and foreign trade. Similarly, the United States undertook to support, where necessary, programmes for alternative development and crop substitution. On this subject, emphasis was placed on the need for immediate financial assistance to alleviate the social and economic costs engendered by the interdiction of illicit drug trafficking and the destruction of crops. The United States demonstrated its readiness to give assistance in regard to the balance of payments of the Andean countries in order to meet their needs for foreign exchange and effectively to facilitate access to their markets of the products of those three countries.
Furthermore, action was agreed upon to support comprehensive prevention programmes in order to deal successfully with drugs, as well as to ensure greater co-operation in equipping and training law-enforcement agencies in the Andean
coun tr ies.
The awareness that sustained development by the producing countries requires the creation of jobs, external financing and easier access of exports to foreign markets was made clear during the deliberations and is reflected in the final document signed by the four Presidents.
The control of financial activities and the procedures for allotting to the affected countries the proceeds from embargos and the seizure of goods involved in drug trafficking were also considered during the summit meeting.
In the Cartagena Declaration stress is placed on the need to ensure that the Pledges of co-operation are supplemented by bilateral agreements between the par ties.
What triumphed in Cartagena was the spirit of concertation. The four countries narrowed their differences and reached consensus on joint policies and actions. We are pleased to have strengthened co-operation based on mutual respect, as sovereign nations and in recognition of our juridical equality.
Colombia and its President, Mr. Virgilio Barco, have attached no conditions to their struggle against drug trafficking, in the form of a quid pro quo on the part of any State or group of States. They have acted and will continue to act with immutable and steadfast moral conviction, in the certainty that this is what needs to be done for the benefit of Colombia and the international community as a whole. Colombia and its President are triumphing.
However, I must state to the General Assembly that millions of men and women in Colombia - and I am sure also in Bolivia, Peru and, in general, Latin America -
are awaiting concrete action to implement the offers that have been made.
If for any reason or under any technical or political pretext, or by means of textual interpretations, action is not forthcoming within a reasonable time frame -particularly action in terms of economic co-operation reflected in the Declaration or in the bilateral agreements between the United States and the other States - there will be an enormous groundswell of frustration in our countries, and this will do absolutely nothing to promote the struggle we are waging. The same feelings would be aroused if other nations did not shoulder their full responsibilities in regard to this struggle.
This special session of the General Assembly constitutes a fundamental step in our collective struggle. We hail this new stage, which will undoubtedly yield promising results and set an example for ever-more-fruitful regional and world action.
Mr. BURKE (Ireland): First, I should like to express my congratulations to you, Sir, on your unanimous election as President of this special session of the General Assembly. I am sure that our work will benefit greatly from your presidency.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Economic Community and
its twelve member States.
The dramatic increase in drug abuse and in the illicit production and traffic in narcotics constitutes one of the most serious issues confronting the international community today. Spreading like a plague around the world, the drug problem has left few nations untouched. While its pervasive effects are felt in every section of society it especially threatens our young people. It robs them of their vitality, saps their creativity and too often destroys their dignity as individual human beings. It threatens the fabric of family life and puts whole communities at risk. The growing scale of the phenomenon is such that it now has the potential to destabilize democratic government, distort economic development and corrupt the process of law. As we approach the end of the twentieth century, there is a grave responsibility on us as political leaders to ensure the mobilization of a truly concerted effort to end this scourge.
The problem of drug abuse is, of course, not a new one, even if the scope and extent of the problem are now greatly increased. There are already in place many excellent programmes designed both to reduce demand and to restrict the supply of illicit drugs. At national level, where the primary responsibility for dealing with drug abuse and illicit trafficking rests, many Governments, including those of the member States of the European Community, have considerably enlarged their efforts in this area in recent years. It is appropriate at this point to pay a special tribute to those States, among them several Latin American countries, which, often in very difficult circumstances, have waged a determined campaign to eliminate the illicit production and transit of drugs from and through their territories. The European Council of Heads of State or Government, at its meeting on 8 and 9 December 198 9, saluted the courageous action taken by certain countries
nd urged that everything possible be done to contribute to the success of their
efforts. The Twelve were therefore pleased last month to welcome the special programme of co-operation announced by the Government of Colombia, to which they intend to offer a positive response.
However, let i t be clear that the Twelve do not see the campaign against drug abuse as merely a question of tackling the sources of supply. The demand for drugs is no less central to this pernicious equation. One does not exist without the other. As President Barco said in his memorable address at the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly, the only law the narco-terrorists do not break is the law of supply and demand. Only by tackling both simultaneously and with equal intensity along with the related aspects of drug trafficking can progress be made.
The universal nature of the drug problem, however, necessitates a response which extends beyond purely national measures. The illicit trade in narcotics is no respecter of national boundaries. If the international community is to deal effectively with this problem then the efforts of Governments must be complemented by effective concerted action at the regional and international levels. The convening of this special session of the General Assembly is our shared acknowledgement of that fact. Last week's summit and the resulting Cartagena communique were another important advance at the regional level. As I shall outline later in my speech, the European Community and its member States are already embarking on an intensified programme of regional co-operation.
The United Nations has long recognized the necessity for concerted inter national action. Under United Nations auspices a number of important instruments have been adopted in the narcotics field. The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol, and the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances have created a system of international control on illicit trade in drugs. The adoption in 1988 of the United Nations Convention against
Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances represented a
further significant extension of the international legal framework. The focus on trafficking came from a realization that, with production and demand, it was an essential third arm of the international illicit trade in drugs. The Convention's innovative provisions in such areas as confiscation of assets, controlled delivery and control of substances used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances are carefully designed to impede and disrupt drug drafficking operations to the maximum possible extent. The European Community and all 12 of its member States have signed that Convention and intend to ratify it as soon as possible.
The role of the United Nations has, of course, extended beyond the legal areai important political declarations were adopted at the Vienna Conferences in 1987 and 1988. The Declaration of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking in 1987 and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control set forth an all-embracing range of practical measures which can make a significant contribution to the fiqht against drug abuse and the suppression of illicit trafficking.
At the intergovernmental level, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs is the main policy-making body in the narcotics area, and provides a specialized forum for debate and exchange of ideas. Its advice and guidance have underpinned many of the developments in drug policy over the years.
The European Community and its member States have repeatedly expressed their support for the work being done by the Division on Narcotic Drugs, the International Narcotics Control Board and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control. While each of those bodies has its own specific mandate within the overall United Nations anti-drug effort, the Seeretary-General has stressed the
importance of a coherent approach so as to maximize the results attained.
Convinced that action at the international level must be complemented by effective regional measures, the European Community and its member States have intensified their co-operation in the narcotics area, a process made more urgent by the need to prepare for the single European market in 1992. To ensure that this co-operation is as effective as possible, the Twelve, on the initiative of President Mitterrand of France, have recently established a High-Level Group of Co-ordinators on Drug Issues. The Group has been mandated to take all steps necessary to ensure that the actions of the European Community and its member States in the fight against the scourge of drug abuse are closely co-ordinated and that they make the most effective contribution possible to wider international co-operation in this area. The Group will report to the European Council of Heads of State or Government in Dublin next June on areas for priority attention and on the measures required to attain the objectives outlined. A further indication of the commitment of the Twelve in this area was the recent decision to establish within the framework of European political co-operation a forum for ongoing consideration of the international aspects of the drug problem.
Within the Twelve, the fight against drug-related crime will continue to be pursued both in the framework of the Trevi Group, which is composed of Ministers for Justice and the Interior as well as representatives of the relevant state agencies, and in the framework of the Mutual Assistance Group among the customs authorities. The member States also attach particular importance to their co-operation with other Western European States in the Pompidou Group, which, as members will be aware, is composed of 19 European States, including the Twelve, as well as the European Community as an observer, and operates within the framework of
the Council of Europe.
As Chairman of the Trevi Group, I can say that it has been active for many years in the fight against illicit drug trafficking, and that a lot of very useful work has been done to improve police co-operation among the Twelve to combat that menace. At the most recent meeting of the Trevi ministers, at Paris in December last, we agreed to make every effort to create throughout the territory of the member States an equivalent degree of pressure against drug traffickers by: strengthening controls at external frontiers, whether these be air, sea or land frontiers; speeding up exchanges of information and stepping up central intelligence units; developing a network of liaison officers; investigating money-laundering offences; and developing a European drugs file.
We have also expressed our solidarity with producer and transit countries in their fight against drugs and have decided to increase and co-ordinate our efforts to co-operate with those countries in technical police matters. TO that end, we decided to organize early in 1990 one or more meetings of experts on equipment, training, technical advice, organizational advice and scientific police methods. Their task will be to prepare as soon as possible a ministerial meeting on the subject of technical police co-operation. A special meeting of such experts will be held under the Irish presidency on 9 March next, in Dublin, and it is my intention to devote a special session at the regular meeting of Trevi ministers in Dublin in June next to discussion of the drugs problem and in particular of the question of co-operation with producer and transit countries in technical police
ma tters.
The European Community and its member States fully realize that their ongoing and expanded programmes in such fields as public health, customs control and security must be complemented by a programme of international assistance. The Community is committed to co-operating with developing countries and to supporting the effective implementation of international instruments on a universal basis. In the framework of bilateral co-operation, the European Community allocated 16.8 million ECU between 1987 and 1989, equivalent to approximately $20 million. Recognizing the increased problem in that area, the European Community has decided to raise its contribution substantially: for 1990 alone, the contribution will be 9.8 million ECU, or approximately $11.8 million. Contributions by the Community and its member States account for over 75 per cent of the total contributed to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control (UNFDAC). The Twelve intend to continue their support and hope that others who have not previously been included among the donors will join them so that UNFDAC can more fully respond to the requests from countries that need its assistance.
A great deal is being done in the battle against drugs. However, the sad reality is that measures that may have seemed adequate even in the recent past are now clearly inappropriate to the scale and dimensions which the crisis has now assumed. To combat that scourge, the international community needs to work together more closely than ever before. We need together to devise new strategies that, by dealing comprehensively with demand, production, trafficking, treatment and rehabilitation as well as the financial aspect, will offer a framework on which to build a truly effective campaign against drugs.
That is the task of this special session of the General Assembly. It convenes at a critical juncture, a time when there is a greater determination world-wide
than ever before to tackle the drug problem, but also a growing realization of the
intensity and complexity of its struggle. That should not deter us from our task but rather encourage us to intensify our efforts.
It is self-evident that a reduction in demand is essential if progress is to be made in dealing with the problem of illegal drugs. The European Community and its member States, recognizing its importance, have actively pronoted preventive education and public awareness programmes, many of them targetted at young people. The Twelve Ministers for Health agreed in 1989 on the implementation of a co-ordinated measure for preventing drug addiction and taking care of drug addicts. The Twelve have also taken steps to reinforce their co-operation in the field of law enforcement. The Twelve would like to see consideration given to an enhanced role for the United Nations as a focal point for the collection and dissemination of information relating to demand reduction. The world ministerial summit to reduce demand for drugs and to combat the cocaine threat, which will be held in London in April, will provide an important opportunity to review existing policies and to identify further measures that could contribute to a reduction in demand and a strengthening of the effectiveness of demand-reduction policies.
On the supply side, effective action to deal with the availability of crops used in the illicit production of drugs is also vital. The European Community and its member States believe that policies aimed at the prevention and substitution of illicit narcotic plant cultivation will be fully successful only if pursued in a framework of comprehensive rural development programmes. These must obviously incorporate incentives designed to identify viable crop substitution programmes and the means to facilitate the efficient marketing of those crops. To help achieve that objective, we believe that it is necessary to expand the level of economic and technical assistance provided by UNFDAC and by intergovernmental bodies and specialized agencies. That should include arrangements for enhanced co-operation at the bilateral and regional levels.
It is essential also that States take steps to eliminate the diversion for illicit use of precursor chemicals and related materials through the application of articles 12 and 13 of the 1988 Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.
We call for the fullest possible co-operation at all levels within the guidelines set out in the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline (CMO) to reinforce the existing system of control of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances provided for in the relevant international instruments.
Progress in the battle against drug trafficking will be greatly enhanced by early ratification of the 1988 Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. The Twelve would propose that, to the extent that they are able to do so, States should apply provisionally the terms of the 1988 Convention. States should also conclude bilateral and multilateral co-operation agreements to build on the provisions of the Convention. It is essential that States co-operate fully in exchanging information on all matters related to the traffic in drugs. In that regard, we recall that General Assembly resolution 44/142 requests the Secretary-General to undertake a study of the economic and social consequences of the illicit traffic in drugs. Within the Community, the Ministers of the Twelve responsible for the police have decided to create a European focal point for drug seizures that will permit improved co-ordination among member States and thereby add to the effectiveness of the anti-drug effort through the Community. In that regard, we also attach importance to work done by Interpol and others.
The Twelve are confident that the special session will endorse the view that the treatment and rehabilitation of the victims of drug abuse must be a matter of priority concern. The Twelve consider that the financial aspects of the illicit trade in drugs require particular attention. States should take steps to ensure
that banking and financial organizations in their territory do not benefit from the drug trade and that they do not become involved in the processing of the often vast sums of money associated with drug trafficking. States should also ensure that the traffickers do not benefit from their ill-gotten gains. We urge all Governments to consider introducing appropriate domestic legislation to trace, freeze and confiscate the proceeds of drug trafficking and to criminalize money laundering. We also suggest consideration by States of the possibility of increasing the funds allocated to anti-drug activities, either nationally or at the international level, taking into account the increased confiscation of assets derived from illicit traffick ing.
Ensuring that the United Nations is equipped for its new and expanded responsibilities in the drugs field requires that the structures of its drug bodies be reviewed and adapted to meet the challenges that lie ahead. We therefore welcome the decision to establish an expert group to advise on the structural arrangements for drug-abuse control and look forward to its report, which is due to be submitted to the General Assembly at its next regular session. We are confident that that study will contribute to ensuring that the United Nations operate in that area through streamlined structures that pursue co-ordinated objectives in the most efficient and rational manner. However, if the conviction expressed on all sides that the United Nations must play a leading role in the fight against drugs is to be meaningful, then the increased resources necessary to allow it to do so must be provided. It is the view of the Twelve that a higher proportion of the regular budget should be allocated to the drugs area, and we urge the special session to send a clear message to that effect.
In his report to the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly the Secretary-General referred to estimates that the monetary value of drug trafficking
had recently surpassed that of the international trade in oil and was second only
to the arms trade. These are depressing statistics. But notwithstanding the difficulties, there are grounds for optimism. We should take heart from the brave example of the Government and the people of Colombia. There is indeed a growing sense in the international community that by acting together we can turn the tide. The special session is a major opportunity to advance this objective. The European Community and its member States will work unstintinqly to ensure its success. For the sake of our young people we cannot afford to fail.
Mr. ALVAREZ DEL CASTILLO (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): The people and the Government of Mexico wish to express their great satisfaction and sincere gratitude for the responsibility delegations have assumed in carrying out the Assembly's work. Its results will allow us to intensify the fight against problems that affect all of us and that demand solidarity in the pursuit of common goals and co-ordination in concrete action.
(Mr. Alvarez del Castillo, Mexico) Each generation leaves a mark that has a bearing on the following generation and influences it. The decades of this century have witnessed dizzying changes and now, in view of the achievements of science and technology and with the solid expressions of our rich, varied and multiple cultures, the world on reaching the twenty-first century is certain to be overwhelming and complex. Hunger and devastation, illiteracy and isolation, racism and imperialism continue to be the scourges of mankind, which we represent; they must also be cause for collective, shared shame.
Of all the evils, all the plagues, all the burdens, with which we cross the threshold of the new millenium, perhaps drug trafficking is among the worst, and drug addiction is the universal social disease. Drugs are the plaque of the modern worId.
We do not seek here merely to differentiate or define causes and effects; much less do we presuppose that the blame lies solely with one group, the producers, or another, the consumers. We are all responsible. We must therefore acknowledge that both supply and demand exist; that borders, nationalities and languages are but stones on the path of that abominable mob that fattens on our peoples and is made up of those who cultivate drugs, those who process them, transport them, distribute them, or consume them, and, finally, those who launder the money made from this degrading illegal trade.
We Mexicans, like other members of the Assembly, are aware of the theory that, if demand is reduced, supply will diminish and, consequently, so will production. But what lies behind that production and that demand?
In the case of those who cultivate drugs, it is poverty, ignorance, exploitation and desperation. Among the consumers it is disappointment,
alienation, helplessness and discouragement. And these occur, almost without exception, in rich, highly-developed countries.
It is everyone's responsibility to help, so that poor peoples, the poor farmers in so many of our countries, receive the support to which they are entitled, to spare them the shameful need to grow the plants used to make the drugs that are poisoning mankind. We must realize, however, that this support must be economic, timely, real and socially oriented. In addition to relieving hunger, it is necessary to provide justice and dignity for these nations.
The rich countries, the chief consumers of drugs, will have to reexamine the future of their societies. The challenges of tomorrow will also have to be democratically settled there. It must be remembered that punitive actions or restrictive measures are not enough.
The components of the drug trafficking and drug addiction phenomena are mutually conditioning and linked together in an unbreakable chain. Education, the raising of awareness, community participation, integral prevention and reduction of demand, control of supply, suppression of illicit trafficking, and treatment and rehabilitation must be understood as integral components of the actions that we must undertake jointly and simultaneously in order to eradicate these evils. Moreover, all efforts will prove insufficient if the marketing of the essential chemical inputs for drug manufacturing is not effectively controlled. Nor should we ignore the fact that proceeds from drug trafficking are frequently used in the arms trade, which can also be controlled if there is the will to do so among those whose obligation it is.
The President of Mexico, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, has decreed that fighting drug trafficking is a priority matter for the State, a problem of the first
importance that concerns national security, health and international solidarity and against which we shall continue to act with all our might. He has stated that Mexico will sustain and intensify the struggle, to avoid national security risks and respond to the concern of families over the damage that drug addiction can do to Mexican youth. We have therefore increased our co-operation and exchange of information in our common struggle against drug trafficking, with the understanding that the responsibility for operations within our territory rests exclusively with Mexicans.
Mexico has contributed to and invested a great deal in this struggle. The Mexican people, who in past years have been seriously affected by the economic crisis, have made admirable efforts in that struggle. We are and will continue to be committed to giving our best in the fight against drug trafficking and drug addiction, with our own resources and in our own way, through our own efforts and free will, even though the cost in both lives and resources has been very high.
Half the budget of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic and a third of that of the Mexican Armed Forces are allocated to combating drugs. In order to redress the situation in to which criminals were carrying out their activities with impunity, methods of investigation have been updated and the penalties and punishment applicable to this type of crime have been increased.
The actions of the Government of Mexico during the past 14 months have led to the verified destruction of 43,551 marijuana fields and 48,776 poppy fields.
During the same period, 697 kilograms of opium gum and heroin have been seized, as have 644 tons of dried, packaged marijuana and 38,519 kilograms of pure cocaine. These actions prevented 1.501 million doses of heroin, 4.222 million doses of marijuana and 616 million doses of cocaine from entering the black market for drugs. Their value would have amounted to more than $50 billion. We know what we
(Mr. Alvarez del Castillo, Mexico) have done and what remains to be done. Similarly, 320 criminal organizations have been disbanded and 12,439 persons arrested, among them several of the most notorious and dangerous national and foreign drug traffickers. Substantial amounts of money and property have been seized from them and turned over for use by society.
When considering these results, it should be remembered that drug consumption levels in Mexico are relatively low. The number of regular users amounts to barely 0.8 per cent of the population and these are to be found mainly in urban areas and primarily among the young. We are determined to reduce domestic consumption, principally in inhalable drugs, which we refer to as the drugs of the poor.
In accordance with the principles of sovereignty and self-determination, in February 1989 Mexico signed - and will soon ratify - the Vienna Convention, which lays down the principle that influence or pressure may not be exercised against other States. Within this framework, Mexico’s international co-operation to date has been formalized in seven bilateral agreements on co-operation in fighting drug trafficking, which call for a number of operational programmes and specific actions. Six other similar bilateral agreements are currently being negotiated.
From the bilateral approach we shall move to the multilateral approach, with greater prospects of success.
For that reason, we repeat that the fight against drug trafficking must be carried out with scrupulous respect for each country’s national sovereignty. We are in favour of applying the international legal framework, and we insist on the effective application of the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, which calls for a comprehensive, balanced approach to the fight against drug production, abuse and trafficking. We insist on full application of the Multidisciplinary Outline by means of bilateral and multilateral action. It is necessary that all of us understand that declarations and documents will not solve the grave problems that confront us; we need economic support, specific programmes and concrete actions.
Standing firmly on our recognized international doctrine, we are opposed to the creation of all multinational military or paramilitary forces. Unilateral measures, arbitrary positions that slander and intimidate, threats that offend the sovereignty of peoples and the dignity of individuals, cannot be tolerated. Criticism should be open and to the point.
Neither the sovereignty of peoples nor territorial integrity is open to discussion. International co-operation must rest on the principle of respect for the rights of others.
These social ills, which are characteristic of our times, can be fought only with the antidote of co-operation, knowledge and understanding. To the challenges of the future we must respond with deeds, not words. We cannot afford to lose this fight. In this regard, there are not, and cannot be, any limitations in terms of
(Mr. Alvarez del Castillo, Mexico) nationality, race, religion or distinction of any type. We are all part of humanity, part of a single project, a single plan - a better tomorrow.
I wish to take this opportunity to express our deepest appreciation to the bodies of the United Nations that Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar leads so effectively and with such dignity.
Mr. McWEENEY (Bahamas): On behalf of the Government and the people of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, and on my own behalf, I extend warm congratulations to you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at this historic seventeenth special session. We are confident that you will lead our deliberations to a successful conclusion.
We also wish to commend the Secretary-General for his commitment to international drug control. We recall, in this respect, that the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking followed on his suggestion. The two important documents of that conference - the declaration and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline - provide a framework, on which we must now build.
The international community is under inexorable pressure to exercise political will and to consolidate and implement an effective strategy appropriate to the gravity of the illicit-drugs problem. The options are few, given the intensity of the challenge that international drug-trafficking networks present to the global community. Developing and developed countries alike have been brought to the brink of social disaster, in consequence of drug abuse and attendant criminality. Consequently, throughout 1989, my Government stressed in all international forums the critical need for bilateral, regional and international co-operation at the highest levels, to devise comprehensive anti-narcotics strategies. Only
(Mr. McWeeney, Bahamas) through co-operation can we effectively combat the powerful drug cartels, which terrorize our social order and undermine our legitimate economies.
The obligation to co-operate and the concept of shared responsibility in the drug war cannot be challenged. The Bahamas believes that embracing this concept precludes the making of discriminatory assumptions regarding the capacity of developing countries to fight the drug menace, as this capacity is severely curtailed by limited human and material resources, as well as by financial constraints. Equally important, shared responsibility does not allow for the creation of unequal relationships, in which the solution of one country’s drug problem is perceived as taking precedence over that of others’. Nor does it countenance situations where the policy choices of States are formulated under threat of sanction. At the same time, international principles should not be used as roadblocks to the compromise and commitment demanded by shared responsibility.
What shared responsibility does entail is the maximum effort to ensure that international co-operation reaches its full potential. In this regard, the Bahamas does not advocate surrender of sovereignty or derogation from international principles. Concession and compromise made by each State, on the basis of mutual commitment and under conditions mutually agreed, can give practical application to the concept of shared responsibility. It follows that equitably shared costs for every aspect of drug control, and assistance by way of equipment, expertise and other resources, must also be an important element of shared responsibility. The objective must always be to enable each country effectively to fight the drug war, individually and in concert with others, in a manner that will have the most significant and enduring impact on the drug problem.
We believe, therefore, that it is important that the General Assembly, at this special session - the first of its kind on the illicit-drugs problem - chart an effective course to address the expansion and entrenchment of the illicit production of, trafficking in, and abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. In particular, an action-oriented global programme must be approved, and the utmost political will to implement that programme and all future drug control efforts must be reflected in the declaration that the General Assembly adopts at this special session.
The Bahamas contends that it is essential to build on substantive accomplishments in the international system. The manifold, countermeasures within the international drug-control-treaty regime, recently fortified by the 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, provide a comprehensive legal framework for effective drug control. The Bahamas is a State party to all these conventions.
The adoption of the 1988 Convention at Vienna in December of that year marked a watershed in the international campaign against drug abuse and illicit trafficking. The signing of the Convention by a substantial number of Member States on that occasion, the growing number of signatories, and the several ratifications are, we believe, indicative of an intensified political will to implement an effective anti-narcotics strategy. The Bahamas was especially pleased to be the very first country to ratify the Convention - in January 1989.
Last October my Prime Minister, addressing the Commonwealth Heads of Government conference on the drug problem, reiterated the importance that the Bahamas attaches to those provisions of the 1988 Convention pertaining to extradition, mutual legal assistance and forfeiture.
He called upon the international community, in conformity with that Convention, to develop their national capacities to trace drug profits through the international banking system so that these ill-gotten profits might be attached wherever they are found. We take this opportunity again to urge all States to enact laws and implement regulatory policies in order to insulate their banking systems against that abuse, money laundering.
We are keenly aware of the dual benefit to be derived from the implementation of the Convention's provisions on forfeiture. It puts money back into national treasuries impoverished by expenditure on drug control, and at the same time sends a powerful and persuasive message to drug trafficking networks that in the final analysis crime does not pay.
As a nation which has already taken such action, the Bahamas strongly recommends that all States provisionally apply the 1988 Convention. The stringent supervision of the banking industry of the Bahamas is a matter of record, and seizure and forfeiture laws have been in force since March 1987. The Bahamas concluded an agreement with the United Kingdom reciprocally to enforce assets forfeiture orders in 1988, signed a mutual legal assistance Treaty with the United States for which instruments of ratification will be exchanged in the immediate future, and has also reached agreement with the Government of the United States on the text of a new extradition treaty and with the Government of Canada on a mutual legal assistance treaty. The extradition treaty with the United States will be signed in Nassau within the next fortnight, and we expect to sign the Bahamas-Canada mutual legal assistance treaty at an early date.
The 1988 Convention articulates with clarity and cogency the responsibility of the international community to assist transit States in effectively counteracting
(Mr. McWeeney, Bahamas) the drug problem. The Bahamas would urge that early steps be taken to analyse the methods and routes used for illicit traffic transit and to determine the modalities of technical co-operation and assistance to improve the interdiction capability of transit States, on land, sea and air.
As a transit State, the Bahamas appreciates the advantages to be gained not only from pursuing a firm drug control policy but also from acting in concert with others to thwart the objectives of international drug trafficking networks. Against incredible odds, the accomplishments of the Bahamas at the national level have been exemplary, and its co-operation with other States, particularly the United States of America, was commended in the report of the International Narcotics Control Board for 1989. We believe that the United States-Bahamas relationship in the anti-drug war is unique and the best example of the type of co-operation and assistance mandated by the international drug-control Treaties. This is not to say that drug control has not been without extreme sacrifice, including the postponement of important and pressing development objectives. Rather, it emphasizes the commitment of the Government and people of the Bahamas to the war against the drug cartels.
In the interest of international drug control, the Bahamas continues to dedicate significant portions of its national budget to law enforcement efforts to stem the flow of illicit narcotics into and through the Bahamanian archipelago. We believe that the Bahamas stands as an example not only of how States can inadvertently become entangled in the labyrinth of the nefarious drug trade but of what one small country can accomplish against drug trafficking networks given the requisite determination and a national commitment. It is geography, not the production, manufacture or consumption of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, that has drawn the Bahamas into the drug web. Located between the
(Mr. McWeeney, Bahamas) largest producers and consumers of cocaine, the Bahamas, on its own and inco-operation with the United States, has proved itself capable of rising to the challenge and achieving enormous success against the drug cartels.
Constructive regional arrangements for drug control not only fulfil the need for co-operation and communication at the regional level but also extend the scope of the international community's response to the drug problem. The central role that the United Nations, as the primary international organization, must play in addressing the critical drug situation is facilitated by the efforts of, among others, the Caribbean community and the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission. It is our firm belief that co-operation within the framework of the United Nations system is fundamental to any success the international community can achieve in drug control.
We believe that there is an urgent need for the international community to harmonize drug control priorities with the requisite support of the United Nations system. It is essential in this regard that we address the myriad factors that would mitigate against the United Nations drug control bodies - the Division of Narcotic Drugs, the secretariat of the International Narcotics Control Board and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control playing a strong supportive role. Not only must every effort be made to improve the efficiency of the drug control bodies and the system-wide response to drug control, but requisite human and financial resources must also be allocated.
The Bahamas itself proposes the establishment of a United Nations-funded narcotics enforcement office in the interests of further improving the Organization's structure. We appreciate that law enforcement cannot be the only response to the drug problem, but we believe that it is an important first line of
defence in areas as diverse as stemming the transborder movement of illicit
substances, eradicating illicit crops and protecting the international bankingsystem from penetration by money launderers. The United Nations has done effective work in strengthening law enforcement co-operation, including training, the provision of equipment and the expansion of its system of meetings of heads of narcotics-law enforcement agencies. Other intergovermental bodies, including the International Criminal Police Organization (ICPO/Interpol) continue to provide invaluable input into narcotic-drug law enforcement. We believe that the time has come to review the diverse law enforcement efforts to ensure a coherent approach to law enforcement activities on a continuing basis.
Complementary to law enforcement efforts, vigorous initiatives must be launched and sustained against the production of narcotics and psychotropic substances, in accordance with relevant international instruments and agreements. The Bahamas has followed closely initiatives aimed at a more realistic approach to crop substitution. Preferential tariffs and treatment for substitute crops in the markets of the industrialized world can provide an important incentive for crop substitution programmes.
The Bahamas also believes that due consideration should be given to the recent proposal	to	elaborate a new	convention against drug abuse. We believe that
progress	in	reducing supply	and trafficking	is inextricably linked with progress in
demand reduction. For this reason the Bahamas has repeatedly made known its support for	the ministerial	level summit on	demand reduction scheduled to be
convened	in	London in April	of this year by	the Government of the United Kingdom.
We reiterate that the Bahamas has confidence in the capacity of the international community to wage an effective war against illicit drugs. The United Nations role in this regard is indispensable. The struggle however requires
unflagging political will, constructive and innovative action-oriented policies and
(Mr. McWeeney, Bahamas) programmes, increased resources and an international system capable of quickand efficient response. A comprehensive global programme of action supported by a consensus declaration will ensure the success of this special session and represent another significant step in the global campaign against the illicit production and supply of, demand for, trafficking in and the distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
Mr. SARASIN (Thailand): My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, once again presiding over a special session of the General Assembly. We recall that during your tenure as President of the General Assembly you have presided over deliberations on the question of a par the id. My delegation has every confidence that under your able guidance our work at this special session will reach a
successful conclusion.
With each passing day the drug problem becomes more and more serious. Drug trafficking and related criminal activities have now reached an alarming scale, to the point of destabilizing economies, adversely affecting the development of many countries and threatening the stability, national security and sovereignty of States. The drug problem constitutes a global challenge requiring a sustained global response.
Following the 1987 International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, the organization of this special session is another important step in the international campaign against drug abuse and trafficking. It reflects the serious concern of the United Nations and the world community over the drug problem and its adverse effects on the national security, stability and resilience of all nations in the world. This session takes on even greater significance in that it is being held at a time when the global community is challenged as never before by powerful drug cartels.
The drug menace transcends all boundaries. There is hardly any country, rich or poor, that remains unaffected by its peril. Thus, it is important that all countries, regardless of their political and ideological differences, collaborate to develop drug eradication and suppression measures at the national, regional and international levels.
We in Thailand are very much aware of the danger and cruel effects of narcotic drugs on our people and our society. The Royal Thai Government has always tackled the drug problem with great seriousness. We believe that reduction of the demand for and of the supply of narcotics must go hand in hand; emphasis on one aspect only at the expense of the other is a prescription for failure.
My Government has adopted a two-pronged strategy which provides a balanced and comprehensive approach against narcotics. The first prong is aimed at reducing the
drug supply through law enforcement and narcotic cultivation control. The second prong is aimed at reducing the demand for drugs through preventive education and treatment and rehabilitation. I am pleased to say that these measures have succeeded in reducing narcotic production in Thailand.
Nevertheless, Thailand is now faced with a more difficult problem. It is being used as a gateway for the trafficking of narcotic drugs from the infamous Golden Triangle because of our geographical proximity, relatively superior infrastructure and convenient transportation network. While intensive interdiction activities undertaken by the Royal Thai Government have so far substantially disrupted the flow of drugs from the Golden Triangle, in view of the alarming increase in the output of drugs from that area, the success of current suppression and interdiction activities remains doubtful without stronger and more generous support from the international community.
Thailand has also played an active role against the drug problem at the international level. We believe that the drug problem is an international problem that no country can solve on its own. Thailand has therefore co-operated closely with a number of friendly countries and international organizations in our common war against drugs, as attested to by our active exchange of information and intelligence on the drug traffic with many countries and international organizations.
In this connection, allow me to take this opportunity to express on behalf of the Royal Thai Government heartfelt appreciation of the assistance rendered to Thailand by all our friends, such as Australia, Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden and the United States, as well as the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control, to name but a few.
My delegation also welcomes the recently concluded summit conference on drugs in Cartagena, Colombia. The joint statement acknowledges the need for demand reduction. It also underscores the need to encourage crop-substitution projects by providing extensive access to commercial markets for these crops. We welcome this as a useful framework for future co-operation, to be followed by countries in other regions affected by the scourge of drugs and illicit trafficking.
Existing international drug control treaties form an important basis for individual action by States and for their co-operation at the regional, interregional and global levels. Thailand is a party to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, of 1961, and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, of 1971. We have also endorsed the declaration emanating from the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking of 1987 and the implementation of the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control. Our acceptance of these instruments serves to declare our intention to engage in a war against drug traffickers. Furthermore, we also participated in the 1988 conference of plenipotentiaries for the adoption of a convention against illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, in Vienna. Many provisions of the Convention - those concerning the seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of and assets derived from illicit drug trafficking and conspiracy, among others - may prove to be the most appropriate weapons against drug trafficking. I should like to note that Thailand has applied in practice many of the provisions of the Convention. We are now in the process of drafting a bill containing anti-conspiracy measures as well as measures to facilitate the confiscation of drug proceeds and properties. It is one of the required steps towards accession to the 1988 Vienna Convention.
The special session should open up a new chapter of international co-operation to combat illicit drugs. The Royal Thai Government attaches great importance to it. We are confident that a high-level meeting like this will mobilize more concerted efforts from the world community to match the degree of gravity of the drug problem. This gathering will be an important testing ground to see how much the international community as a whole is willing and able to establish a common front against the drug traffickers.
The global programme of action to be adopted in the next few days must be action oriented, containing concrete, comprehensive and long-term objectives. It should be based on a sound strategy, addressing simultaneously all the aspects of the problem; reducing demand, controlling supply, halting the illicit traffic, strengthening United Nations control organs and bridging the resources shortfall.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the United Nations drug bodies for their past achievements in mobilizing and co-ordinating international efforts to eradicate drug problems. We want to see the United Nations continue its central role in this vital area. My delegation is confident that the United Nations system-wide plan of action on drug-abuse control being prepared by the Secretary-General will complement the global programme of action, resulting in significant improvement in the efficiency of the United Nations structure and programmes for drug-abuse control world-wide.
Let me reiterate that for its part the Royal Thai Government stands ready to step up its efforts to stem the flow of drugs from the Golden Triangle to the markets in the West. I should like to call upon the international community to lend further support to our activities. In that connection my delegation would also like to emphasize the need for the drug-consuming countries to step up
(Mr. Sarasin, Thailand) measures to reduce local demand for drugs, because, without a market, no business can exist. I fully agree with the President of Colombia when he said that the only law that the drug traffickers do not break is the law of supply and demand.
Prince Bola AJIBOLA (Nigeria): On behalf of the Government and the people of Nigeria, may I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your unanimous election to steer the work of the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General, his officials and all the representatives whose preparatory work has made the actualization of General Assembly resolution 44/141 of 15 December 1989 and the present gathering of distinguished delegations in this Hall possible. I believe that all of us are gathered here today to deliberate, with a sincere sense of mission and concern for humanity, on how we can jointly and effectively strengthen international co-operation against the illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking in and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
As Minister responsible for the administration of justice and law enforcement, I have watched and followed with great concern the increased rate of drug-related offences in the world. For me and for many of my colleagues in other countries this has been a source of grave concern. The convening of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to international co-operation against illicit drugs and trafficking in psychotropic substances is the proof of this collective sense of urgency to deal with the issue felt by the international community. My delegation attaches great importance to the special session and hopes that it will produce positive results.
As anyone who has followed developments relating to narcotic drugs and illicit trafficking in substances can testify, the solution to the menace posed by drug and substance abuse is obviously beyond national efforts. My delegation believes that the main task before the special session is to agree on realistic measures that can be adopted as soon as possible and implemented almost immediately to arrest further deterioration of the drug phenomenon.
It is all well and good to draw up a litany of programmes on information and education aimed at increasing the awareness of the general public. We believe, however, that mere statements on paper on the control of supply, or the eradication and substitution of the illicit production and processing of narcotic drugs and substances, will be purely cosmetic if adequate measures are not taken to ensure that the right follow-up mechanisms are put in place. My delegation agrees wholeheartedly with the continued use of the present monitoring and control mechanisms, as well as the utilization of the institutions in situ. We recognize the importance of strengthening the judicial and legal systems and believe that, if well employed at the sub-regional, regional and international levels, these will contribute in no uncertain terms to the eradication of the drug trafficking and abuse in the world. Nigeria believes that whereas primary responsibility falls upon individual States for the success of such measures to arrest the diversion of arms and explosives and the illicit traffic of vessels and aircrafts, the onus for putting to meaningful use all information issued by the Under-Secretary-General for Social Affairs and co-ordinator for all drug-related issues rests squarely on the General Assembly.
The succinct and precise analysis provided by the officials of the United Nations Offico at Vienna is to the effect that additional resources are required by
the United Nations drug-abuse control system if it is to implement fully all existing mandates. It was said that some 333 million, including 37 million of additional funds to the regular budget, are approximately the sums that may be required for the development of the United Nations system-wide plan. Furthermore, it was clearly stated that what has been done to date by the international community is inadequate to cope with the problems posed by illicit drugs and
psychotropic substances.
It follows that adequate attention by this session to the appointed officials' appeals for the co-ordination of all United Nations drug-related activities will be a step in the right direction towards finding the long-overdue solution to drug problems. A more effective approach to the issue would be the mounting by committed volunteers of a massive drive for needed funds, rather than the appointment of yet another body of experts on various aspects of the drug problem. The offers of co-operation by the various non-qovernmental organizations should be accorded due consideration and, where possible, accepted. The role of these well-qualified men and women who are from all walks of life and are actually in daily contact with the realities of drug problems may constitute just the support mechanism needed for the effective combating of the drug issue, in all its ramifications. The problem is certainly beyond the scope of the United Nations and its various bodies alone.
It is time for all Governments and non-qovernmental organizations as well as all humanitarian institutions and individuals to make their varied and much-needed contr ibutions.
At the national level, Nigeria has enacted laws imposing stiff penalties for drug offences, penalties such as life imprisonment and the forfeiture of all assets of the drug trafficker. In addition, on 29 December 1989 the Government promulgated the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency Decree No. 48 of 1989. This Decree provides for, among others, measures to identify, trace, freeze and confiscate the proceeds derived from drug and drug-related offences.
In the West African subregion Nigeria is already co-operating with the Republics of Benin, Ghana and Togo for the purpose of negotiating a quadripartite treaty on mutual assistance for the eradication of illicit drug trafficking within
the subregion. When the treaty is signed, signatory States will be expected to
grant to one another assistance in the investigation of illicit drug trafficking in all its ramifications.
Furthermore, within the ambit of the Commonwealth, the Nigerian Government also promulgated Decree No. 13 of 1988 - known as "Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters within the Commonwealth (Enactment and Enforcement Decree 1988)". The objective of the Decree is to increase the level of assistance and co-operation between Commonwealth countries in criminal matters, including the offence of drug traffick ing.
Nigeria believes that all these efforts must be linked to international treaties in order to enhance their effectiveness. It is on record that as early as June 1981 we ratified the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances and in the same year acceded to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol. And just a year ago - in February 1989, to be precise - Nigeria signed the 1988 Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Nigeria thus became the third signatory State to ratify the Convention.
In order to contain effectively the nefarious activities of traffickers, we believe that efforts must be intensified at the bilateral level to put in place treaties on mutual assistance in law-enforcement matters. Conscious of the advantages of such mutual assistance, Nigeria concluded two agreements with the United States - namely, the Executive Agreement on Procedures for Mutual Assistance in Law-Enforcement Matters, in November 1987; and the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in Criminal Matters, in September 1989. These agreements are intended to facilitate the efficient execution of requests from one country to the other for law-enforcement assistance, in our continuing and relentless efforts to stop
illicit trafficking. An identical treaty was also signed with Great Britain, under
(Prince Bola Ajibola, Nigeria) Commonwealth auspices, and we are at present negotiating similar bilateral agreements with India, Egypt and Ethiopia - to name but a few. All that is being done in the spirit of the 1988 United Nations Convention.
It is a welcome development that many countries have adopted measures in their legal systems to enable their Governments to comply with the provisions of the Convention relating to laundering, tracing, freezing and confiscating assets. The introduction of controlled delivery will, we believe, help law-enforcement agencies apprehend the leading drug traffickers and bring them to justice. There is ample evidence that there is co-ordination between the United Nations and its agencies and various organizations working in these fields. The volume of the available reports and documentation on their findings is proof of the work done as well as an indication of issues that are yet to be addressed. My delegation therefore believes that the content of the global plan of action which the special session adopts will go a long way towards determining the success or otherwise of the present concerted efforts at the international level to eliminate the illicit demand for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
Nevertheless, attention should be focused on ways of suppressing demand as well as production and supply. We support fully the idea of an international decade on narcotic drugs, as this would generate a global awareness, especially in the producer and user nations, of the evils of narcotic drugs. The same period could be used for fund-raising to support United Nations activities in this direction.
The work of the special session would be incomplete without effective deliberations by representatives on a concerted effort to support the poor economies of the producing nations. That would serve as a helpful incentive by enabling those nations to channel more resources towards suppressing the production and supply of illicit narcotic drugs.
Finally, it is my delegation's hope that the Organization will be able to release its potential power, in an integrated and co-ordinated manner, to meet the challenges of the task before the session. With greater determination and increased understanding and appreciation of the problems, backed by the necessary political will, I believe the goals we have set for ourselves are achievable. When we reflect on the heart-wrenchinq effects of drug abuse, we know that we must, with qrim determination, brace ourselves to meet the challenge, in the supreme belief that with close collaboration and a well-co-ordinated approach, success over the menace of drug traffickinq and abuse will be brought within reach earlier than
expected.
Mr. SCHAUBLE (Federal Republic of Germany) (spoke in German; English text furnished by the delegation): The Minister of Justice of Ireland has already set forth the joint position of the member nations of the European Community. To add to his presentation, I should like to elaborate on some issues from the point of view of the Federal Republic of Germany.
We are gratified, Mr. President, that you, an eminent representative of Africa, will be directing the business of this special session of the General Assembly. I am confident that under your experienced presidency this session, which is devoted to one of the most pressing problems of our time, will yield good results.
The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the fact that with this special session of the General Assembly the United Nations is once again demonstrating to the world public its determination to proscribe drug abuse. We must all be committed to the same cause, that of proscribing drugs, just as we previously proscribed torture and slavery.
Over the years many different measures have been taken at both the national and the international level to combat the ever increasing drug problem. Those measures, however, have never led to a co-ordinated world-wide combat strategy. Now for the first time there are signs of an earnest willingness to take that step, and it is imperative that it be taken. We must protect mankind from the self-destruction inflicted by drugs.
The estimated total turnover from illicit drug trafficking has now reached several billion dollars. That concentration of criminal power can be countered effectively only on the basis of close international co-ordination and co-operation. We must not waste time. We must use this special session of the General Assembly to make good headway in this effort.
If we are to achieve our purpose we must abstain from yet another fruitless discussion of whether demand or supply is the effective cause of the drug problem. The two are inseparably linked and interdependent. What matters most is that, on the basis of the fundamental consensus reached at the international drug Conferences of 1987 and 1988, we should now agree on specific measures that can be initiated within a short space of time.
In this context we must be quite clear on one point,. the fight against drug abuse is a joint task of the international community that can be successfully performed only if all nations assume joint responsibility. It is not by opposing the producing countries but only by joining forces with them that the consuming nations can get the drug situation under control. That was the message sent to us from the Cartagena conference by the Presidents of Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and the United States. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the decisions taken at that conference.
The crucial issues are, on the one hand, reduction of the demand for drugs by means of effective prevention and improved rehabilitation and, on the other, reduction of drug supplies by eliminating the economic and social causes of the cultivation of drugs in producer countries by ensuring effective control of chemicals and intensifying the fight against drug-related crime, especially drug traf f ick ing .
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is prepared to launch simultaneous efforts in all those areas. The Federal Chancellor, Mr. Kohl, has ordered the drafting of a national anti-drug plan, to be adopted in June this year by a national drugs conference. Its aims will be to bring together all
governmental and non-governmental forces involved in drug control so that they may
(Mr. Schauble, Federal Republic of Germany) work together towards jointly established objectives, and to open up new financial, technological and intellectual resources for the fight against drugs.
As we see it, the foremost objective of our national anti-drug policy is to persuade people, especially young people, to live a life without narcotics and drug addiction, in free self-determination. We shall significantly intensify our national measures in this field. Only recently, at the start of a large-scale education and awareness campaign, the Head of State of the Federal Republic of Germany, Federal President von Weizsàcker, appealed to all citizens of our country to ostracize drug consumption in any form.
Another important concern of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is to prevent any diversion of chemicals into the illicit manufacture of drugs. For this purpose, co-operative action has been taken in our country, in conjunction with the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, to provide control meednanisms which make it possible to detect illegal drug laboratories and prevent the illegal diversion even of substances which are not subject to legal controls because they are not themselves psychotropic and because they are required in large quantities for legitimate purposes.
As a further addition to this system we shall offer bilateral agreements to various countries to the effect that export permits for chemicals that can be used only for the manufacture of drugs will be granted only if the receiving countries authorize their importation. Moreover, we shall, within the European Community, advocate a uniform standard governing the control of chemicals which can be used for the manufacture of such drugs.
The crucial flaw is the current practice of brokerage firms by which they specify or change the destination of such chemicals only after the goods have left
(Mr. Schauble, Federal Republic of Germany) the territory of the country of origin. Also, supervision in the countries of destination is often inadequate. By means of agreements with the chemical and pharmaceutical industries and broker organizations and by developing effective monitoring models and helping with their implementation, the United Nations could make a significant contribution to preventing illegal diversion of chemicals to the manufacture of drugs.
Any	effective reduction	in the supply	of drugs presupposes that	in addition to
fighting	drug trafficking we	significantly	reduce the cultivation of	drug-yielding
plants.	The cultivation and	sale of drugs	must no longer be allowed	to be the
basis of existence for entire regions. Therefore, there must be substitutes for drug production, along with comprehensive international measures in the area of economic, trade and development policies in order to eliminate the economic dependence of the producing countries on the cultivation of and trade in drugs. In our country the anti-drug campaign is one of the priorities of our development policy. This year alone we have made available to producing countries an additional amount of DM 100 million for rural development and structural improvement and to support their narcotics control agencies.
We think that, in addition to bilateral aid given by individual States, well-directed use of loans by the World Bank and the regional development banks is also required.
In view of the serious economic and social damage caused by drug abuse, anti-drug policies must be brought to bear also in trade policy, so that concrete measures may promote some form of economically appropriate conversion to the cultivation of substitute crops in the producing countries.
The European Community, too, must bring to bear all its economic and political weight in support of the anti-drug campaign. We therefore welcome the establishment by the Council of Europe of a committee of drug co-ordinators. In that forum we shall come out in favour of the Community's attaching greater importance to the drug problem in its co-operation with developing countries.
The United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, which indisputably has much experience in the planning, co-ordination, funding and implementation of alternative cultivation projects and measures to combat drugs in Asia, Africa and Latin America, must be allocated considerably more funds if it is to fulfil its functions more effectively. It is quite obvious that the resources allotted so far are not commensurate with the scale of the threat. We must therefore find new ways of funding the effort. One approach might be for all States to commit themselves to making confiscated profits from illegal drug transactions available to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control. In particular, we shall make every effort to ensure that the administrative efficiency of the Fund is enhanced so as to allow further development of the master plan concept. Such master plans constitute an extremely important instrument for meaningful and purposeful project co-operation in the producing regions.
In addition to the implementation of development projects, there is also a need for the comprehensive counselling of developing countries on prevention, treatment, rehabilitation and law enforcement with regard to drug abuse. Only the United Nations can adequately fulfil that task. The United Nations should set up advisory teams of experts on those issues and make them available to developing countries upon request.
Recent developments have highlighted the power of the drug barons to establish their criminal networks throughout national territories by means of violent action and corruption. That should cause us to consider whether and how the United Nations can assist those countries threatened by drug terrorism and wishing such intervention by the detachment enforcement units.
If our aim is significant containment of international drug trafficking, then prevention and suppression will have to go hand in hand. Just as it is for the United Nations to commit all Governments to adopt effective anti-drug policies and to support them in that effort, so the International Criminal Police Organization - INTERPOL - must be enabled and called upon to continue further development of concepts for fighting international drug trafficking. To that purpose, the Secretariat-General must be assigned the function of a world-wide co-ordinating agency. Its regional offices in the various continents should develop model strategies for the individual cultivation and transit regions.
The transborder anti-drug operations of the police and customs authorities have also shown the disadvantage of the fact that INTERPOL does not yet have a co-ordinating function but is confined to exchanges of intelligence and information. We must therefore endeavour to ensure that an INTERPOL co-ordinating office be established. INTERPOL can make a further significant contribution
(Mr. Schauble, Federal Republic of Germany) towards enhancing international co-operation as regards detection of drug profits. To that end, the Secretariat-General's Section for Confiscation of Profits should be expanded.
On the national level, the Federal Republic of Germany has initiated the necessary steps for implementing the 1988 Convention. Improved regulations governing confiscation of assets and the introduction of a property penalty will soon enable us to deprive drug traffickers of their financial base. They will also clear the way for the conclusion of bilateral agreements on co-operation regarding confiscation of illegal drug profits.
It is the duty of every generation to leave the world to the next generation in such a condition as to allow remaining problems to be solved. I believe that we have a good chance of overcoming the drug problem if, now that the cold war is over, we tackle it with all determination over the next decade. To that end, we will have to mobilize all national and international forces at the governmental level. However, every individual will also have to make his or her contribution towards preventing drug abuse among the present and all future generations and towards stopping drug trafficking and illicit drug production.
Mr. de ABREU SODRE (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese: English text furnished by the delegation): My Government is very pleased, Sir, as am I, to see you presiding over the work of this special session of the General Assembly devoted to considering the issue of international co-operation in the fight against the illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Under your skilful and experienced guidance, I am fully confident that this session will reach important decisions aimed at greater international co-operation in the fight against the drug problem in all its dimensions and consequences.
The perception of the various aspects of the problem of narcotic drugs has evolved considerably in recent times. Joint efforts aimed at increasing co-operation in the fight against not only production and trafficking but also consumption have been the growing trend in tackling the question of narcotic drugs. Fourteen international instruments aimed at controlling narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances were concluded between 1912 and 1988. That is a clear demonstration of the international community’s full awareness that co-operation among nations in the search for effective solutions is imperative.
Despite the diversity and number of existing conventions and agreements, the gravity and extent of the drug phenomenon in the world today - especially the dramatic increase in the number of addicts in the last few years - underscore above all the need to extend such co-operation to new areas. The convening of this special session of the General Assembly thus seems to us a timely initiative, in that it affords the international community the opportunity to display its resolve in facing the full spectrum of the drug problem.
In the evolving perception of the complexity of this issue, it is encouraging to note that most countries are beginning to recognize that the drug problem comprises three components! demand, supply and trafficking. In spite of the evidence, certain countries are only now coming to realize that, in order to be effective, any and all action aimed at combating the scourge of drugs must simultaneously address all facets of the problem.
Most international efforts directed against the illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances have focused almost exclusively on illicit cultivation and production - i.e. the supply side. Both the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs, amended by the 1972 Protocol, and the 1972 Convention on Psychotropic Substances seek particularly to regulate and control supply and, whenever, possible, to curb the availability of such substances for illicit purposes.
The 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, for its part, represents an important innovation. It is not limited to production but instead concentrates on drug trafficking, that is, the activity that brings together the two fundamental elements not only of the drug problem but, for that matter, of any commercial transaction; supply and demand. When in force, the Convention will no doubt emerge as a powerful tool for States in co-ordinating their fight against the illicit traffic, for it is aimed at regulating judicial co-operation and countering activities directly linked to trafficking, such as money laundering and the diversion of chemicals used in the manufacture of narcotic drugs.
Brazil has siqned the Convention and is taking the necessary internal measures for its early ratification.
With regard to the areas covered by the international instruments to which I have referred, the present special session should consider the following points; first, that the elimination of illicit crops can be achieved only through integrated programmes of rural development that seek to introduce economically viable and sustainable alternatives in areas previously dominated by illegal cultivation, with due respect for each country’s cultural and religious traditions; secondly, that in the area of international oo-operation against illicit traffic there is growing concern with the need to address the issues of controlling the covert flow of arms to traffickers and of the participation of mercenaries in drug-related criminal activities; and, thirdly, that drug marketing and distribution merits greater attention, because it is the aspect of trafficking that occurs within the borders of major consuming countries.
Tn that context, if any policy to combat the drug traffic is to be effective,
it is essential that the Governments of all the countries involved acknowledge the
need on the one hand to control chemical orecursors and on the other to establish mechanisms to curb the launderinq of money derived from illicit trafficking.
Still with regard to existinq international instruments, I wish to recall the Rio Programme of Action, which in 1986 established the Inter-American Commission for Drug Abuse Control under the auspices of the Organization of American States (OAS). The Rio Programme of Action proved very timely and relevant, most of all by defining the principles and objectives that should guide international co-operation in the fight against narcotic druqs and by prescribing the necessary balance of prevention, enforcement and rehabilitation. The Proqramme of Action has met with unanimous approval and thus represents a common denominator for those countries whose markets, by virtue of their purchasinq power, provide a powerful stimulus to production and trafficking and producing and transit countries.
Unfortunately, improvement of existing international conventions will not in itself suffice effectively to tackle the drug problem. Little progress can be achieved at the international level unless States commit themselves firmly to co-operation to reduce significantly the other element of the equation: it is necessary to eliminate the illicit demand that keeps the drug trade alive.
Every society must honestly and couraqeously examine the internal factors that contribute to the still uncontrollable increase in druq consumption. Let us not delude ourselves into thinking that the problem can be eliminated without pursuing the clear intention of learninq how it arises and adequately addressing its root causes. It is necessary to identify the motivating factors that lead to drug abuse, in particular in societies where it would appear that satisfactory levels of progress and well-being have long been attained. It is necessary for inter national organizations to collaborate within their respective fields in the effort to identify these motivating factors.
This special session of the General Assembly must enable us to examine frankly and openly the problem of drug abuse in all its ramifications. The seriousness of our efforts will reflect our common resolve to address all elements of the problem with the required thorougnness. The adoption of such a comprehensive and exhaustive approach to the question will not only mean much more effective and fruitful international co-operation but also make it abundantly clear that we are committed to bequeathing to future generations a world from which the scourge of drugs has been banished for ever.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.