United nations
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.44
23 October 1987
ENGLISH
.......................    i,	„I,..   agMaBMM»
Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-FOURTH MEETING
. Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 20 October 1987, at 3 p.m.
Pr esident;	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
— Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms and study of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration, grievance and despair and which cause some people to sacrifice human lives, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical changes: [126]
(b) Convening, under the auspices of the United Nations, of an international conference to define terrorism and to differentiate it from the struggle of peoples for national liberation
— Report of the Economic and Social Council: [12] (continued)
(a)	Report of the Council (chapter VI section C (A/42/3) : draft resolution
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of tne delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 126
MEASURES TO PREVENT INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM WHICH ENDANGERS OR TAKES INNOCENT HUMAN LIVES OR JEOPARDIZES FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS AND STUDY OF THE UNDERLYING CAUSES OF THOSE FORMS OF TERRORISM AND ACTS OF VIOLENCE WHICH LIE IN MISERY, FRUSTRATION, GRIEVANCE AND DESPAIR AND WHICH CAUSE SOME PEOPLE TO SACRIFICE HUMAN LIVES, INCLUDING THEIR OWN, IN AN ATTEMPT TO EFFECT RADICAL CHANGES
(b)	CONVENING, UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE UNITED NATIONS, OF AN INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE TO DEFINE TERRORISM AND TO DIFFERENTIATE IT FROM THE STRUGGLE OF PEOPLES FOR NATIONAL LIBERATION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : As members will recall, at
its 3rd plenary meeting the General Assembly decided, on the recommendation of the
General Committee, that item 126 should be allocated to the Sixth Committee, on the understanding that sub-item (b) should first be introduced at one plenary meeting before its consideration by the Committee.
I call on the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to introduce the sub-item.
Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic):
Terrorism undoubtedly constitutes a threat to mankind as a whole. It undermines confidence in international relations; it is a destabilizing force; it spreads disturbance, anxiety and fear all over the world.
The Arab Group, of which I have the honour to be Chairman this month, realizes the increasing concern of the international community at the terrorist acts carried out by individuals or by States, which affect the lives of innocent civilians and threaten the security and safety of human communities.
The Arab Group shares the international community's conviction of the need to
combat terrorism in all its shapes and forms, proceeding from its belief in
(Mr. Treiki, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
the absolute necessity of putting an end to all its evils and dangers. In this regard we believe that it is necessary to establish clear, well-defined and agreed international standards on the basis of which to differentiate between terrorism, whether by States or individuals, which all States members of the international community should be committed to combat and eradicate, and the legitimate struggle of peoples against all forms of occupation, colonialism, racism, foreign domination and racial discrimination. This struggle deserves the support and assistance of the international community, in keeping with the provisions of the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations, the rules of international law and the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In the face of certain attempts at obfuscation and confusion with the object of frustrating the struggle of peoples to free themselves from occupation and domination and achieve the right to self-determination, we feel the need for a study of all aspects of terrorism and the establisnment of international criteria by means of which to define the phenomenom of terrorism, that affects innocent civilians and endangers States or individuals.
The Arab Group is always guided by the principles of the United Nations Charter and those of the charter of the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Organization of African Unity and the Non-Aligned Movement. All these principles guarantee the right of all peoples to legitimate national struggle to free themselves from occupation and domination and exercise their right to self-determination. The Arab Group believes in the importance of determined and serious international co-operation to combat terrorism in all its forms and put an end to all its dangers and causes. But this must be done without
(Mr. Treiki, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
prejudice to the right of peoples languishing under the yoke of occupation, colonialism, racism and other forms of discrimination which create misery, frustration, injustice and desperation to struggle for freedom and self-determination. That struggle is in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and the rules of international law, which guarantee the right of peoples to struggle for freedom, resolution 20/5 of the Fifth Islamic Summit Conference, of 1987, the communiqué of the meeting of Foreign Ministers of non-aligned Mediterranean countries held in June 1987 in Brioni, Yugoslavia, and resolution 4654/87, of 6 April 1987, of the League of Arab States.
It is on this basis that I wish to introduce to the General Assembly, on behalf of the members of the Arab Group, sub-item 126 (b), entitled "Convening, under the auspices of the United Nations, of an international conference to define terrorism and to differentiate it from the struggle of peoples for national liberation.*
We call upon the Assembly to mandate the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, which was set up under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII) , of 1972, to carry out preparatory work for this conference and to report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session. We also call upon the Secretary-General to provide the necessary facilities so that the Committee can carry out its task.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As I have said, this sub-item will now be considered by the Sixth Committee.
AGENDA ITEM 12 (continued)
REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
(a) REPORT OF THE COUNCIL (chapter VI, section C) (A/42/3) s draft resolution A/42/L. 7
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : I propose that the list of speakers for the debate on this item be closed today at 5.p.m.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I request representatives who wish to speak to inscribe their names on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
I	call first on the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It was only a few years ago that we first began to learn of a new disease on our planet: acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). For the first several years, it was thought that this was a very limited disease, particular only to very specific, limited populations. It was therefore easy for many to ignore the disease altogether. 
Now we understand that the human iimnuno-deficiency virus (HIV) can strike virtually anywhere. And it does so with increasing intensity. It is called by many "the plague that knows no boundaries". It ignores not only geographic boundaries, but boundaries of culture, social and economic position, religion, age and sex. 
It is critically important that the Member States, and the world community at large, appreciate the full dimensions of the AIDS crisis. AIDS is a global
challenge of unprecedented dimensions. It affects and threatens all countries north and south, east and west, rich and poor, of whatever political and economic orientation. It raises crucial social, humanitarian and legal issues, threatening to undermine the fabric of tolerance and understanding upon which our societies must function. 
AIDS is one of those critical issues, like nuclear weapons, global development, and environmental pollution, which affects the future of all peoples in all countries. It is, in many senses, a global combat, and it threatens us with all the consequences of war - not only of massive death tolls and even greater numbers of disabled, but of orphans, of mass displacements, of loss of productivity, of overwhelming and bankrupting demands on financial, administrative and human resources, of fear, anger and panic, and of social instability. 
The Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO) and his colleagues will brief the Assembly in more detail on the nature of the AIDS threat and report on the measures which WHO is taking in responding to it. Since last November, WHO has moved rapidly and purposefully to develop its Special Programme on AIDS and fill an essential central role in the international medical and health response to the spread of AIDS. WHO Secretariat initiatives in this regard were confirmed and advanced by the 1987 World Health Assembly, which adopted a global strategy for the prevention and control of AIDS. This strategy was endorsed by the Economic and Social Council at its summer session. 
I am pleased that virtually all Member States have indicated their acceptance of the necessary leadership role of the World Health Organization, and that many agencies of the United Nations and the international system are already co-operating with the Special Programme in their operational activities. 
The broad effects of AIDS will not be controlled and relieved by medical and health authorities alone. This challenge requires commitment far beyond that yet
mobilized - internationally, in national Governments, and in communities. Certain fundamental principles are essential to this effort. 
First, we must establish - and I am pleased to say that recognition of this need has rapidly grown - that AIDS is a world-wide challenge and that only, to quote WHO's slogan, a world-wide effort will stop it. As a world-wide crisis, it will not be resolved by any single national action, nor can any nation truly exclude itself from the danger. It cannot be prevented from crossing borders, and any attempt by a country to isolate itself from all others offers only a delusion of protection, and not a reality. 
Second, we must establish that AIDS is not a national stigma. Early appreciation of the situation was made more difficult by the understandable reluctance of many Governments and many communities to acknowledge the dimensions of the problem in their midst. Fortunately, that reluctance is largely receding; it must be removed altogether, if we are to give our medical, scientific and educational colleagues the room and the freedom to manoeuvre so that they can do their work. 
Third, the battle against AIDS and AIDS-related problems must be established as a priority concern of every Government as well as of the international system. The WHO global strategy places particular emphasis on the preparation and implementation of national plans which incorporate health, social, cultural and economic components required to combat AIDS. All concerned United Nations entities must work with Governments in a complementary manner in support of national programmes. 
Fourth, the urgent search for treatments and prevention - for a cure and for a vaccine - demands maximum effort and co-operation by the medical and scientific

community. All engaged in this battle must set aside personal, institutional and national considerations in order rapidly to advance humanity's common cause. 
Fifth, the world community must find ways to ensure that national co-operation in WHO's global strategy allows full and expedited exchange between countries of information, research results and procedures, testing protocols and experimental drugs. 
Sixth, we must remind all involved in the medical and scientific effort that the objective of their work is to protect and treat all people - not just the wealthy, the privileged, and those with access to sophisticated medical services. Until the AIDS threat is resolved for all people, it is resolved for none of us. 


Seventh, we must work hard to ensure that the rising tide of understandable concern and fear demanding action against AIDS does not wash aside the careful, equally urgent work that the United Nations has led in such areas as child survival, primary health care and community development. That would be especially tragic, not only because such important and dramatic progress has been made in these areas in recent years but also because the very same infrastructure and techniques which the United Nations and our colleagues have pioneered for major success in these areas are essential to the battle against AIDS. 
Finally, but most importantly, we must unequivocally establish that our battle is against AIDS, and not against people. The target of our efforts must not be people with AIDS; it must not be people infected with HIV; it must not be people considered at highest risk of AIDS or infection; and it must not be the children, siblings, parents, neighbours or associates of people with AIDS or HIV or high-risk groups. Those who suffer should not be made to suffer more. Those endangered by illness should not be penalized by society. 
The human rights dimensions of our response to AIDS have yet to be adequately addressed. We need to carry out a careful, well-researched study of the issue in all its complexity. Yet of one cardinal principle we can be sure; the fight against this disease, as in the fight against innumerable scourges of bygone eras, is also a fight against fear, against prejudice and against irrational action born of ignorance, for those are the causes of some of the most critical violations of human rights. Let us not create new minorities and fashion new structures of discrimination. Instead we have to confront the problem with understanding and compassion, awaiting the assistance that scientific progress will bring. 
Ultimately, as the leading public health authorities have reminded us, the AIDS epidemics in each country will constitute difficult and complex tests of national character. As a global crisis it will test the human character in all its
variety. I am convinced that the entire United Nations system must respond to this fundamental challenge. 
This week, at the meeting of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, I shall suggest that in order to complement the efforts of the World Health Organization each organization and agency of the United Nations system undertake a comprehensive examination of the implications of AIDS in its area of responsibility, in terms of both the direct action on AIDS which would be appropriate for each agency and the potential impact of AIDS on other concerns of the agency, both in an immediate time-frame and over a longer-term period. 
In my view the basic elements of our mutual response should be to support the World Health Organization in its medical and health strategy to combat AIDS; to mobilize the necessary resources and machinery of the international system in order to address the broader-scale implications of this emergency, and to ensure that international actions on AIDS - and, as appropriate, national actions as well - are undertaken in harmony with existing United Nations programmes to combat disease and bring protection and assistance to vulnerable groups. 
We are confronted with a truly global emergency. I believe we have the capacity, by acting rapidly and decisively and as a global community, to contain the damage and master this challenge to the health and tranquillity of the world community. 
We must combat fear with knowledge, panic with reason and isolation with compassion. We must affirm through solidarity that we are but one human family
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As members of the Assembly are aware Dr. Halfdan Mahler, the Director-General of the World Health Organization, and Dr. Jonathan Mann, the Director of the Special Programme on AIDS at the World Health Organization, have generously offered to brief the Assembly on
eh/mo
(The President)
the question of AIDS. Accordingly, I shall suspend the meeting so that the briefing may take place.
BHS/tg
The meeting was suspended at 3.45 pm and resumed at 4.25 p.m.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : I call on the representative of Australia to introduce draft resolution A/42/L.7.
Mr. WOOLCOTT (Australia): A relatively new and fatal affliction -acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) - is casting a dark and threatening shadow over the health of our world. We have just been reminded of the importance of our purpose in gathering together today when we listened first to Dr. Mahler and then to Dr. Mann exposing the devastating challenge of the AIDS virus, which must be one of the most alarming threats to the well-being of mankind. I should like to express the Australian delegation's thanks for tne comprehensive briefing which we have just received.
The first task, and one of overriding importance, is clearly the containment and then the defeat of the AIDS virus. This is the crucial challenge of AIDS at present. We must seek, through our collective commitment, to control and eventually to eradicate this terrible problem. AIDS does not distinguish between its victims on the basis of their culture, material wealth or origin. Nor can we, in fighting it, afford to do so. To this end, the World Health Organization (WHO) has established its special programme to co-ordinate global activity against the virus. This is a development which requires our unqualified support.
This forum, the General Assembly, represents the principal policy-making organ, of the multilateral system. The issue before it now reflects the aspirations of all our citizens for peace, justice, welfare and security. It is entirely appropriate that the Assembly pause to consider the risks to humanity posed by this virus and to proclaim a commitment to combat it.
(Mr, Woolcott, Australia) As Article I of the Charter of the United Nations states, this Organization must act as a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the various common ends to which we all subscribe. The presence here today of officials of WHO is evidence of the way in which the resources of the wider multilateral system can be concerted to meet this challenge.
We must acknowledge that the problem of AIDS is not confined to the public health sphere. AIDS will have repercussions, for example, in areas as diverse as employment, national budgets, tourism, trade and migration. A major concern for all of us is that the AIDS virus will inevitably divert funds from other priority tasks, including development. It is now clear that, unless checked, AIDS could have a greater impact in some areas of the world than famine, drought or war. It may have the potential to threaten national cohesion itself.
Since there is as yet no cure for AIDS, our priority now must be to contain the disease and prevent its spread. The essential strategy in containing the spread of AIDS is the establishment of effective education and information programmes at local, national and international levels, in order to provide clear information that explains exactly how the virus is transmitted. Success, even at the purely domestic level, will depend greatly on international co-operation. International travel and the movement of blood products do, after all, play a very-significant part in transmitting the virus. Governments must also share their experience and resources in developing knowledge about the virus and in promoting the search for a cure and for a vaccine.
The Australian Government has energetically supported a global strategy. My Government was, for example, an active co-sponsor of the World Health Assembly's resolution on the prevention and control of AIDS earlier this year, and it supported the resolution introduced by the President at this year's second regular session of the Economic and Social Council.
These initiatives will, we hope, culminate in this General Assembly with a system-wide commitment. Australia has valued the support it has received from WHO and it is currently developing its own national strategy. Australia has also been fortunate in the attitude of its neighbours in Asia and the Pacific. Not all those countries have an AIDS problem and they might well have regarded the AIDS threat within the region as one that only a few countries had to face. They might even have allowed relations within the region to be influenced by the identification of certain States as potential sources of regional infection. My Government is very grateful that these Governments have instead recognized that AIDS presents a threat which all countries of the region must fight together.
My Government was greatly encouraged by the response of Health Ministers from the Asian and Pacific regions to the Ministerial Meeting on AIDS that Australia had the honour to host in conjunction with WHO last July in Sydney. That meeting resulted in a firm resolve to resist, through close co-operation, the further encroachment of this disease within the region. Consistent with the commitment that these Governments have themselves given to co-ordinated international action, I ask that their needs be appropriately reflected in global activity. In most of the countries of the Asian and Pacific regions, preventive action can still block the incursion of AIDS, but appropriate support is urgently needed. Many of the countries in the region have limited financial and health resources and to this extent are not well eauipped to withstand the virus.
Consistent with these concerns, the Australian Government will consider a contribution to the WHO Special Programme on AIDS to be directed to assisting Asian and Pacific countries in their own efforts to protect themselves. The Australian Government also stands ready to provide direct support to Asian and Pacific Governments under bilateral programmes in consultation with WHO.
That we can today debate the issue of AIDS openly in this forum is a testimony to how far we have already come in acknowledging the need to participate in a global effort against this virus.
We must at all costs avoid descending into arid speculation about international sources of infection or allow such concerns to fester. Such developments could only be at the expense of the international co-operation which is our only means of resisting the menace of AIDS. We would then suffer in two ways. Not only would resentment and recrimination replace co-operation and commitments, but the AIDS virus would continue to insinuate itself among our peoples auickly, widely and tragically.
The Question is not "Where does AIDS come from?" but rather "where is it now and where is it going?". The disease now spans every continent and is still spreading rapidly. A global commitment in this General Assembly will reaffirm that AIDS is the concern both of the afflicted and of those who strive to be spared.
Australia is pleased, therefore, to have this opportunity to introduce the text in document A/42/L.7 on the prevention and control of AIDS. ,We do so on behalf of the following sponsors: Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominica, France, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Haiti, Italy Japan, Liberia, Malawi, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Poland, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the USSR, the United Kingdom, the United States and my own country, Australia. In addition, Malaysia and Singapore have recently agreed to co-sponsor the text.
The text before us is the first global statement on the issue to be collectively considered by the world community. The large number of co-sponsors who have indicated their support for this significant draft resolution, and who are
nr/mo
drawn from all regional groups, is clear evidence of the global concern to eradicate AIDS as soon as possible. The General Assembly is of course the ultimate forum for galvanizing the international co-operation that is so vital on this issue.
In encouraging international co-operation, it is appropriate that the draft resolution before us reflects a measure of consensus on the tactics which need to be followed, both by international agencies and by Governments. The General Assembly should commend the way in which the virus is already being confronted, especially through the WHO Special Programme on AIDS, and should encourage Governments and international agencies alike to support a global strategy under the leadership of WHO. At the domestic level too it is important that the General Assembly emphasize the need for Governments to develop national strategies. These strategies should support the global effort but will also need to take account of the social, economic and cultural circumstances in individual States.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly makes no moral or value judgements, accuses no one, contains no barbs. It indulges in no special pleading and reflects no political alignments. It merely seeks the commitment of all Governments in the Assembly to a common cause which, with responsibility to their own populations, they cannot resist.
I believe the draft resolution should command the General Assembly's unanimous support.
Dr. KOOP (United States of America) : As Surgeon-General and Director of the Office of International Health, it has been my privilege for a number of years to represent my country at the World Health Assembly; and therefore I am honoured to appear before this important body this afternoon.
The United Nations was created with nope and promise following a period of despair and devastation. And now in a way that is what I want to talk about today - hope amid despair and promise amid devastation. I am referring, of course, to a disease this entire planet faces - the disease known as the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) . This is a disease that most often cuts down those in the prime of their lives. It kills the poor; it kills the affluent; and it is a disease that knows no geographic boundaries. Populations of all countries are vulnerable to attack.
I welcome the General Assembly’s decision to discuss this frightening disease, and I welcome the draft resolution placed before it, commending the World Health Organization (WHO) for its impressive efforts to co-ordinate the attck on this awesome threat, and urging action by Governments in all countries to initiate where necessary and improve where possible their individual and collective efforts. My delegation sincerely hopes that this draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
I come to this Hall today not as a diplomat but as a physician, and I come to you with a physician's plea. My plea is for greater compassion and for intensified international co-operation under the World Health organization. It is a plea for all the nations of the world and for all their component parts - in the health community, the education community, the social service community, industry, non-governmental organizations - to mobilize their energies and resources, and to escalate the common fight against AIDS.
In each of our countries, we must start with an understanding of the disease and an acceptance that it is a risk to the entire society, and not just to one or more narrow groups. I recognize that the political and public health leaders in some countries may not have wanted, at the start, to collect and publish data on an epidemic such as this. But we cannot truly understand a disease, much less stop it, if we do not know where it is and how it acts. I believe that the under-reporting of AIDS could be retarding our progress in the fight against it, and I am pleased to learn that WHO has made advances in stimulating more openness and more honesty about the impact of this problem. I sincerely hope that all delegations here will urge that this growing openness continue.
We also need to recognize that while AIDS is a global problem it is potentially more destructive to the developing world than it is to the industrialized world. In developing nations the people stricken with AIDS are primarily those we look to for support of the children, the aged and the sick. Deaths among these breadwinners cause both family income and nutrition to decline, while poverty and disease increase, making AIDS a major threat to family life.
But there is more. Because AIDS strikes the healthy and usually the young productive adult in the prime of life, AIDS is also a hindrance to development. Developing nations will be losing workers in agriculture, industry, and many other
(Dr. Koop, United States) vital economic areas, not to mention teachers, engineers, physicians, health workers, Government officials and many other professionals. These are talented people that no country, especially not a developing country, can afford to lose.
Beyond that, there are the innocent victims - the children, the future of our world - who are and will continue to be afflicted with AIDS. The sad fact is that AIDS can roll back the global child survival efforts of both the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and WHO and undermine all the hard-won victories in reducing infant mortality.
There are many other unpleasesant scenarios. Tourism may suffer because of unreasonable fears about how AIDS is contracted; foreign investment may falter as well, because AIDS may be leading to reduced local markets and reduced skilled labour, not to mention the rising costs of health care.
Further, the expenses associated with dealing with AIDS will inevitably take funds and personnel from other programmes in health, education and other vital sectors, and thus jeopardize gains already made in these areas. AIDS can defeat the purposes of foreign assistance that international banks and industrialized countries have provided.
No, it is not fair that those whose potential losses are so threatening may be bit the hardest. But the reality is that AIDS can defeat a developing nation's hopes for the future. Altogether, these are very sad possibilities to consider.
In the industrialized world, the conseouences are also very great. We have already seen this in the United States. My country is not the most affected country in per capita terms, but as representatives know it has more cases than any other nation. What we have seen is this: 43,000 AIDS cases have been reported in the United States, with 25,000 deaths. We estimate that 1.5 million additional Americans are infected by the AIDS virus, and can spread it to others. Present
data indicates that 30 to SO per cent of infected individuals can be expected to
develop AIDS within 7 years of first becoming infected. We now know that the costs
are astronomical, even for a country with as many resources as the United States
Treatment can cost $50,000, and perhaps more, for a single patient. We estimate that by 1991 the costs of treating AIDS in the United States will have reached between $8 billion and $16 billion a year. At the same time, however, we are mking truly remarkable strides in research. We have learned more about AIDS in 6 years than we did about poliomyelitis in 40 years, or about whooping cough in several generations. But there are limits to this knowledge. President Reagan has pointed out that "science is clearly capable of breathtaking advances, but it is not capable of miracles." He is right; even if we are able to identify a vaccine, because of the long incubation perioa of the virus it will take years to know if that vaccine is effective.
One thing that can be done in the short term, however, that will nelp to preserve tourism, business and foreign investment is to resolve to make the world's blood supply safe for transfusion. Could we do this, all of us working together, say by 1991? We have the technology and the resources to do it. This is an area where the nations of the world could come together and do something that is for everyone's benefit. Victory over this one small facet of the AIDS pandemic will help bind us together in our struggle to contain the scourge of AIDS. We call on WHO to give this high priority.
AIDS is such a devastating disease that the cultural, social, economic and ethical after-shocks will last longer than the disease itself. My own country is suffering and in many cases my fellow citizens are confused and angry.
(pr« Ko°P, United States)
With this background we have declared AIDS to be our priority public health problem. A massive research effort is under way. We have undertaken educational canpaigns to Inform the public about AIDS and about the means to prevent it, and to try to dispel the myths and fears that can lead to discrimination against the victims of AIDS.
Of course, we are also supporting bilateral co-operative efforts in developing nations through our Agency for International Development, and we are co-operating fully with the efforts of WHO. The World Health Organization has developed highly sensible and impressive guidelines for action by individual Governments, and I believe it imperative that all countries make their AIDS control programmes consistent with WHO guidelines.
One reason I came here today was to endorse WHO's leadership role in the battle against AIDS. The World Health Organization's global AIDS programme emphasizes prevention through education, the exchange of information and the need for national programme efforts, developed in co-operation with WHO. It is clear to us that no country can fight AIDS on its own, and that the international co-ordinating authority of WHO is absolutely essential. My Government has provided money and equipment and manpower to assist the WHO programme and will continue to do so.
I have been a surgeon for almost 50 years, and I have never seen such a threat as AIDS. I am proud to be part of a tradition of care that goes back more than two millenia, a tradition that will not abandon the sick and the disabled, whoever they are. But now, in this epidemic, reports are trickling in that some doctors, nurses, and other health care workers, through unfounded fear concerning the transmission of AIDS, are refusing to care for patients with AIDS, or who they think might have AIDS. This behaviour on the part of a misinformed and fearful minority could destroy the fabric of traditional Hippocratic medicine, and we must not let that happen.
We must not abandon those who need our help. Just as important, we must not abandon hope, or abandon our countries or their economies to the devastating impact of this pandemic. Certainly there are and will be those we cannot save. But I do
lDr- Koop, United States) believe that our scientific efforts, together with knowledge and education, will eventually stop this terrible disease.
As we speak, progress is being made in the laboratory; progress is being made in education; and as this discussion illustrates, progress is being made in international co-operation.	.
Let us continue to move forward with good sense and good science and, together, let us give the world something every bit as precious as a vaccine against AIDS. Let us show the world how compassion and enlightenment can triumph over disease.
Mr. MOORE (United Kingdom): I am delighted to have this opportunity to address the General Assembly. I know that it is unusual for health subjects to be debated here but I believe today's debate is a welcome and timely indication of the recognition throughout the world of the threat posed by AIDS. No country is immune from the effects of this new and menacing disease.
Indeed, the presentations we have just heard from Dr. Mahler and Dr. Mann show the world-wide extent of the problems we all face. The 17th-century English poet John Donne wrote that "No man is an island, entire of itself". These words are only too significant in the context of the battle against AIDS.
I believe that there are two fundamental questions which need to be addressed in this debate. First, what is to be done to contain the impact of this disease? Secondly, how much of that action should be taken by individual countries and how much should by a collective effort of us all?
The presentations have indicated the scale and scope of the problem throughout the world. The position in the United Kingdom is that, by September 1987, we were aware of over 1,000 people with AIDS, and over half of these had already died. Particularly worrying is that the number of cases is currently doubling every 10
months or so. In addition, the reported number of HIV cases is now over 7,500 and the actual number might be as high as 40,000 to 50,000.
To tackle the growing problem, the United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive four-part strategy, comprising measures in public education, infection control and surveillance, research, and the development of health and other services for people with HIV and AIDS. I should like, if I may, to say a little about each of these in turn.
In the absence of medical defences against AIDS, public education is the main weapon in the fight to limit the spread of infection. Only by influencing personal behaviour and life styles can we hope to minimize the ravages of AIDS throughout our populations. That is why the British Government committed $33 million in November 1986 to its campaign to raise public awareness about AIDS and particularly to dispel myths about the ways it can be spread. This is a many-faceted campaign. It has included television, radio and newspaper advertisements. And a leaflet was distributed to all 23.5 million households in Britain, a unique exercise for us in mass public education. I am pleased to say that research shows widespread public support for this move, and we received very few complaints. Another strand of the campaign is a 24-hour free national telephone service giving confidential advice and information.
I am also pleased to report that our press and broadcasting authorities have been extremely co-operative in putting out the public education message. This culminated in a co-ordinated schedule of television programmes, the so-called AIDS Week, in February 1987. A similar schedule has been carried on radio. Could I also pay tribute here to the valuable worK of the staff of our National Health Service and of the voluntary sector in the United Kingdom in caring for those afflicted by the disease.
The most recent stage of the campaign, which I launched on 2 September, concentrates on the dangers of infection in one particularly high-risk group -those who inject drugs. Its results are being closely monitored.
Our public education campaign nas been extremely well received. I believe one reason has been its wide-ranging and imaginative nature. But a major cause of public acceptance has undoubtedly been the strength of the Government's commitment to the fight against AIDS. This has been amply demonstrated by the excellent and co-ordinated response of the Government across all of its departments.
As the second part of our strategy, we have adopted a number of measures to safeguard public health and to establish the extent of the problem we face in the United Kingdom. These include the screening of blood donations, the heat treatment of blood products, the establishment of a confidential and voluntary reporting system to monitor the spread of HIV infection and AIDS, and the provision of free and confidential testing and counselling services through ¡.'National Health Service family doctors and hospital clinics.
As there is currently no vaccine or cure for AIDS, research is clearly a major priority. Accordingly, we have given our Medical Research Council an additional $24 million over the next three years to finance a directed programme of AIDS research. This programme is particularly aimed at the development of vaccines against HIV infection and anti-viral drugs to treat those who do become infected.
We have also given the Medical Research Council $5 million for general AIDS research outside this directed programme. In addition, the British Government is funding a number of AIDS-related research projects, and our very important pharmaceutical industry is also investing heavily in this area. We all hope that these research efforts will prove successful. However, we have to recognize that expert opinion is at present that no vaccine will be generally available within at least five years, and a cure looks a much more distant prospect. Meanwhile, we must rely primarily on the education campaign.
The fourth strand of our strategy concerns the provision of services for the care and support of those with HIV infection or AIDS. We consider that wherever possible these should be community-based, to enable people to be cared for in their own homes. To achieve this, we aim to promote co-operation between health authorities, local government and the voluntary sector in providing a range of services, including treatment, counselling and special training for staff. One element of this is the working group we have established to consider the implications of AIDS for both health and local government services. An Act of Parliament - the AIDS (Control) Act - has recently been passed. This requires every health authority in the United Kingdom to publish an annual report giving details of both the public education measures and the care provided for people with AIDS. I hope these reports will help contribute to planning future services; the first reports will be made next year.
There is, of course, one further aspect to our strategy, and it is a crucial one. It is the need to encourage international co-operation. AIDS, as other speakers have said, is no respecter of national boundaries. So we need a global response to contain it. This means aiming for the most effective use of all our
(Mr. Moore, United Kingdom) resources, the sharing of information and expertise and the avoidance of duplication of effort.
This is why the leading roleof the World Health Organization (WHO) is so important. A measure of this is that it is now working with over 90 countries on their AIDS campaigns. The United Kingdom greatly appreciates what WHO has achieved so far, and fully supports its Special Programme on AIDS, which aims to provide global leadership, to help international collaboration and to support and strengthen national AIDS programmes world-wide. I am pleased that the United Kingdom has contributed nearly $5.5 million to this Special Programme. We are also contributing over $2.5 million to the International Planned Parenthood Federation, to help strengthen its AIDS work, and are currently discussing with WHO the best way of supporting AIDS control programmes in a number of affected countries.
A most encouraging start has been made in co-ordinating the necessary international action. But it is only a start, and much remains to be done. There are three traps that could seriously undermine international efforts, and we must not allow ourselves to fall into any of them.
The first is to pretend that AIDS is not a threat in one's own country. It is a luxury to think that AIDS is someone else's problem, that other countries will somehow find a way of solving the problem and that all we have to do is to sit tight and wait. AIDS is a problem for all of us. All countries will be affected by it in one way or another. And it will not be defeated on a world scale unless each country takes action to defeat it within its own borders.
The second trap is to expend energy in arguing about where the infection originally came from. This question is no doubt of some scientific interest. But Governments' concern must be with the much more urgent issue of how to tackle the
infection. Recriminations between countries about
one, least of all the sufferers themselves.
The third trap, perhaps the most dangerous of
the origins of the virus help no
all, is to try to isolate one's
country completely from the spread of the
infection. -Even if this were possible,
. j	very doubtful, to sustain such a
which for the great majority of countries must be very
self-imposed quarantine would require the most Draconian measures, ihese would have to involve not only rigid controls over one’s own population, but also severely curtailing contacts between them ana those of other countries. The devastating impact this could have on relations between countries, not to mention trade and travel links, is likely far to outweigh its effectiveness in combating
AIDS. The United Kingdom therefore firmly supports the World Health Organisation's
opposition to such measures.
Instead of these negative approaches to the problem that confronts us all, the
United Kingdom believes three things are needed. The first is action, not words.
There is no point in countries just paying lip-service to the problem. Each
country has to face up to the threat that AIDS repreents and take the right measures to safeguard its people, notably by teaching them how the infection is transmitted and how to avoid catching it. The second is co-operation, not
conflict. It is essential that each country work with others as part of a communal effort. This involves being willing to co-operate in medical research projects and surveys about the spread of the disease, exchanging experience and expertise and making available to the international community new scientific information and data
as soon as practicable. The third is co-ordination	>
ination, not contusion, international
efforts must be co-ordinated. If individual countries: >-wntries take action without any
regard to what others are doing, the internal-. al response to the problem will be
(Mr. Moore, United Kingdom) less effective. There could be wasteful duplication in some fields and inadequate action in others. The World Health Organization's Special Programme, therefore, has a crucial role to play, and should be supported.
Therefore, we strongly support the draft resolution now before the Assembly, which has been put together under the skilful leadership of the Australian delegation. If passed, it will represent a substantial political message of our determination to fight the terrible disease of AIDS. The draft resolution also represents a carefully balanced consensus, reflecting the interests of a number of Member States and groups. It has attracted sponsorship from a wide cross-section of the United Nations. I therefore hope that the draft resolution as it stands can be adopted tomorrow by consensus, or at least by an overwhelming majority.
AIDS poses probably the greatest threat to public health this century. It is very important, therefore, to have the issues aired on the world stage. 1 very much hope that this debate will play its part in generating greater understanding, greater effort and greater co-operation between the Member States. The United Kingdom stands ready and willing to play its part in all this. That is why we look forward to the joint World Health Organization-United Kingdom World Summit of Health Ministers in January 1988, to be held in London. The Summit's theme is public education and prevention. It is clear from the responses we have received so far that a conference on this important subject is widely welcomed. I hope that as many Health Ministers as possible will decide to attend, and that the Summit will enable a further useful exchange of views, very much in the spirit of today's proceedings.
Mr. EPP (Canada): Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity to express my admiration for the way in which you have conducted this debate. I am convinced that everyone will agree that you have shown great skill in guiding us at this special meeting. The Secretary-General must also be thanked for his
(Mr. Epp, Canada)
introduction to the debate. I also wish especially to express my appreciation to Dr. Mahler, Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO), and Dr. Mann, for their summary of the AIDS situation throughout the world. Their lucid description has set the tone for our debate.
(Mr. Epp, Canada)
It is hard to believe that less than 10 years ago few people had heard of acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome (AIDS). No one could have imagined a disease of such magnitude. While there have always been deadly diseases there had developed over the last few decades a faith that the skills of doctors and medical researchers would eventually protect us from them. Think of the great strides that we had already made, such as the eradication of smallpox.
We are now faced with a disease against which, for all its efforts, modern science has not made sufficient headway. I do not underestimate the brilliant work already done by doctors and researchers. Extraordinary advances have already been made in research into this disease. In just a very short time scientists have developed an understanding of the complex nature of the disease. Still it is clear that it will take many years and much effort before we can hope to control AIDS through medical techniques.
It is obvious that AIDS has reached such a height of public concern because of the various ways that one can become infected with it and the fact that it is a fatal disease. As we well know, a number of AIDS patients have been infected by the use of contaminated blood and blood products; yet that must be weighed against the fact that millions of people have been saved from the ravages of deadly diseases by means of blood transfusions or injections with vaccines. With immunization programmes sponsored by the World Health Organization (WHO) and many Governments, these immunizations could eventually be available to all. Now, the fear of AIDS has put these programmes into jeopardy. People are justifiably concerned that they might receive the AIDS virus from contaminated, reused needles. That fear of AIDS could lead to an undermining of the great efforts which have already been made to control other diseases.
eh/mo
(Mr. Epp, Canada)
However, as we are all aware, the most common way by which the AIDS virus is spread is through sexual contact. That is the source of our greatest concerns. Certainly there have been sexually transmitted diseases before, but never has there been one of such magnitude and danger; therefore we must recognize that the sexual transmission of the AIDS virus is not restricted to any particular group but that all sexually active people are potentially its targets.
Opinions have been expressed that there have been relatively few deaths from AIDS so far. There is some truth in that. In Canada, which has one of the highest reported rates of AIDS per capita in the world, there have been 680 deaths to date out of 1,300 cases; and yet estimates show that this is only the tip of the iceberg and that deaths will rise steadily. What is truly frightening is that we do not know the full magnitude of the disease. When we think of the numbers who are already infected by the AIDS virus, and how far it could spread, we must all face the fact that the effect of the disease will be medically and economically devastating. The costs of caring for AIDS patients will be an enormous burden, even for the most developed countries.
Furthermore, it is clear that the effects of AIDS will go beyond just the deaths of tens of thousands. The disease has the potential to upset the social and economic fabric of many countries, which are likely to lose many of their most economically productive members. In addition, as the number of AIDS cases grows, the cost of caring for them may swamp other equally important health care programmes. We must not forget that there are other serious health care problems in addition to AIDS, which must be addressed.
For the immediate future we face the problem of the fear which has resulted from misinformation about AIDS. Over the last few months we have seen many examples of people infected with the AIDS virus suffering discrimination. Increasingly, those who are AIDS sufferers are being shunned by other members of
(Mr. Epp, Canada) society. What is demanded of us is to give them the best health care possible. Similarly, every effort must be undertaken to provide factual data regarding aids, to reduce the rise of groundless fear and panic which is most often built on misinformation.
Just as we cannot isolate the individual AIDS sufferers, so we must not cut off those countries where it seems that the AIDS virus has struck the hardest. We must help them cope with the situation and the AIDS pandemic should be occasion for greater co-operation among us.
Clearly, more than words is needed. AIDS will have to be dealt with in a variety of activities. Research efforts must be properly balanced with public education. That is the approach which Canada has taken to deal with the AIDS pandemic.
AIDS cases were first reported in our country in 1982. Since that time over 1,300 people have developed AIDS and 87 per cent of AIDS cases are between 20 and 49 years of age. Over 86 per cent are homosexuals or bisexuals. By the end of 1991 there may be as many 6,700 AIDS cases in Canada. It is estimated that there are between 50,000 and 100,000 people infected with the AIDS virus in our country.
The screening of blood and blood products began in Canada in November 1985. After the first year of screening, 211 of 1.2 million donation samples contained the AIDS virus antibody. We are confident that the Canadian supply of blood and blood products is safe from the AIDS virus.
Once the full extent of the AIDS danger was evident we in Canada did act. Between 1982 and 1986 $2.6 million had been spent on AIDS research by the Canadian Government. In 1986, on behalf of the Government, I announced a $39 million five-year programme, of which over $22.5 million would be allocated to various research projects. Canadian Government research concentrates on the following areas; first, the use of epidemiological studies of population groups as a means
(Mr. Epp, Canada) to determine the extent and progression of infection; second, the improvement of diagnostic techniques through the use of bio-technology; third, the development of a rapid test to identify the presence of the virus; fourth, the development of an effective vaccine, which is fundamental to any long-term efforts to control the spread of the virus; fifth, immunological studies in individuals with AIDS or related infections; and, last, socio-economic and behavioural studies of the effects of AIDS.
To ensure that its plans are properly implemented the Government of Canada has established the Federal Centre for AIDS. That organization brings together all the AIDS-related scientific and medical expertise witnin the Federal Government. Tne unit, which has been designated a World Health Organization AIDS collaborating centre, will co-ordinate epidemiological studies with regard to AIDS and also serve as a source of technical and scientific information for laboratories across the country. Additionally, research will be done by non-governmental organizations, such as universities and hospitals, especially with the assistance of Federal and Provincial Government funding.
In Canada we recognize that it will be many years before there is a cure for AIDS. Further, we know that even an effective vaccine is a long way off. Clearly, at present and for the foreseeable future, the only means available to slow the spread of AIDS are education programmes. The Federal Government has allocated $3.7 million to the Canadian Public Health Association for a national AIDS education and awareness programme, which includes intensive multi-media educational projects as well as seminars, the provision of written materials and course curricula. Much of the funding provided will go to support community-based AIDS organizations to provide education and services to all parts of Canadian society, including those who are most at risk.
(Mr. Epp, Canada)
To ensure that the Government of Canada was receiving the best advice possible on all aspects of AIDS, the National Advisory Committee on AIDS was formed in 1983. As the pandemic grows, there is a continued need to address the many social, legal, ethical and moral issues which arise. Experts in those disciplines have been included in the Advisory Committee.
Under our Federal system, the Provinces are responsible for the provision of formal education as well as for the delivery of health care and social services. Therefore, various Provincial and Territorial Governments are establishing their own preventive awareness programmes.
The key to all the educational efforts across the country is that they provide intelligible, reliable information. Handled with sensitivity and tact, these programmes can provide Canadians with information about the dangers they face and will familiarize them with the methods available to reduce those risks.
In my opinion, in Canada we are doing our utmost to bring AIDS under control within our own borders. However, we cannot do the job alone. Canadians recognize that it is urgent that international efforts be undertaken to deal with the pandemic. Canadian scientists and doctors have worked with those of many other countries. In June 1989 Canada will serve as host to the fifth International Conference on AIDS, in Montreal. The theme will be partnership, both within and amongst countries, and the Conference will focus on the social and economic issues of AIDS as well as the more traditional biomedical aspects.
So we welcome this debate because it is an opportunity to discuss the various dimensions of AIDS, especially the need for international co-operation. That is why Canada was amongst the first to co-sponsor the draft resolution on AIDS and we urge others to support it. My presence here is indicative of Canada's willingness toco-operate with other countries to manage the pandemic.
(Mr. Epp, Canada)
Above all these things, we have shown our commitment to participate in the global campaign against AIDS. Canada strongly supports the World Health Organization's (WHO’s) Special Programme on AIDS. -It is the focal point of international efforts against AIDS. Last May tne Government of Canada contributed $5 million to this Programme. We firmly believe that the WHO Special Programme on AIDS is essential if we are going to control the AIDS pandemic around the world. Therefore, it is vital that it be supported and fully funded.
The Special Programme has been endorsed by countries from all regions. Last May the leaders of the Seven Leading Industrial Nations endorsed the work of the Special Programme. Only last week, in Vancouver, the Commonwealth Heaas of Government stated their willingness to co-operate with WHO. This support is not surprising. It has been earned by the extraordinary work done by Dr. Jonathan Mann and his staff. Since February, while occupied with the organization and planning of the Special Programme, they have been able to advise many countries about the AIDS pandemic. The Special Programme has already released a number of studies which are of great use to all countries.
One of the Special Programme's most important roles is to gather information about AIDS. It is essential that we have a free and accurate exchange of information regarding all considerations of the pandemic. That is a responsibility for which the Special Programme is especially suited. In addition, as the international focal point, the Special Programme will provide the necessary co-ordination and collaboration to ensure that countries do not duplicate each other's work.
The Special Programme must be a catalyst for co-operation between countries. Furthermore, it will be able to build the consensus on issues to avoid conflicts
(Mr. Epp, Canada) which can only hamper efforts to deal with the pandemic. By providing guidelines on various questions, the Special Programme helps alleviate some of the fears which the pandemic is causing.
The other major role which the Special Programme has is to assist countries with the preparation of their national strategies in their fight against AIDS. National strategies of prevention and control are essential if we hope to stop the spread of AIDS. The Special Programme can provide the expertise to put the necessary programmes in place.
It is clear that the Special Programme on AIDS will play a central role in any successful campaign to control the disease. I urge all countries to co-operate fully with the Programme. All countries must face the serious consequences which will result from AIDS if the disease is left unchecked. Long-range health needs should not be sacrificed for short-term economic gains.
We are faced with an enormous task, and I believe that the next five to ten years are the most crucial. I know that all countries, working together with WHO, have the tools to meet the challenge. The work already done by researchers convinces me that it is only a matter of time before there will be an effective vaccine. However, we must accept the fact that a cure is a long way off. For the foreseeable future, we only have education as a tool to slow the growth of the AIDS pandemic. Delicate subjects, generally not discussed in public, must be addressed. Ensuring co-operation and collaboration is vital, and that is one of WHO’s major roles.
We can succeed in our efforts to control the pandemic only if each of us recognizes that AIDS is a threat to the social and economic fabric of our countries. AIDS knows no borders, nor does it distinguish the nationality of people. It is a matter for world-wide concern. The defeat of AIDS, like that of
(Mr. Epp, Canada) smallpox, can be an example of people working together, regardless of national origin, race or creed.
Canada strongly supports the draft resolution. This debate must lead to greater co-operative action now. Canada will do its part, and I urge all nations to join together in conquering this dreadful scourge which is threatening mankind Mr. BIERRING (Denmark): Allow me first, on behalf of the twelve member States of the European Community, to thank the Secretary-General for his address this afternoon to the General Assembly and Dr. Mahler and Dr. Mann for briefing u on AIDS - a menacing disease affecting all regions of the world. We welcome the fact that special attention is being given to AIDS here at the Assembly. Let me mention, among others, two reasons for that:
First, a key word in the fight against AIDS is awareness. Not only does awareness tend to increase the resources given to combat the disease but awarenes in itself is furthermore a direct remedy - for the time being the most important remedy - in the effort to slow down the spread of the pandemic. By the discussic । of AIDS in the General Assembly, it is our firm belief that awareness will be increased not only among public health officials and doctors but also among politicians and the public at large. It will promote efforts by the Internationa community.
Secondly, it is essential that all resources be used in the most efficient * ty in the fight against AIDS. Discussions and exchanges of information about the subject in various forums should aim at co-ordination and co-operation, thereby avoiding duplication of efforts.
(Mr. Bierring, Denmark)
I should like in general terms to express appreciation of and satisfaction with the important work.of the World Health Organization (WHO), which the twelve member States of the European Community have always supported strongly. We also support the activities carried out by otner United Nations agencies in this field. Let me assure the Assembly that in the future also our support will not be lacking.
I should also like to stress that we fully endorse the World Health Organization as the agency which has the international leadership and is the co-ordinating agency with respect to the global struggle against AIDS. The World Health Organization enjoys world-wiae respect and has so far shown that it has th« flexibility and the capacity to deal effectively with the problem. We believe th< WHO is ideally placed to provide and mobilize the international action that will I needed to establish and maintain national AIDS programmes in all countries and we note with satisfaction that national AIDS committees have already been establishe« in more than 100 countries.
No less important is the fact that the World Health Organization, with its long experience in the health sector, is the organization best suited to ensure that efforts to combat AIDS are to the maximum extent possible integrated in general public health services, thereby using existing infrastructure and avoidin' creating new and costly structures. We expect, therefore, that WHO will also mak use, wherever expedient, of existing channels and programmes of such United Natio agencies as tne United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Fu for Population Activities (FPA) , as well as of a number of non-governmental organizations which are particularly suited for the execution of important activities in the fight against AIDS.
Information, education and research are essential elements in the fight against AIDS for as long as no vaccine exists, and the Community and its member States focus precisely on those elements. The European Community has decided to introduce in its fourth Medical Research Programme 1987-1991 the co-ordination of medical research on AIDS. Just a few weeks ago the research ministers from the European Community approved about $US 15 million for research on AIDS.
Let me also mention that the Council and the Ministers of Health meeting within the Council on 15 May 1987 adopted a number of conclusions aimed at strengthening and improving our common efforts to combat AIDS. In those conclusions it was confirmed that the efforts of the European Community would be carried out in co-operation with WHO, in order to avoid duplication of effort.
The Council of Ministers also decided to establish an ad hoc group of representatives with the mandate to propose as soon as possible a common strategy for an action plan to fight the disease, to be carried out by the Community and its member states.
We believe that in our efforts to combat AIDS care must be taken fully to respect the human rights of all. We stress in this context the ineffectiveness, in terms of prevention, of any policy of systematic and compulsory screening, in particular during health checks at frontiers.
AIDS is not only a grave problem in all parts of the world; the disease will have serious implications for the social and economic development of, especially, the most vulnerable countries. Given the considerable difficulties we have encountered in trying to combat AIDS in our own countries, we can easily appreciate that countries whose national health resources are much more limited find it even harder to cope with the problem.
Against this background, the European Community approved in June this year a three-year plan with a budget amounting to about $40 million. This plan involves providing technical, financial and scientific assistance to African, Caribbean and Pacific countries running national AIDS control programmes and encouraging Community co-ordination of bilateral efforts. It should be superfluous to say that the plan will be carried out in close co-operation with the World Health Organization, but let me again state clearly that the idea behind the plan is to
MLG/MO	V4 2/PV.4 4
53
make a Community contribution to the international AIDS campaign being run and co-ordinated by WHO's Special Programme on AIDS. The Community notes with satisfaction that so far about 40 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries have asked to take part in the programme.
The Community is pleased to see that a draft resolution on the prevention and control of AIDS has been presented to the General Assembly. We commend this draft resolution to the Assembly for its unanimous support.
The AIDS pandemic has in the space of a few years become a matter of the greatest concern to the international community and the 12 member States of the European Community believe that exceptional attention should be given to the struggle against the disease. We commend WHO for having done just that.
The Community also strongly welcomes the convening of the world summit meeting of Ministers of Health on programmes for AIDS prevention in London from 26 to 28 January next year.
It is necessary to continue to work solidly and tirelessly towards eradicating the many health problems that still exist.
We fully trust that the World Health Organization will continue to work arduously and wisely in the battle against AIDS, while at the same time not neglecting the many other valuable activities carried out with world-wide co-operation towards attaining health for all.
Mr. POMPIDOU (France) (interpretation from French): This is the first time that the auestlon of the fight against AIDS has been taken up by the General Assembly of the United Nations. France welcomes the initiative taken in the face of the now global impact of this new viral infection.
The inclusion of this question on the agenda of the General Assembly, the attention given to it by the Secretary-General in his introduction, the remarkable
mlg/mo
(Mr. Pompidou, France) addresses that we have heard from Dr. Mahler and Dr. Mann and the presence here of a large number of Ministers and personalities are clear indications of a universal awareness of the dangers inherent in AIDS, not only for our health but also for the development of the world, and bear witness to a collective will for action.
The Ambassador of Denmark has just expressed on behalf of the 12 member States of the Community the importance that we attach to the strengthening of the struggle against AIDS and our appreciation of the role of the World Health Organization in this field. I should like to explain briefly how France sees and carries out such efforts.
Thanks to the discovery by two French and American teams of the human immuno-deficiency virus and of its role as a causal agent of AIDS, it has been possible to devise detection techniaues. Rapid scientific progress has been made thanks to the involvement of researchers throughout the world in the fight against AIDS.
Despite the extremely productive nature of present-day research, there is still no definitive treatment for the infection and it continues to spread. It .s obviously necessary to pursue our efforts, which is why France, in its struggle against AIDS, has developed a global, balanced policy, based on prevention, research and international co-operation.
Prevention encompasses both information and screening. Bearing in mind the highly symbolic nature of transmission through blood and sexual contact, information must be based exclusively on science. It must therefore focus on we 's of contamination and epidemiological data on known cases of AIDS, which must be reported in France. Such information, however, is also a way of increasing awareness and making every individual responsible for his own behaviour in order to protect himself and others.
Thirteen million brochures have been distributed to give information on contamination factors and means of protection, 24 million leaflets have been ser ; to all telephone subscribers; and a data bank has been established and is accessible through an automatic telephone network to the entire population.
Screening is mandatory in France for all blood, cell or organ donors. Apar : from this, screening is widely available to the entire population on a voluntary or consenting basis, with professionally guaranteed respect for confidentiality. I »is is indispensable to avoid both discrimination and frustration of the desired result - that is, broad access to screening and a change in the oehaviour of individuals who react positively.
Research is being carried out in several major centres, including the Past« ir Institute in Paris, and a supplementary budget of 100 million francs has been allocated this year.
These efforts, of course, are not carried out in isolation from the actions of the international community and France full intends to develop its bilateral and multilateral co-operation. It will, of course, participate in the efforts of the countries of the European Economic Community and will follow the recommendations of the ad hoc group set up on the initiative of the Committee of Ministers of Health of the Community on 15 May 1937. That Committee, in accordance with the recommendations of the World Health Organization (WHO), decided unanimously not to carry out any screening at frontiers, in order to permit free movement of individuals.
France already materially supports WHO, both by means and by personnel. It has decided to increase its assistance to that organization. The action of WHO, under the guidance of its Director-General and thanks to the dynamism of the Director of the Special Programme on AIDS, has been able to mobilize and co-ordinate efforts with remarkable efficiency. That programme must maintain its priority status within WHO and with regard to all countries.
We are therefore fully in favour of the draft resolution submitted to the United Nations, because for us control means prevention and health education, but also screening, with absolute respect for medical confidentiality and human rights, to which France is by tradition firmly committed.
Indeed, while infections by the human immuno-deficiency virus endangers public health science remains directly involved in the search for a radical solution, we must not underestimate the basic questions raised by the spread of AIDS, as stated by Dr. Mann a moment ago, in the modern society, in particular its ethical aspects.
This is why France proposed the meeting in Paris of the people responsible for dealing with the struggle against AIDS in more than 120 countries, which is to take place tomorrow, with representatives of WHO, to consider the questions of
(Mr. Pompidou, France) international co-operation, screening methods and ethical and socio-economic problems. This first contact will make it possiole to take stock of tne present situation and also to prepare for future meetings, in particular the meeting of Ministers of Health to be held in London next January. The purpose is to avoid over hasty or emotional decisions in an area in which it is more necessary than ever before to proceed step by step and, above all, to do so calmly.
Mr. BELONOGOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian) : I wish to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, and to the Director-General of the World Health Organization (WHO), Dr. Mahler, and his colleague Dr. Mann, for their substantive introductory statements.
It is a paradox of our time that the rapid development of science and technology, while making breakthroughs in the exploration of outer space and the ocean depths and opening unprecedentea vistas of social ana economic progress, is not yet able to penetrate all the mysteries of the human organism and to find antidotes to the many diseases that destroy that organism.
This is clearly reflected in the swift spread of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). The scope of the AIDS pandemic, the lack of means of preventing it and the growing fear of it throughout the world have made AIDS one of the gravest global problems, whose significance goes far beyond the limits of medical science and public health.
Although AIDS is not as acute a problem in the Soviet Union as in many other countries, we are conducting intensive scientific research to develop means of preventing, diagnosing and treating this disease. Unfortunately, nowhere in the world have effective means yet been found of treating this disease, nor is there yet a vaccine which can give reliable protection from its pathogenic organisms. In
JSH/tc
the circumstances, the Soviet Union, like several other States, does not see at this stage any alternative to the adoption of measures to impede the spread of AIDS viruses. The Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR of
25 August this year on measures for preventing infection with the AIDS virus has come into force and the USSR Ministry of Public Health has approved rules for medical examination to identify infection with AIDS. These were organizational measures to control the spread of AIDS, inter alia through preventing the introduction of this disease into our country.
It is obvious, however, that no rules or instructions will be able to make any country safe against the threat of an epidemic. We should not pin our hopes on defensive tactics; it is necessary to bring together all the potential available in the world today in order to start a global offensive against this problem.
That is why we favour the establishment of an world-wide network of medical co-operation on the problem of AIDS and the other most dangerous diseases on the basis of existing WHO structures and with due regard for the ideas on this matter which have been advanced by the leaders of the World Physicians' Movement.
The Soviet Union highly appreciates the activities of WHO, which has been leading the fight against AIDS. It has taken an active part in elaborating a global strategy for the prevention of this disease and has made scientific and material contributions to the implementation of the relevant WHO programme.
At the same time, it is our conviction that we should not stop at what we have achieved and that urgent and vigorous actions are needed to bring together, on a world scale, the efforts and scientific potential of all countries, of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and of public and private funds and foundations, to stop the pandemic from growing in geometrical progressior and to save people from this plague of the twentieth century.
While supporting the guiding and co-ordinating role of WHO in the fight against AIDS, .we think it is necessary to make fuller use of its potential to develop routine exchanges of information and practical co-operation among national laboratories in various countries on the problems of research, evaluation of the epidemiological situation and the efficiency of measures to curb the spread of the infection. In fact, what is needed here is the establishment of a world research
centre to combat AIDS.
The AIDS pandemic is specific in that it is fraught with potential and critically dangerous social, economic, moral, ethical and other conseauences where medicine is, in fact, powerless. That is why it is so important for the problem of AIDS to be discussed regularly, not just at a professional medical level, but also at a political level, and to be adequately monitored by the world community as represented by the United Nations General Assembly, its most broad-based and authoritative body.
The fact that the General Assembly is discussing the problem of AIDS today is, in our opinion, a confirmation of the ability of our Organization to respond directly and intensively to the acute problems of our age, especially those of a global nature. In our opinion, this high forum should instruct the relevant specialized agencies to determine, in keeping with their mandates, their role in the work to implement the global strategy of the prevention of AIDS. Subsequent discussion of the implementation of this strategy at regular intervals, including when necessary at sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, will help ensure adequate co-ordination of efforts by the world community.
In our opinion, the draft resolution on the problem of AIDS, of which the Soviet Union is a sponsor, contains sound guidelines for a programme of action in this field and is a useful step towards expanding all-round international co-operation on all aspects of the emergency situation which has arisen as a result of the spread of the AIDS infection.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
HH Hf4A^
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.48 29 October 1987
, ■ «ri,«,	ENGLISH
Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FORTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 26 October 1987, at 3 p.m.
President;	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
later:	Mr. OULD BOYE	(Mauritania)
(Vice-President)
later:	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
(President)
- Report of the Economic and Social Council [12] (continued)
(a) Report of the Council
(i)	Draft resolution
(ii)	Amendments
- Critical economci situation in Africa; United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 [21]
(a)	Reports of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one Wfeek? to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the recdfd.
87-64287/A 8419V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 12 (continued) REPORT OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
(a) REPORT OF THE COUNCIL (chapter VI, section C) (A/42/3)
(i)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/41/L.7/Rev. 1)
(ii)	AMENDMENTS (A/42/L.9)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly has before it draft resolution A/42/L.7/Rev. 1, which is the result of consultations. In view of the agreement reached on the draft resolution, the sponsor of the amendments in A/42/L.9 has indicated that he does not wish to press them to a vote.
I call upon the representative of Australia to introduce draft resolution A/42/L.7/Rev. 1.
Mr. WOOLCOTT (Australia) : During the debate in the plenary Assembly las week on the AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) pandemic, my delegation introduced, on behalf of a large number of co-sponsors, draft resolution A/42/L.7( on the prevention and control of AIDS.
Since then, a series of further informal negotiations on that text have been held in order to respond to the specific suggestions of a number of delegations. Those negotiations culminated in a meeting presided over by Ambassador de Matos Proenga, the Permanent Representative of Portugal and Vice-President of the Assembly. At that meeting, a consensus agreement was reach 1 on a revised text, which is now before the Assembly in document A/42/L.7/Rev. 1. have been asked to announce that Rwanda nas joined the sponsors listed on the revised draft resolution.
The fact that delegations were able to agree so rapidly on a consensus text reflects the flexibility and goodwill shown by all parties on this vital issue. n this context, I would like in particular to mention the extremely constructive to e
(Mr» woolcott, Australia) played by my friend the current Chairman of the Group of African States, Ambassador Blaise Rabetafika of Madagascar.
In presenting this revised text I wish also to pay a tribute to the chairmanship of Ambassador de Matos Proenga. It was largely through his patience and skill that negotiations were able to produce this consensus text on this very important matter of global significance currently before the Assembly. I would like to thank him not only on behalf of the Australian delegation but on behalf of all members of the Assembly, who, I am confident, will join in the consensus adoption of the revised text.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A/42/L.7/Rev.1, "Prevention and control of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)". May I take it that the General Assembly adopts the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/42/I>.7/Rev. 1 was adopted (resolution 42/8).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I consider that the Assembly's adoption of resolution 42/8, "Prevention and control of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)", to be a sign of the international community's preparedness to co-operate in combating a new threat to the attainment of health by all.
I wish to thank the co-sponsors of the resolution and the delegations that took part in the consultations for their efforts, which enabled the General Assembly to adopt this important and timely resolution without a vote. At the same time, I regard this outcome of our work as an expression of our determination to co-operate in the same spirit when tackling the other global problems facing mankind.
This concludes our consideration of the global strategy for the prevention and control of AIDS.
AGENDA ITEM 21
CRITICAL ECONOMIC SITUATION IN AFRICA: UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR AFRICAN ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT 1986-1990
(a)	REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/42/560 and Corr. 1, A/42/674)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/42/L.11)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Consideration of the critical economic situation in Africa at this stage of the forty-second session of the General Assembly directs the attention of the international community to an important and challenging task that concerns the future of a continent. At the same time, it is yet another demonstration of the role of the United Nations in today's world, which is to be a centre for analysing and overcoming problems that touch the lives, indeed effect the very existence, of individuals and nations.
(The President)
I believe that the Assembly has been deeply impressed by the statements of African leaders at the session describing the enormous human, social and economic effort made to implement the Programme of Action despite all the adverse circumstances. President Kaunda of Zambia, in his capacity as current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, eloquently reaffirmed the determination of the African countries to continue this effort.
At the same time, statements in the general debate, as well as the report of the Secretary-General (A/42/560 and Corr.l), bear witness to the response of the international community to the priorities set in the Programme of Action. In the light of the Final Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, new avenues have to be opened up to release urgently needed resources for development.
It has to be stated, however, that the negative development trends have not yet been reversed. This applies, in particular, to the increasing external debt and debt-servicing requirements, as well as to the continued decline in commodity prices, factors determined by the predominant international economic relations. In addition, the continued policy of aggression and political and economic destabilization pursued by the South African apartheid régime leads to enormous financial and human sacrifices, in particular on the part of the front-line States. A stable peace and the absence of regional conflicts are urgently needed prerequisites for the economic recovery and prosperous development of the African continent.
I share the view that, apart from the pressing problems of external debt and commodity prices, programmes for education, vocational training, administration and management snould receive even more attention than they do now because they represent the future.

Africa needs the full and comprehensive support of the international community in order to tackle complex and complicated development problems. Let us use all the possibilities of the forum of the United Nations to discuss and adopt measures appropriate to the critical economic situation in Africa and the challenges posed by it. 
I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed at 5 p. m. today. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided. 
It was so decided. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I therefore ask representatives wishing to participate in the debate to put their names on the list as soon as possible. 
I call on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): In June 1986 the General Assembly, at a special session, adopted the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. That was a historic event. The African countries and the international community in general assumed a mutual commitment to act together to bring about the self-sustained economic and social development of Africa. 
A year and a half later, I am obliged to note that the overall situation in Africa has become much more difficult. The progress made as a result of the courageous efforts of African Governments, the support provided by the international community and the improvement in climatic conditions were compromised by the deterioration in the international economic environment in which Africa has to operate. 
Among the external forces involved, I would mention in particular the deterioration in the terms of trade, the constant fluctuations in exchange rates, 
the increase in interest rates and the reduction of net resource flows. The debt burden has become untenable for many countries. Nor must we forget that drought continues to threaten certain States, and indeed there are regions where it is returning. Lastly, other countries continue to be the victims of acts of political and economic destabilization supported from abroad. 
While it appears that the international community realizes the seriousness of the situation and the need to adopt specific measures without delay, I remain concerned over the disparity between commitment in principle and the real action that is so desperately needed. 
It is against this gloomy background that the General Assembly has to consider the progress made with regard to the implementation of the Programme of Action. The report that I have submitted on this subject is of a preliminary nature. Since it refers basically to overall results, it does not give a precise idea of the situation in the different countries. Therefore we must proceed to a more thorough analysis on a country-by-country basis. Furthermore, it is still too early to evaluate fully the effects of certain of the actions undertaken. Having said that, I wish to draw the attention of the Assembly to certain provisional conclusions which, in my view, require serious consideration. 
Most African Governments have begun economic adjustment and reform programmes, frequently at the price of important social costs and definite political risks. Twenty-eight countries have adopted structural adjustment programmes with the support of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and bilateral donors. These programmes are a11 aimed at improving the management of public funds, rationalizing public investment programmes and promoting private initiative. Development budgets have been adjusted so as to take into account the priorities of the Programme of Action with a view to speeding up economic recovery and

development. To encourage agricultural production, systems of price incentives have been instituted, subsidies have been reduced and internal distribution networks have been improved. Measures have been adopted to increase the mobilization of domestic resources and to restore a certain amount of discipline in the budgetary and financial areas. It appears that these efforts are already beginning to yield results. For example, in 1986 there was an increase in agricultural and manufacture production. 
The international community, for its part, has supported these efforts, while emphasizing assistance to low-income countries. We are increasing the resources of the International Monetary Fund Structural Adjustment Facility and are proceeding to the Eighth Replenishment of International Development Association funds, of
which Africa should be the main beneficiary. 

The agencies of the United Nations are increasing their activities in Africa. A certain number of bilateral donors have provided additional resources for the implementation of structural adjustment programmes. Several donors have decided to offer better terms at the time of rescheduling the debt to the Paris Club and some of them also agreed to convert to grants the public loans granted to certain African countries. Finally official development assistance offered at the bilateral level slightly increased in real terms in 1986. 
We must welcome measures adopted by African countries and by the international community. Nevertheless new efforts are required to generalize the process of reform and extend it to all countries, as well as to mobilize the necessary support. Multilateral lending institutions have set up special programmes for low-income countries which should receive the necessary support. 
I also wish to draw attention to the needs that are, no doubt, of a different nature, but just as serious, of the medium-income countries which have been affected in particular by developments in the primary commodities markets. 
As I stated in my opening remarks, the various provisions I have mentioned are not sufficient to meet as required the difficult problems faced by African countries. The most urgent need continues to be to increase the flow of resources. Given the decline in commodity prices, Africa as a whole has so far lost 19 billion dollars in export receipts as of 1986. The debt burden, which is also becoming worse, weighs heavily on the meagre resources available. In real terms total volume of official development assistance has levelled off in 1986, according to recent statistics. 
It is the seriousness of the situation that led me to consult with Governments and to constitute last April a consultative group of eminent experts to consider the problem of financial flows. This group is to report to me at the end of the year. I shall communicate its recommendations to all Governments and international

organizations, as well as my personal views, on the measures that should be taken. In December, we will also be informed of the views of Heads of State or Government of African countries after a special summit, called by the Organization of African Unity (OAU), to adopt a common position on the African debt question. 
It is with reason that these pressing financial questions are being discussed in immediate international consultations. It is also essential not to defer other crucial measures to a medium- or long-term. The Final Act of the Seventh Session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is a positive development in this regard, in particular with regard to commodity products and trade. The entry into operation of the Common Fund for Commodities and the diversification measures are of crucial importance for Africa. Protection of the external purchasing power of the Continent - which presupposes access to potential markets - constitutes one of the main objectives that should be included in long-term development strategies. 
The development of Africa's human resources is also among the main questions that should be of concern in a medium- and long-term perspective. I am pleased to see that many United Nations agencies have undertaken activities in this field with the full support of partners in the development of Africa. 
As can be seen through the adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action, all agree that the situation in Africa calls for exceptional and urgent measures. This programme continues to be at the basis of a dynamic association between Africa and the international community. African Governments expressed and recently reaffirmed to the OAU their firm desire to fulfil their commitments. They should continue to be encouraged to mobilize their own resources and to step up their reform efforts. The international community,for its part, must contribute to those efforts with broader, firmer and speedier support. 

I wish to assure you that United Nations agencies will continue fully to participate in the implementation of the programme. As in the past, we - my immediate assistants and I - will endeavour to work in close co-operation with the OAU and with other competent African and intergovernmental bodies. 
The General Assembly should proceed to a thorough examination of the programme and reach conclusions with regard to its application at the forty-third session. In the report that I shall submit at that time, I shall provide information on measures adopted by each African country and their development partners, as well as a general overview of the situation. I trust that at that time I will be in a position to speak about more considerable progress and more satisfactory results in the implementation of the programme. That will depend on the pursuance of African efforts and on the nature of the provisions to be taken by the international community and the diligence with which it will act. I wish to stress that the margin for manoeuvre available to Africa in implementing the programme has been greatly reduced and that concrete measures are required in order to support it, without which the momentum achieved thus far cannot be maintained. 
This is a pressing appeal which I make once again to all partners of Africa to accord to this major enterprise the priority it deserves in their development efforts. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call on the representative of Zambia, who will speak on behalf of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and will introduce draft resolution A/42/L. 11. 
Mrs. MUYUNDA (Zambia): I wish to introduce, on behalf of the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), a document on Africa's preliminary assessment of the United Nations Programme for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-199Û (A/42/560 and Corr. l). 
The adoption by the General Assembly of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 at its thirteenth special session was a response to a call by African Heads of State and Government made at the twenty-first session of the OAU. In substance, the United Nations Programme was based on the priorities to which the African countries had committed themselves in their efforts for economic recovery.
In adopting the Programme, the international community signified the acceptance and recognition that Africa's own efforts required assistance. It will be noted that the United Nations Programme incorporated a language which emphasized two essential elements of commitment and co-operation.
The first reflects the determination and commitment of the African countries to launqh both national and regional programmes of economic development. The second is the response of the international community and its commitment to support and complement African development efforts.
It is important to note further that a full implementation of the Priority Programme is estimated to require resources of about $US 128.1 billion. Within this amount the African countries are to provide through their own efforts about two thirds of the total required resources, while the international community is expected to supply the balance. The balance is critical for the full and effective implementation of this Priority Programme.
It is imperative that Africa should emerge from the doldrums of declining standards of living. For the Programme to succeed the international community should work to create a favourable international environment within which it can be implemented. Unfortunately, the creation of a favourable environment is not yet in evidence. This situation has reduced the capacity of many African countries fully to implement the Programme and tends to undermine future prospects of recovery. The crucial factors which have adversely affected the implementation of the recovery programmes include the following: the escalating debt burden affecting many African countries; a rapid deterioration in the terms of trade in most African countries resulting in the loss of nearly $US 20 billion annually; a reduction in resource flows to Africa; natural disasters; and the destabilization policies of the apartheid régime.
The combined and cumulative effect of these factors has driven some African countries to near economic collapse. In the Secretary—General1s own evaluation, as reflected in his report on this subject-matter, he concludes that
"in every respect Africa’s margins for manoeuvre to implement the Programme of Action are being reduced ... Nothing less than the best co-ordination of resource flows and the most energetic partnership between Africa and the international community will ensure adequate forward momentum towards the Programme's goals." (A/42/560, para. 139)
In line with their commitment to Africa's Priority Programme and the United Nations Programme of Action, a growing number of African countries have instituted magnificent reforms. As a first step, priorities have been reordered ana new strategies have been adopted to facilitate the accelerated recovery of their economies.	.
In almost all African countries, priority programmes have consisted of corrective measures in areas such as food and agriculture, transport and communication, combating drought and desertification, and human resource development. As many as 28 African countries have embarked on policy reforms focused on structural adjustment and domestic resource mobilization. Further measures have been instituted with a view to enhancing economic efficiency, improving macro-economic management, rationalizing the public sector, reducing the share of public expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic product and improving the terms of trade for the rural sector.
As reflected in Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990 (APPER) , food and agriculture has been accorded the highest priority. A number of immediate and short-term measures have been undertaken in favour of agriculture. In this regard, many African countries have created national emergency preparedness mechanisms and established early warning or national food security systems. In order to encourage agricultural production, measures instituted include price incentives and improvement of internal input distribution channels. All these measures are meant significantly to improve internal rural and urban terms of tradi
18
(Mrs. Muyunda, Zambia) in favour of the rural sector. Other important agricultural policy reforms include land reform and the abolition of export taxes.
In addition, many African countries have substantially raised the share of agricultural investment. This has involved establishing or strengthening agricultural credit institutions and introducing, where appropriate, mechanization of agriculture; developing, distributing and encouraging the use of modern inputs and methods; improving and expanding storage capacity; and the development, rehabilitation and extension of feeder-road networks and other critical infrastructures. Particular attention has been focused on assistance programmes for small-scale farmers and on the need to strengthen the self-help efforts of rural populations through participatory organizations and co-operatives.
In this connection, many African countries are pursuing measures in line with the Programme of Action on the enhancement of the work of women in agricultural production and other development processes. Within the Kilimanjaro Programme of Action a growing number of African countries are taking measures to implement comprehensive population policies and programmes. They have established national machineries to facilitate the integration of population issues into the development planning process, and are putting into place policies aimed at influencing fertility and mortality rates as well as stemming rural-to-urban migration. It is with the above in mind that the African countries initiated a resolution at the session of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) held in June 1987 that called on the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) to increase both human and financial resources to African countries.
In order to achieve permanent and sustainable agricultural and food production, corresponding improvements in other sectors supporting agriculture are also required. Thus, many African countries have initiated tne development of
local capacity for preparation and design of projects, rehabilitation and maintenance of existing modes of transport ana communications, better management of water resources, improvement of drainage in irrigated areas, encouragement of afforestation, control of deforestation, protection of the environment and reorientation of the educational systems to meet development needs.
In the field of industry, measures have also been taken to rehabilitate and upgrade existing plants and the development of small- and medium-scale industries. Similarly, programmes of a regional character in the areas of transport and communication have been initiated.
Steps towards greater co-operation have been undertaken through such organizations as the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) , the Preferential Trade Area (PTA) and the Southern African Development Co-ordination
Conference (SADCC).
The sacrifices which the African countries have thus made to implement the recovery programme cannot be over-emphasized. This has been done in the face of severe social and economic problems. Prominent among those are: the increase in unemployment, wage reduction, increased inflation and drastic import reductions. The consequences of these programmes are threatening the very foundation of the African social and cultural structures.
The implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action was predicated upon expected resource flows from the international community and improvement in the international economic environment, as both are prerequisites for the successful implementation of the action programme. The Programme of Action envisaged that the international community was to provide concrete assistance to Africa's efforts. This was to involve the improvement of the quality and modalities of external assistance and co-operation, improvement in the external environment on commodity issues, greater bilateral and multilateral programmes lending and alleviation of Africa's debt burden and reduced outflow of resources.
Regrettably, as I have already stated, the international environment has continued to undermine the efforts of the African countries. In fact, there nas been a net outflow of financial resources from the African continent. For example it has been estimated that through repurchases in 1986 alone, African countries transferred to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) an amount of over $US 960 million. It is a matter of grave concern that African countries should be transferring such enormous vital resources to the IMF at a time when the continent is in dire need of increased external financial support. If this situation is allowed to continue, then even the new structural adjustment facility of the IMF will have no real, meaning.
The donor community, particularly the multilateral financial institutions, should therefore consider instituting measures which will effectively function in such a way that the transfer of additional resources to Africa becomes a reality. In this respect the IMF and the World Bank are called upon to increase their concessional lending to African countries. They should relax their conditionality in order effectively to increase that assistance to African countries and reverse the trend of net resource outflow.
The anticipated increase in official development assistance (ODA) to Africa has not materialized. Standing at SUS 13 billion in 1986, total ODA to Africa was, in real terms, below the level of 1985. Furthermore the dwindling of private flows and export credits to Africa has been a major concern of those States.
In spite of the serious efforts deployed by the African countries to tackle their external debt problem, the debt relief measures adopted so far by the developed creditor countries nave not adequately addressed the core of the problem. The ratio of Africa's external debt to exports of goods and services has become unbearable and rose to about 277 per cent in 1986 from 198 per cent in 1985, while the servicing of this debt claimed more than 35 per cent of Africa's exports of goods and services in 1986.
We note with appreciation, however, that some donor countries have taken action to cancel official bilateral debts owed to them by African countries, while others have announced their intention to do so. Further, some initiatives have been announced, proposed or taken by some countries which are designed to address Africa's external debt problem and related problems of resource flows. Nevertheless, the international community has largely lacked the needed political will to implement the relevant resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) on debt relief
(Mrs. Muyunda, Zambia) and the transfer of resources, and to provide effective support and a positive response to Africa's economic recovery efforts, as agreed in the Programme of Action,
The interlocking cause and effect relationship among all the factors of the availability of external resources to Africa, export earning capacity of African countries, rate of African economic growth, and the external debt-servicing obligations make it imperative that comprehensive solutions be found in order for these solutions to have real lasting impact. This assessment has been clearly acknowledged by the Secretary-General in his report before this august body.
The first 18 months after the adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action have therefore seen a very hostile external environment. Had it not been for the good weather conditions that prevailed in 1985 and 1986, the African continent would have faced a disaster much worse than was the case in the years 1983 and 1984. During this period, Africa's export earnings from commodities, the backbone of many African economies, have collapsed, resulting in a loss in 1986 alone of some $US 20 billion. The external debt burden of the African countries has continued to mount and the debt-service burden has become unmanageable. It is because of the enormity of this problem that the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) will meet in a special session this December to deliberate on this issue.
It is important to recall that Africa's commitment to mobilize the required resources for the implementation of the programmes was closely linked to the improvement in the external environment, a solution to the debt crisis and a substantial increase in resource flows.
The improvement in the international environment, particularly the restoration of commodity earnings to remunerative and equitable levels is of crucial importance
to the development efforts of African countries. In this respect, developed countries are urged to take measures to improve and stabilize commodity earnings for African countries through all possible means: the strengthening and improvement of commodity prices and enlarging the commodity list to cover all export commodities of interest to Africa. There is also a need to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a global scheme to stabilize export earnings
Peace, security and stability are necessary pre-conditions for economic development, particularly in Africa. In this regard, the aggression, political an< economic destabilization pursued by the South African régime against countries of southern Africa have a drastic and negative impact on and constitute a serious and permanent threat to their efforts to achieve economic recovery and development.
Before I make my concluding remarks, I should like to introduce on behalf of the African Member States, draft resolution A/42/L.11 on the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
In its preambular section, the draft resolution reflects the assessment of th efforts being undertaken by the African countries and the response of the international community to the needs of African countries under the United Nations Programme of Action.
The operative paragraphs are consequential to the issues raised in the preambular section and address matters that I have touched upon in my statement. It is therefore the sincere hope of my delegation, and indeed of the African Member States, that the draft resolution which I have just introduced will commend itself for adoption by consensus.
I should like to conclude by commending the Secretary-General on his excellent report on the implementation of the Programme. We reaffirm our commitment to the Programme and we urge the international community to support it. In this regard, it should never be forgotten that the development of Africa is as much in the interest of the industrialized world as it is in that of the continent itself.
Mr. BIERRING (Denmark) s I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the European Community and its member States.
The member States of the Community have long-lasting close links with the African continent and extensive economic and development co-operation with African countries. In our development policy Africa, especially the sub-Saharan countries, is given particular priority. Within the Community we have anchored our I co-operation with African countries in a network of agreements, the most important being the Lomé Convention, which constitutes a partnership of a unique character between the European Community and the 66 countries of the African Caribbean and Pacific community (ACP) , of which most are in Africa, embracing commerce and aid as well as other fields of co-operation. With countries in northern Africa we have separate co-operation agreements. Against this background, it should be no surprise that the critical economic situation in Africa has been and still is of great concern to us.
About one and a half years have passed since the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 was adopted by consensus at the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly. That event
(Mr. Bierring, Denmark) took place after an unprecedented decline in Africa during the first half of this decade. Natural disasters, primarily drought, triggered a severe, persistent economic crisis for most African countries, which did not have strong or resistant economies. The economic crisis was aggravated by a combination of exogenous and endogenous factors, as is outlined in the Programme of Action.
With evidence of an improved harvest in 1986, positive elements were, however appearing on the horizon and there was a mutual understanding by the donor community and the African countries to break the vicious circle of decline and relaunch Africa on a path of economic and social progress.
The special session of the General Assembly held in May 1986 lived up to expectations and gave birth to one of the most important United Nations agreements for years in the economic field by the adoption of the Programme of Action. That Programme provides a framework for co-operation and partnership, based on mutual commitment and shared responsibility, between the African countries and the international community. The Programme has been established for the years 1986 to 1990, but it will clearly be of significance beyond that period, since it was a milestone in the shift from the urgent and short-term response to the crisis towards a long-term development. The measures envisaged for restoring growth and development in Africa have a long lead time and their effect will be felt long after their adoption.
Consequently, a year and a half is not an adequately long time span for a thorough assessment of the implementation of the Programme or of its effects, and even less for drawing firm conclusions. Certain trends or delays in the implementation can, of course, be revealed and appropriate appeals can be reinforced in order to maintain the momentum in the implementation of the
Programme. At the special session that fact was recognized. Let me add that the Steering Committee of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) also made that point in paragraph 18 of its submission to the General Assembly.
The special session therefore decided that a mid-term review should take place at the forty-third session of the General Assembly, in 1988, and that the forty-second session should concentrate on the establishment of such preparatory mechanisms as might be necessary.
The review in 1988 should be thoroughly prepared. I shall, later in my statement, revert to this question. In the light of the progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme and the document submitted by the Steering Committee of the OAU following its meeting last month, I shall, however, also make some observations on the Programme of Action.
■ It is of the utmost importance that the consensus on the Programme of Action and the commitment of all parties thereto be preserved. We should like to see this General Assembly confirm the consensus and stress the need to keep the critical economic situation in Africa a priority issue on the international political and economic agenda.
The economic situation in most African countries is still very serious and calls for intensified efforts to solve the problems. This objective will not, however, be furthered by a dramatization of the situation or a process whereby, on the basis of insufficient information, we point fingers at each other. I can assure our African partners that the European Community and its member States are not complacent about the present situation and that we are continuously reviewing what we can do to assist African countries in need. The Community and its member States will elaborate on this next year during the review of the Programme of Action.
The African countries are facing widely differing circumstances and needs as a consequence of size, population, weather conditions, economic and social structure, literacy rate and so on. Most of them, however, have been seriously affected by an adverse external environment that has added to the strains on their economies. Structural handicaps have made some of them particularly vulnerable to the external economic environment. Of particular concern has been the persistent low level of many commodity prices, because many African countries are heavily dependent on exports of just one or two commodities. The slow growth of export volumes, rising imports, stagnating real external resource flows and increasing debt-servicing burdens have also aggravated the problems of sub-Saharan African countries.
The African countries assumed in the Programme of Action the primary responsibility for their overall development. We appreciate that courageous adjustment programmes have been undertaken by many African countries and we encourage others to do the same. We are aware that implementation of adjustment policies often have had high social costs, and the framing of adjustment policies should therefore pay special attention to the need to protect the most vulnerable parts of the population.
Adjustment through sound, stable macro-economic policies continues to be necessary to restore growth and development. At the same time, however, efforts must be made to ensure sustainable development.
The food and agriculture sector was given highest priority in the Programme of Action. There is evidence that many reforms have been initiated to improve agricultural performance. Adoption of price incentives is an important measure that has been applied with promising results by a number of countries.
We find it important that the African countries, in the design of their adjustment policies, endeavour to mobilize fully the human resources through education and training in required skills, to strengthen the role of women in the development process, to develop institutional arrangements, to improve the efficiency of the public sector and encourage indigenous entrepreneurship. On the basis of more comprehensive information, we look forward to an in-depth discussion of these questions next year.
The Programme of Action is a compact containing two central elements: the commitment of African countries to launch domestic programmes of economic development and the commitment of the international community to support and complement the African development efforts. To achieve success, the two commitments must accompany each other, but let us not ignore that just as much as it is a commitment vis-à-vis each other, it is a commitment to ourselves.
African countries undertake reform because it is in their own interest to restore, growth and development. The international community undertook the commitments in the Programme of Action because a favourable external economic environment and revitalized growth in Africa is also in its own interest.
The European Community and its member States have, in the intervention in the general debate in the Second Committee, outlined at length their views on the requirements for an improvement in the international economic environment. I shall not repeat these views here. Suffice it to say that the European Community and its member States reaffirm the commitments undertaken in the United Nations Programme of Action and recognize the need for extensive international support for the priorities and policies that Africa has identified as necessary.
We also agree on the importance of increasing official development assistance to Africa in support of adjustment, in particular on highly concessional terms to the poorest among them, and the need for innovative measures to support debt : distressed countries, primarily in sub-Saharan Africa.
Official development assistance (ODA) will continue to play a decisive role for many African countries. For the poorest among them, ODA is often the only access to external financial support of significance. Achievement of the 0.7 L target for ODA and the 0.15 target for ODA to the least developed countries, as adopted, is therefore important, and we realize that further efforts are needed to achieve these targets as quickly as possible.
The member States of the Community have increased their development assistance to Africa since the special session, and a very high share of our total aid is now allocated to African countries.	■
At the international level, a number of initiatives have also been taken in line with the Programme of Action. International financial institutions are being
strengthened by the provision of additional resources and instruments to fulfil their tasks. The Eighth Replenishment of the International Development Association and the understanding to set aside a substantial part of the funds for sub-Saharan countries is to be welcomed. The decision on a substantial general capital increase for the World Bank is another important step. We also welcome the increase in the capital of the African Development Bank and urge all donors to do their utmost also to achieve a substantial replenishment of the African Development Fund.*
We are seriously concerned about the debt-servicing problems facing the sub-Saharan countries. While the international debt strategy has well served all the parties concerned, it has also been evident for some time that it needs reinforcement and that all its elements have to be implemented more effectively. This point was recognized both at the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and at the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in September. For the sub-Saharan countries there is an undeniable need for urgent action to alleviate the debt burden.
The member States of the European Community have all implemented Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) regarding debt relief, being of particular relevance for the poorer African countries. We call on those countries which have not yet done so to apply that resolution in full.
Negotiations in the Paris Club on longer repayment and grace periods for the poorest countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, and undertaking adjustment programmes will also lead to debt relief. Proposals to apply lower interest rates to rescheduled official debt have also been put forward.
*Mr. Quid Boye (Mauritania) , Vice-President, took the Chair.
The Managing Director of IMF has proposed a substantial increase in the resources of the Fund's structural adjustment facility over the next three years, and it is to be expected that negotiations on this proposal will be completed soon. We, for our part, strongly support his initiative.
The World Bank's efforts to mobilize a special package of additional financing from the donor community in order to assist the poorest and debt distressed sub-Saharan countries' own efforts in tackling their debt problems should also be recalled.
For certain highly-indebted low-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa, the Community itself is considering an initiative concerning a special programme in the form of quick-disbursing aid for this group of countries.
Trade is an essential means of promoting growth and enhancing the resources needed for development. The trading environment of African countries must, therefore, be further improved. Protectionist pressures should be resisted all over the world.
The Community market has long been largely open to the exports of African countries through the very liberal Lomé trade regime and the trade components of our co-operation agreements with the Mediterranean countries. These arrangements provide our African partners with non-reciprocal free access for the bulk of their exports to their major market, now enlarged to include Spain and Portugal.
In the broader context of multilateral trade negotiations, the Community is actively promoting a further expansion of trade through more liberal and open rules, on the basis of the Punta del Este ministerial declaration. In this context, on 14 October, the Community submitted a wide-ranging offer on tropical products, a subject which was given special attention in the Uruguay round. We hope that our African partners will continue their active participation in the Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations, and we call upon all other countries to participate in the liberalization of their import markets so as to open up new opportunities for African exports.
In particular, with regard to the least developed countries, of which many are sub-Saharan African countries, we consider it essential that all industrialized countries should enhance market access for the products of the least developed countries through more favourable treatment within an improved General System of Preferences, including improved rules of origin. Also, we should aim at the widest possible use of the provisions of the fourth Multi-Fiber Agreement on flexibility and market access in favour of least developed countries.
As many African countries are heavily dependent on their exports of commodities, the situation on the commodity markets is of particular concern to them. There is need for better and more stable functioning of the commodity markets, and long-term solutions to commodity problems should be sought. For most African countries, horizontal and vertical diversification of their economies, as well as increased participation in the processing, marketing and distribution of their commodities, is of major importance in this respect. With regard to compensatory financing, suffice it to say that a review of the IMF facility is being undertaken and that the member States of the Community will participate constructively in the review.
The results of the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) have significantly improved the prospects for future action leading to constructive results in the commodity field. The Stabex system should be recalled in this context as an important innovative achievement.
Improvement in the quality and modality of aid and aid co-ordination is an important part of the Programme of Action. The member States of the Community already have a good record with respect to aid quality and modalities. That has not, however, stopped us from seeking futher improvements. The review next year will be a good opportunity for a thorough examination of this question. Steps have also been taken to ensure better co-ordination of aid, inter alia, through closer co-operation between the World Bank and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). I am referring to the round-table meetings and the consultative groups. Further strengthening of the co-ordination should be pursued, for example through expanded co-operation between the Governments of the recipient countries and the multilateral and bilateral donors, locally as well as at the international level. In this regard we would refer to the new set of guiding principles for aia co-ordination which were approved at the Development Assistance Committee high-level meeting at the end of last year.
The United Nations system plays an important role in the implementation of the Programme of Action, and we are pleased to see the priority given by the Secretary-General to the critical economic situation in Africa. The engagement of the United Nations in the long-term efforts of restoring development in Africa is a logical continuation of the swift and effective action of the Secretary-General to mobilize and co-ordinate emergency support for Africa in the days of the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa.
The support of the United Nations system in this subsequent phase covers a broad field. The development organizations of the system seem to have strengthened
their activities in Africa, although it is difficult to discern from the Secretary-General's report which of the many activities are directly related to the Programme of Action. The action taken by the Secretary-General to ensure co-ordination and monitoring is welcomed and will, it is hoped, prove useful in the continued implementation of the Programme and in the preparation of the review in 1988. Efforts to sustain the international interest in Africa's recovery is another area in which the United Nations can make a useful contribution. The establishment of the Advisory Group on Resource Flows is a further initiative by the Secretary-General, and we are now awaiting the report from the Group.
As the Assembly can see, many initiatives have been taken to address the critical economic situation in Africa since the special session. They should be given the time to work, and we should take our time to assess their effect. On this basis I shall, finally, address the question of preparing the review of the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Recovery and Development.
The Secretary-General has the central role to play in this process. The regional organizations and the various bodies in the United Nations system can also be expected to contribute to the documentation of the review. We would find it appropriate at this session of the General Assembly to decide on the scope of this documentation and to agree on a timetable for the preparatory process. To that end, we submit the following considerations.
The review should be based on balanced, factual papers which should provide a well-documented survey of steps taken by all parties to implement the Programme of Action. It would be desirable that the information provided be of a rather specific nature, not only aggregated figures. The possibility of submitting some case studies for countries or subregions, for instance, should be explored.
(Mr. Bierring, Denmark) , .	the review should take place during
As envisaged in the Programme of Action, tne re	r
the forty-third session of the General Assembly. To the extent that an intergovernmental preparatory mechanism is necessary, we prefer that use be made of existing mechanisms instead of creating new ones. One option could be to entrust the Economic and Social Council with the task. Discussions in a preparatory mechanism should not be initiated before the necessary data and inputs from the parties concerned are available. In our view an appropriate time seems to be the early fall of 1988.
Mr. FERM (Sweden) : I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
The Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, which the special session adopted last year, has two main elements: adjustment efforts that the African countries must undertake; and increased international support for these efforts.
The Nordic countries welcome the determined efforts by many African countries to engage in policy reforms and adjustment measures in line with the Programme of Action. In many cases impressive results as regards, for instance, fiscal management and exchange rate adjustment, have been achieved. It is worth highlighting the steps taken in the areas of agricultural incentives and wage policy. These are essential in order to create improved possibilities for domestic food production and rural development.
Resolute implementation of reforms in the African countries must continue. This is a prerequisite for long-term sustainable development and growth with equity, but the industrialized countries know from their own experiences the dilemmas in implementing austerity measures and structural change, and in Africa such programmes are often being carried out under particularly adverse circumstances. In many cases a heavy debt burden, deteriorating terms of trade, stagnating external-resource flows, natural calamities and political tension are severe constraints on Governments' margin for manoeuvre. Therefore, the Nordic countries share the concerns fo the African countries over the insufficient support from the international community for the adjustment efforts they are undertaking.
In this context we find that the operational organizations of the United Nations system - in the first place the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) - must continue to support tne structural adjustment process in Africa. They should continue to map and define the social impact of the structural adjustment programmes in order to have this dimension more clearly reflected in the planning and implementation of the programmes. We are convinced that this dimension is essential to secure an effective adjustment with a human face.
The situation is exceptionally precarious in the debt distressed countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Already very poor at the beginning of the present decade, that group of nations has registered negative growth in per capita gross domestic product during the whole of the 1980s. They have also experienced a fall in their export prices and a striking deterioration in investment levels.
The external economic environment is of course of prime importance in order for it to be possible for the African countries to implement ambitious adjustment programmes. The Nordic countries have on many occasions stated that the existing
and growing uncertainties in the world economy have a negative impact on the position of the poorest African countries and that they seriously endanger the attainment of the development objectives of these countries. In seeking solutions to the present difficulties, the international community must also bear in mind the legitimate expectations of the most vulnerable nations and the commitments of all partners, both developing African countries and developed countries, to make serious efforts to bring about a long-term sustainable development.
The Nordic countries have studied the report of the Secretary-General under this agenda item (A/42/560 and Corr.l) with interest, and we would like to express our appreciation for the work undertaken. I should like here to make some comments on its content.
First of all, there seems to be an almost total absence of information on the emergency situation. However, from some African countries there are already alarming reports. Such information could undoubtedly have served a purpose by showing the link between acute emergencies and development. Accordingly, the Nordic countries take this opportunity to underline the necessity of a continuous monitoring of the emergency situation on the African continent and the importance of viewing the emergency situation in a wider development context. The Nordic countries will address this issue separately in the Second Committee, when the report of the Secretary-General on the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator (UNDRO) is discussed.
The Secretary-General points out the difficulties in obtaining reliable data for his report. It may therefore be understandable that the report provides only limited qualitative and quantitative information to support various of its statements, particularly on actions taken by African countries. We hope, however, that the Secretary-General in his next report on the critical economic situation in
Africa will be able to elaborate further on measures aimed at the enhancement of the role of women in agricultural production and other development processes.
Further elaboration of the initiatives mentioned in paragraph 19 to protect the environment would also be desirable.
Those examples illustrate the scope for greater clarity and precision in future documents on this issue. The United Nations project to strengthen the statistical and information-gathering capacities of African countries should be helpful in this respect. It would also be of use is assessing domestic measures to implement the action programme. A higher response ratio to the relevant Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) questionnaires should further contribute to a more complete picture, de would also like to emphasize the need for a harmonization of the methods used for the gathering of statistical information.
It is crucial that both of the two central elements of the United Nations Programme of Action are implemented, one being the commitment of African States to domestic action and the other
"The response of the international community and its commitment to support and complement the African development efforts." (S-13/2, annex, para. 8 (b) )
This second element is spelt out in several places in the Programme of Action, which emphasizes that it is imperative that the international community intensify its co-operation and substantially increase its support for the African efforts. The Programme of Action also clearly states that the international community recognizes that the African countries need additional external resources and that the international community commits itself to making every effort to provide sufficient resources to support and supplement the African development effort.
Those statements of support, particularly to the debt distressed countries of sub-Saharan Africa, have recently been reiterated, inter alia, in the Final Document of the seventh session of the United Nations Conferénce on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and in the communiqués issued by the meetings of the World Bank-International Monetary Fund (IMF) Development Committee and the Interim Committee last month.
Seen in this light, the overall inadequacy of resource flows to Africa is a reason for serious concern. At the same time that the importance of concessional flows to sub-Saharan Africa has significantly increased, their volume has been stagnating, concurrently with declines in non-concessional flows, export earnings and escalating debt-service obligations. The fact that concessional support to the debt distressed countries in that regaion has declined in relative terms - and in volume as well in 1986 - is particularly alarming.
Urgent action is needed to provide satisfactory international backing for the African development efforts, from bilateral as well as multilateral sources. The Nordic countries therefore welcome the recent concrete set of proposals from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to enhance assistance to low-income countries facing exceptional difficulties. We support the orientation of those initiatives towards mobilizing additional resources, aiming at a package sufficient to make it possible to achieve adjustment with growth in per capita income while enabling all industrialized countries to participate selectively.
In our view, further international support measures are called for in order to reactivate growth and alleviate the debt problems of the low-income debt distressed African countries. At the recent World Bank-IMF Annual Meeting we put forward the idea of establishment an arrangement to be administered by the International Development Association (IDA) to make available additional resources for this
purpose.
(Mr. Perm, Sweden)
The Nordic countries also welcome the initiative by the Managing Director of the IMF to enlarge substantially the resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility of the Fund with genuinely additional resources. We likewise back the recent developments in the Paris Club with regard to extended maturities and grace periods for the poorest, most heavily indebted countries.
46
(Mr. Ferm, Sweden)
Interest payment on publicly guaranteed commercial debt is one of the most serious financial burdens facing many of the poorest African countries. The Nordic countries wish to see discussions continue on this issue in the Paris Club with a view to finding a multilateral solution. Some of the Nordic countries are in a position to apply concessional interest rates within such an arrangement, while others are considering alternative measures with the same effect. All the Nordic countries have either converted or will positively consider requests to convert their remaining bilateral development credits to the poorest countries into grants. We urge donors that have not yet done so to adopt similar measures.
The Nordic countries strongly endorse and participate in the multilateral efforts I have just briefly described, many of which to a very high degree benefit the African continent. Increased transfer of resources must, however, take place also on a bilateral basis. The decline in 1986 of bilateral official development assistance flows to the debt distressed countries of sub-Saharan Africa from major donors is, therefore, highly disturbing. Domestic obstacles in donor countries to such assistance, although real, are surely minute compared to the hardships the absence of that aid creates in many of the poor recipient countries.
Additional efforts on the part of bilateral donors are definitely necessary. In view of the structural adjustment endeavours facing many African countries there is a pronounced need for programme assistance to complement other kinds of bilateral assistance. Temporary emergency aid should, when no longer required, be smoothly converted into long-term assistance.
Prospects for official development assistance growth for the remainder of this decade seem to run counter to well-known targets as well as to the responsibilities accepted in the United Nations Programme of Action for Africa. The Nordic countries reiterate their appeal to the major industrialized countries to increase
their official development assistance to reach these targets. While striving towards achieving internationally agreed targets in this field, increased consideration should be given to the resource needs of the African countries.
The performance of the Nordic countries in this respect is well known to this body. More than half of the main recipients of our bilateral assistance are situated in sub-Saharan Africa and over 60 per cent of that aid is allocated to these same countries. The Nordic countries will continue to bear their share of the responsibility for the provision of international support to Africa in line with the Programme of Action for Africa. Assistance from the Nordic countries will continue to increase in the years to come. Continued high priority will be given to co-operation within the framework of the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference and to assistance in favour of the front-line States.
A review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action for Africa will take place at the forty-third session of the General Assembly. For this purpose we shall, during the present session, consider and establish such preparatory mechanisms as may be necessary. In considering this matter, the possibility of using existing means should be taken duly into account. In our view, such means could include relevant United Nations bodies reporting through next year's sessions of the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly. We believe that a procedure of that kind may contribute to setting the stage for well-prepared and constructive consideration of this important item next autumn.
I conclude by stating that the Nordic countries look forward to the comprehensive review and appraisal of the Programme of Action which will take place at the forty-third session of the General Assembly.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French): My delegation endorses all the statements made by the Chairman of the European Community. We shall now simply add a few remarks on the question of the economic situation in Africa, which is for France a matter of major concern.
France, where the contract was signed in 1981 between the least developed countries, most of which are African, and their partners throughout the world, contributed, with others, to creating the climate of courageous clear-sightedness and realism which ultimately came to form part of the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
Together with other members of the General Assembly, we have reflected on the best lesson to be learned from the present debate when everything had already been said at the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly, where an exceptionally clear analysis was made of the serious, complex and specific problems being experienced on the African continent.
We shall not hide the fact that things have not evolved in Africa as quickly or as well as we had expected. We are not pleased with the progress, which has been too slow and hesitant and has had too many setbacks. We know what some peoples are suffering. We fully appreciate the actions taken by many Governments in Africa to correct past mistakes and make the best of the resources of their soil and the efforts of their people. We are aware of the efforts made to reform their economies to promote future growth, at the cost of courageous and sometimes unpopular measures. We do not wish to question anyone's motives here: that would be a waste of time and emotion.
With the Programme of Action adopted last year we now have a diagnosis and a prescription. Only one thing is necessary: to reaffirm together, unanimously, the
(Mr. Blanc, France) commitment to implement effectively, better and more quickly the provisions of our June 1986 contract.
It is the facts that we shall judge, and it is on the basis of facts that we must prepare the thorough analysis of the implementation of the Programme which the special session of the General Assembly decided should take place at our forty-third session.
Accordingly, the work of the Assembly should be prepared within an unchallengeable, geographically balanced international framework. It is to such a forum that we should transmit the necessary information. This information could be based on an assessment in as precise and reliable terms as possible of the qualitative and quantitative progress accomplished by all. We should like the Secretary-General, assisted by the Director-General for International Economic Co-operation and Development, to take responsibility for this.
At this stage we are not yet in a position to take serious stock of the implementation of the five-year commitments which were entered into a mere 18 months ago. Any attempt at an assessment based on figures would be, in a technical sense, premature today - first, because national accounting data for 1986 and even for 1985 are not yet ready; and, secondly, because the first budgets prepared by Governments of Member States since the publication of that Programme are for 1988.
This means that from this technical standpoint next year's analysis will Perhaps come a little early. We must also admit that a realistic assessment must also take into account factors that are not related or are little related to Government action. These social factors also concern corporate life and relate to individual choices made with regard to training, employment, savings and consumption.
Also among the external factors affecting the success of African recovery and development we should discern five sets of elements where the Governments of industrial countries, like mine, have responsibility in a variety of areas. It is merely by way of example, and without trying here to enter into any competition, that I shall illustrate these remarks on the basis of initiatives taken by my country.
First of all I shall simply recall the importance of weather conditions and natural disasters, such as the very serious drought that affected the economy of African States in the years 1983 to 1985. Indeed, for humanitarian reasons these exceptional circumstances called for responsible action by Governments of all regions of the world. Those Governments that cannot discharge this responsibility bilaterally should find in the relevant institutions of the United Nations system appropriate means by which to channel their efforts at solidarity, be it in the areas of emergency food aid, assistance to refugees and the fight against AIDS or the locust problem. We share the concern of the Secretary-General that the humanitarian aid that may be necessary should be added to and should not replace the support offered within the framework of the Programme of Action.
Secondly, other essential elements for African economies directly depend on the action of corporations and banks, investors and lenders outside the governmental framework.
One must bear in mind that States with liberalized economies have few means available in securing assistance from commerical banks and private investors to the developing economies. They also do not have direct means of pressuring banks to compel them to show more understanding in their loan policies.
On the other hand, it is possible to act without constraints but effectively in attracting motivated and experienced partners for African enterprises, in particular among the small and medium firms of the northern countries. In this connection, important meetings were held successfully less than a year ago at Libreville on the subject of industrial co-operation and the private sector.
Other industrial, commercial and even academic partnerships already exist among the universities, corporations and banks of African and Western countries, or of African countries with their neighbours, on a subregional level.
African recovery and development will also require the promotion of services: industrial quality, the regularity of supplies and access to international markets are indeed essential elements to economic recovery.
In this context, the consultations held under the dual sponsorship of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the International Labour Organisation (ILO) brought together in Paris last September 250 professionals from 70 countries to discuss the question of training for industrial maintenance.
Further, with regard to official development assistance loans the Governments of creditor countries can, through international consultation, assist debtor countries in fulfilling their obligations within the tested framework of the Paris Club, which has already done a great deal with regard to the taking into account of the external constraints of African countries. For several months it has even been implementing measures under the proposals made by the French Finance Minister by
(Mr. Blanc, France relaxing the terms o£ rescheduling tor the very poor and highly indebted countries that have undertaken a recovery programme.
Along those lines, a few days ago in Washington the French Minister for Economy and Finance strongly appealed for:
"A consensus on the systematic generalization of concessional rates for rescheduling development assistance debts leading to an agreed reduction, and even elimination, of the margins added on by creditor States to the market cost in the case of consolidated commercial debts."
Thirdly, another set of elements is that of the world economic situation on which most individual national policies, except perhaps for two or three among them, have only meagre influence. In bringing about the Louvre agreement, France wished to make a contribution to greater stability in exchange rates and to lower interest rates. It made a similar contribution last January by holding a seminar in Paris, followed by the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade, and Development (UNCTAD), where a North-South dialogue took place on the situation on commodities, which so seriously affected the African economies in the past few years. This dialogue will, we hope, enable producers better to control supply in various international commodity markets; and an important step will have been taken if it leads to the effective and rapid utilization of the two "windows" of the Common Fund for Commodities. The second "window" will allow for a more effective diversification of the African economies.
Fourthly, with the Common Fund, we can already see a fourth group of external elements which are more directly available to Governments when they act in concert within multialteral agencies, through commercial, monetary or financial instruments, such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) , the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Lomé Convention, the World Bank group and regional development institutions.
<Mr» Blanc, France) I wish here simply torecall France's decisive role, together with other
European countries, in the establishment of a special fund for Africa and a special African programme within the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), where we hope certain major countries will join the donors.
Further, France has increased its share in the Eighth Replenishment of the International Development Association, its contribution today having reached 7.3 per cent of the total of $11.5 billion.
After the unanimous ratification of structural adjustment by UNCTAD VII, we call on the other members of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concerned to treble the volume of the Facility set up to that end. For its part, France is ready to provide that Facility with a contribution of $500 million. It is ready also to make a significant increase to the capital of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)• Lastly, it is prepared to undertake a supplementary budgetary effort with regard to the plan to replenish the resources of the African Development Fund to a level of between $2.5 to $3 billion for the coming years, thus more directly responding to the need of highly concessional net resource flows to Africa.
Fifthly, it is now obvious that bilateral official development assistance and multilateral assistance by way of voluntary annual contributions to the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), are especially geared to the choices and external priorities of our Governments.
Suffice it for me to recall that my country is the primary donor of development assistance to sub-Saharan Africa. For the budget year 1988 the French Parliament has been asked to increase the resources of the Ministry of Co-operation, which generally devotes its activities to Africa, by 13.4 per cent. That means quite more in this period of austerity than has been granted to any
(Mr. Blanc, France! other ministry. I should add that 20 per cent of our bilateral assistance to sub-Saharan Africa will take the form of non—project, rapid-distribution aid especially well adapted to the needs of structural adjustment.
We must be realistic and creative if we, whether African or not, wish to fulfil our respective conunitments.
But, above all, we must together devise the provisions that will allow us, in each country, to co-operate in the closest possible manner, to be followed up by the local representatives of the main partners. President Diouf of the Republic of Senegal, who last year made such an important contribution to the success of our special session, is today providing an example of this by opening in Dakar a three-day international meeting devoted to a follow-up of that session. I hope that that initiative will lead to others and that all these initiatives will enable Africa to regain confidence in its own future.
Mr. ZVEZDIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): It is difficult to over-assess the importance of the question under discussion today taking into account its essential and vital importance and its scale, as on its solution depends the fate of millions of people and even of an entire continent.
An objective assessment of progress in the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 can be given only on the basis of a balanced analysis of the situation existing on the continent taking due account of the impact of the entire set of interrelated external and domestic factors. This approach will provide an opportunity to see positive elements, to identify difficulties and complications on this path and then to work out tasks of the international community for the successful fulfilment of the Programme.
The Soviet delegation at the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly emphasized that a radical improvement of the general economic and political situation, both in Africa and throughout the world, as well as the elimination of the unequal position of the African countries in the international division of labour, were indispensable conditions for overcoming the economic crisis.
Today we must state that the causes of the crisis not only persist, but have grown into a permanent source of increasing problems and difficulties.
According to the Secretary-General's report entitled "Critical Economic Situation in Africa: United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990" (A/42/560 and Corr.l), because of the general weakness of the economic structures in many African countries, especially the sub-Saharan countries, they have found themselves in fact defenceless faced with further upheavals in the external economic situation. Last year their export
earnings fell by $19 billion, that is, by almost one third. Their external debt is now close to $200 billion, wnile debt-servicing payments amounted to 38 per cent of their export earnings. Moreover, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which, it would seem, should have as its purpose the promotion of stable conditions for growth and development, received from the African countries last year almost $1 billion more than it gave them.
The net outflow of financial resources from Africa exceeds $9 billion a year while it was stressed at the thirteenth special session that the African countries needed exactly that amount of annual external assistance to overcome their economic difficulties.
Structural adjustments made by several African countries demonstrate that these measures are not a panacea for chronic ailments of national economies on the continent and did not lead to an increase in external aid as had been promised. Several of the most important donors are even catting down their bilateral aid to African countries. The Secretary-General in his report noted also that:
“The implementation of structural adjustment programmes has not been without social stress and disruption and indications of political risk" and has also been related to
"social costs, in particular, for health, education, nutrition, employment and maintenance of social institutions" (A/42/560 and Corr.l, para. 24).
There has been no progress in finding solutions to problems that have accumulated in southern Africa. The immoral and anti-humane anachronism of contemporary history represented by the apartheid régime, South Africa's continued aggressive actions against front-line States, economic sabotage and colonialist oppression of the Namibian people are all depressing elements of the current situation in southern Africa and raise serious obstacles to the normal development of the continent as a whole.
The analysis of these and other factors leads us to rather disquieting conclusions, which are presented in a summarized form in a document of the Permanent Steering Committee of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), which, inter alia, states that:
"The national and international environment has in many respects worsened, with the consequence that the capacity of African countries to implement the programme fully has been undermined". (A/42/614, annex, para. 8) The Soviet delegation notes that the United Nations Secretariat has made certain efforts to mobilize the international community in order to overcome the critical economic situation in Africa as well as to improve the co-ordination of those activities in the United Nations system, and we are grateful to it for that. At the same time, it is our view that the Secretariat does not always take a balanced approach to the realization of aims and purposes contained in the Programme of Action. No one will deny the importance of the domestic economic policies carried out by African Governments in fighting the crisis. However, external factors, which in many cases have a decisive role to play, should continue to be the focus of attention. This one-sided approach, in particular in the Secretariat's evaluation work, hinders a comprehensive analysis of the impact of all factors both external and internal and consequently the formulation of recommendations and actions.
We noted with regret that the Secretary-General's report also permits a one-sided approach in estimating contributions by various donor countries to the assistance of Africa. For instance, it contains estimates which are not in keeping with reality, such as the information regarding the volume of aid from the socialist countries of Eastern Europe. We believe that those estimates - the
source of which is not mentioned - should be the responsibility of the authors of the report. However, the United Nations Secretariat has at its disposal not only estimates, but also official data on the aid from the socialist States to Africa. . As for my country, our aid figures have been published, for example, in the annex to United Nations document A/S-13/10. It is well known that in 1985 alone it amounted to $1.7 billion and was just as significant in 1986. I hope that the necessary corrections will be made to the report.
The Soviet Union has been actively co-operating with African countries in supporting their efforts to overcome economic backwardness and to ensure genuine economic self-reliance with due regard to the aims and purposes of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
In co-operation with the USSR, the African countries have already built and put into operation over 340 projects, including those in such key economic branches as industry and energy.
While providing aid to African countries, the Soviet Union does not receive a share of the profits of the enterprises constructed with its assistance; this completely rules out a return flow of funds. It seeks no economic privileges or concessions and lays down no political conditions whatever.
A very important feature of the Soviet Union's economic relations with the developing countries is its assistance, in response to requests from the Governments of these countries, first in the establishment of key enterprises in the public sector which constitutes the basis for independent development. Public-sector enterprises built with the assistance of the Soviet Union are a major source of income for the national budgets of African countries. They promote increased employment in those countries and also serve to train qualified national personnel.
(Mr. Zvezdin, USSR)
In view of the particular urgency of the food problem in the African countries, the Soviet Union is helping to increase their food production and giving greater attention to economic and technical assistance for the African countries with a view to developing their agriculture and the related agro-industrial sectors of the economy.
This assistance is being provided to about 20 African States and covets 192 projects, more than 60 of which are already in operation. Work is going on to bring more than 200,000 hectares of land under cultivation, and 15 irrigation and land reclamation projects have been put into operation.
A very important part of the Soviet Union’s economic and technical co-operation with African countries is the training of national personnel. With the assistance of my country more than 450,000 workers from African countries have been trained as specialists and skilled workers in various fields. More than 20,000 people are today studying in institutes of higher education in my country. For the period covered by the United Nations Programme of Action for Africa, we shall be hosting up to 1,100 nationals from the front-line States alone and paying all the related costs.
We intend to expand our co-operation with African countries in all areas. At present, nearly 300 industrial enterprises and other national economic projects are being built or designed in those countries.	1
The period to 1990 will see further expansion of co-operation, particularly with sub-Saharan countries, in agriculture, fisheries and related agro-industrial sectors of the economy. The contribution of the USSR in aid to the agro-industrial sector will reach 20 per cent of the total amount of aid provided by the Soviet Union to the countries of that region.
The credit assistance provided by my country to the States of Africa is on conditions that are generally more favourable than those of such capital provided to the African countries by other official creditors. Characteristic features of Soviet credits to African countries are that they are production-oriented and provided on favourable terms. Such loans are usually returned in the form of traditional and non-traditional export goods or the output of new industrial
(Mr. Zvezdin, USSR) branches, including those established with Soviet assistance on a compensatory basis. A search is now under way for other mutually acceptable forms of settlement.
In addition, in the period 1981-1985, in the light of the deterioration of their currency situation, the USSR allowed African countries to defer repayment of Soviet credits, including interest, to a total amount of nearly $2.4 billion.
In accordance with the recommendations in the United Nations Programme of Action, the Soviet Union is taking steps to establish and develop co-operation with such African regional organizations as the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference, the Preferential Trade Area for eastern and southern Africa and the inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development in East Africa (IGADD) . We supported the establishment of the Fund for Africa and plan to contribute nearly 65 million roubles to it.
My delegation fully shares the view that implementation of the decision of the International Conference on the Relationship oetween Disarmament and Development concerning the close link between disarmament and development would allow the international community to save substantial resources, which coulo then be used, inter alia, for giving even further assistance to the African countries.
For us, Africa is not a field of confrontation between East and West, or a place to test various models of social and economic development. We regard Africa as an arena for the broad international co-operation that is so necessary for the solution of such urgent problems facing the African countries as those of the total elimination of colonialism and racism, the overcoming of economic backwardness, the eradication of hunger and disease, the improvement of the standard of living and the protection of the environment.
It is the duty of the world community to stop tne African countries from slipping towards a catastrophe whose social and economic consequences would be
difficult to predict. It is necessary to work for the establishment of a new world economic order which would guarantee economic security for African and other countries on a just and equitable basis. To this end, it will be very important to do away with inequitable international trade, eliminate protectionism, ensure stability in world commodity markets, stop the net outflow of financial resources from Africa and find a just solution to the problem of external debt. We support the initiative of the Organization of African Unity on the convening of an international conference on Africa's external debt.
The Soviet Union supports broad international co-operation in the interest of Africa and is convinced that the expansion of this co-operation will contribute not only to a radical improvement of the social and economic situation on the continent, but also to the stable and harmonious development of the world economy in general, to the benefit of all participants in international economic relations.
Mr. LI Luye (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, I should like to thank the Secretary-General for providing us with a report on the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 which is very helpful to the review and assessment of this matter by the General Assembly.
More than a year has passed since the United Nations Programme of Action was adopted by the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session. Shouldering the heavy task of reactivating and developing their economies, the African countries have, within this snort period of time, made tremendous efforts to bring about a change in their critical economic situation. The determination shown and the progress made by the African people in their efforts to implement the Programme of Action have received the widespread appreciation of the international community.
■	l^- ^i Luye' China)
, In.keeping with their commitment, the African countries have started implementing the United Nations Programme of Action and Africa’s Priority Programme for Economic Recovery in an earnest and gradual manner.
Many African countries have introduced economic reforms and policy adjustments, and some of them have already achieved initial results. What is particularly striking is that food and agricultural production has received close attention from most countries and been accorded top priority. They have not only adopted contingency measures for possible food problems and establisned early warning systems, but also taken a number of medium-term steps. These steps include the establishment or strengthening of agricultural credit institutions, an increase in agricultural investment, adjustment of the prices of agricultural products and incentives for food production and its rational distribution, improvement of production and managerial methods, improvement and expansion of storage capacity and the development of agricultural infrastructure. As for their macro-economic policies, the African countries have paid greater attention to the mobilization of indigenous resources and improvement of economic efficiency, and taken steps to strengthen their macro-economic management, reduce public spending and drastically decrease exchange rates.*
*The President returned to the Chair.
At the same time, by giving vigorous play to self-reliance and collective self-reliance, the African countries are making concerted efforts to overcome their economic difficulties. In recent years economic co-operation and co-ordination at the regional and subregional levels have witnessed further development. In their efforts to ensure closer co-operation they have established regional networks of crop protection and inter-State early-warning systems, united their efforts to control drought and desertification, worked collectively to set up an agricultural research centre and popularized the use of improved varieties of rice and beans. In policy co-ordination, with the support of international organizations, they have held various conferences and meetings, carried out technical exchanges and worked out specific regional and subregional implementation programmes to facilitate the implementation of Africa's Priority Programme and the United Nations Programme of Action.
We have noticed that many countries and international institutions have taken positive steps in providing assistance to the African countries. In order to increase aid to the African countries, the Special Fund for Africa was created by the World Bank, a sum of SUS 12.4 billion has been agreed upon for the Eighth Replenishment of the International Development Association (IDA) and a substantial expansion of the Structural Adjustment Facility is now under discussion by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In adaition, some developed countries have abolished the official debts for a number of the least developed African countries and increased their grants to the low-income African countries. The Venice summit meeting of seven Western countries also suggested that the Paris Club reach agreement on longer grace and repayment periods for official development assistance to the poorest African countries so as to alleviate their debt burden, and that lower interest rates be applied to the existing dents of those low-income African
(Mr. Li Luye, China) countries that were making adjustment efforts. All of this deserves our welcome and encouragement.
It must be pointed out, however, that the progress made so far in implementing the United Nations Programme of Action is still very Limited.
The international community's support and assistance to African countries have not reached the expected level and are far from being able to satisfy the development needs of those countries for what is particularly worrying is that in recent years private financial flows to the African countries have continued to dwindle: for example, export credits declined from $1 billion in 1935 to $0.4 billion in 1986 and have almost come to a halt in 1987. The financial transfer to the African countries by the IMF nas also become negative.
Judging by the call in the United Nations Programme of Action, the steps taken by the developed countries in helping to improve the external environment and reduce its adverse influence upon Africa have so far remained quite limited. The African countries in general, and the sub-Sanaran African countries in particular, are faced with an even harsher international economic environment. The prices of primary commodities remain low, trade protectionism is intensifying and the terms of trade for developing countries are worsening.
The debt problem also has seriously impaired African economic recovery ana development. Although the absolute debt figure of the African countries is not very large, compared with their economic basis and their debt-servicing ability a total debt of $US 200 billion has constituted an unbearable burden for them. Each year the repayment of principal and interest amounts to around $US 20 billion -nearly half the total export earnings of the entire African continent.
In short, as a result of the adverse effects of the serious shortage of funds, the worsening external environment and the besetting debt burden, the African economy, instead of taking a turn for the better, was in deeper trouble in 1986, in spite of heavy sacrifices made by the African countries in implementing the Programme of Action and the Priority Programme. According to the United Nations International Economic Survey 1987, the growth rate of Africa's real gross domestic product in 1987 was minus 2.1 per cent, which was not only lower than that of any other continent but also lower than its own growth rate in 1984 and 1985, when it was hit by severe droughts.
The International Conference on Africa, held recently in Abuja conducted a comprehensive review of progress made in the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action, reached conclusions and put forward recommendations. The Abuja Statement points out that the prospects for African economic recovery depend upon the concentration of efforts on such areas as: first, sustaining domestic policy reforms; second, continuing the efforts to improve economic management; third, ensuring that structural adjustment programmes are consistent with the objectives and priorities of the recovery programmes; fourth, ameliorating the debt burden; fifth, intensifying tne search for the solution to the commodities problems; sixth, overcoming the constraints on achieving adequate levels of official development assistance; and, seven, limiting the impact on the recovery of the countries in the region of acts of political and economic destabilization of the South African régime.
The Chinese delegation is of the view that this analysis is consistent with realities and that the recommendations are also very much to the point. We believe that in tackling the economic problems in Africa it is necessary to adopt a comprehensive approach and try to bring about a close co-ordination between domestic efforts and external supports, while the African countries continue to
make efforts based on self-reliance and collective self-reliance, adopting correct adjustment measures and economic policies suitable to their actual conditions, giving fuller play to the positive factors in their countries and making fuller use of their indigenous resources, the international community at large is urgently called upon to take action in support of the African countries in the following areas.
First, earnest efforts should be made to bring about a solution to the debt problem of Africa. The international community, and the developed countries in particular, should adopt effective measures, including lower interest rates and the writing-down or even writing-off of the debts of the low-income African countries.
Secondly, practical steps should be taken to stabilize the prices of primary commodities at a rational and remunerative level, help the African countries to attain at an early date commodity diversification and develop processing and manufacturing industries, and provide greater market access for their commodities so as to increase their export earnings.
Thirdly, there should be increased financial transfer, especially through funds on concessional terms and official development assistance to the African countries, particularly the sub-Saharan African countries, so that the transfer of financial resources will be reversed from its downward trend to an adequate level.
Fourthly, the international community, especially the developed countries, should try to improve the international economic environment, strengthen the co-ordination of their macro-economic policies, adopt measures which will facilitate world economic growth and the development of the developing countries, remove trade protectionist practices, change the rigid economic structure and adjust the irrational international economic relations so as to give better expression to the principle of rationality, fairness and mutual benefit.
The Chinese Government and people have always supported and assisted the African countries in their economic development and attached special importance to agricultural assistance to Africa. The economic and technical assistance that China has provided to 48 African countries has totalled 8.9 billion yuan renminbi in 506 complete projects, among which 353 are operational and 64 are under construction, making up 82 per cent of the total.
Since 1981 China has provided African countries with 240,000 tons of emergency relief food, and has supplied through the United Nations 22 multilateral technical co-operation projects. Since 1982, in co-operation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) , China has set up three training centres on biogas, sericulture and fishery, and some trainees are management personnel from Africa. We are now making preparations to set up a training centre catering especially to African agro-technical and managerial personnel. In 1985, in response to FAO’s appeal for the reactivation of the African economy, China provided grants totalling more than $US 900,000 for six agricultural projects in six African countries. In 1986 China offered 50 tons of pesticide against locusts to the African countries and another 100 tons will be supplied this year.
In future, the Chinese Government will, in keeping with the principle of equality, mutual benefit and common development, continue to explore ways and
(Mr< Li kuy6, China) means of expanding the economic and technical co-operation with African countries, so that the economic assistance and economic and technical co-operation will promote each other and facilitate the development of South-South co-operation. The Chinese Government will continue to assist African countries to the best of its ability. Together with the international community, we are ready to make our own contributions in helping the African countries to achieve economic recovery and long-term development.
We are convinced that so long as African countries and the international community persist in their efforts, strengthen their co-ordination and fully implement the United Nations Programme of Action, the African countries will extricate themselves from the present economic predicament and embark on the path towards steady economic development.
Mr. TSVETKOV (Bulgaria) (interpretation from French): The adoption by the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990 reflects the need to take urgent and effective measures to assist the countries of a continent which, although rich in natural resources, has suffered greatly. The period of a year and a half which has elapsed since the adoption of the Programme is not sufficient to enable us to engage in an exhaustive consideration of its implementation. However, even very general analysis of the situation in Africa shows that, far from improving, it has in certain areas deteriorated noticeably. The report of the Secretary-General on the critical economic situation in Africa (A/42/560 and Corr.l) provides precise arguments in support of this conclusion. I should like to mention the good work that went into producing that report and the generally thorough, analytic approach to the treatment of the various issues.
My Government follows closely the development of the situation in the African continent. We cannot fail to mention the sense of responsibility shown by the African countries with regard to the tasks which they themselves set with the adoption by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) of the Priority Programme for their economic development for the period 1986-1990. We welcome the promotion of multilateral co-operation and the co-ordination taking place within the African countries. These concerted efforts are undoubtedly in the right direction.
On the international level multilateral and bilateral measures have also been taken with the aim of providing relief for the economies of the African countries. However, their limited nature and the attempts to change the existing situation without affecting the principles of the system in force in international economic relations have not produced very satisfactory results.
During the 18 months which have passed since the adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, the international situation, too, has not developed along positive lines. Nothing has been done to create the external economic conditions essential for tne development of African and other developing countries. In this respect, I should like to note that the report of the Secretary-General regarding the application of the Programme would have gained considerably if greater attention had been devoted in it to the external factors that have proved such an obstacle to the economic recovery and development of Africa.
The report of the Secretary-General contains numerous facts and data which give a clear picture of the situation in Africa. Three weeks ago the President of the Republic of Zambia and Chairman of the Organization of African Unity,
Mr. Kenneth Kaünda, in his outstanding statement here, described eloquently and convincingly the critical, disastrous situation prevailing in the African continent. It is worth noting that during the year of the adoption of the United Nations Programme on the Economic Recovery and Development of Africa the external debt of the countries of the continent rose from $150 billion to $200 billion, which represents 54 per cent of the gross national product of the continent and 440 per cent of the export earnings of African countries. Under the impact of deteriorating conditions of trade, the export earnings of those countries have noticeably decreased, that decrease being, according to International Monetary Fund data, of the order of 9.3 per cent as compared with 1985.
Net financial flows from the African countries continues to be channelled towards the developed market-economy countries. As is highlighted by the report of the Secretary-General, even the International Monetary Fund in 1986 received from Africa more resources than those it allocated to it. We hope that the measures the Fund has taken will redress that difference. In these conditions it is difficult to believe solely through a policy of structural change that the African countries will be able to overcome the critical situation in which they find themselves.
It is significant in this respect to refer to the views voiced by certain African Leaders that the economic reforms and difficult adjustments they have undertaken and the measures of stabilization they have taken have often cost them very dearly on the economic and social levels, forcing them to take considerable political risks which in many countries have threatened the very foundations of social cohesion and political stability.
The position of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria on the issues of international economic relations, and in particular on ways to overcome underdevelopment, is clearly and specifically spelt out in the document adopted at the meeting in Berlin of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty, entitled, "On the Elimination of Underdevelopment and the Establishment of a New International Economic Order (A/42/354), and I shall therefore not go into it here in greater detail. In addressing the problems of the African countries in the social and economic spheres I should merely like to stress that independence and development are inseparable from the questions of disarmament and peace. In fact, it is only international peace and security that can create the necessary conditions for the resolution of development problems and for guaranteeing the political and economic independence of all countries.
The first and most important step to achieve that objective is a halt to the arms race: the channelling of part of the means thus released towards development would constitute a genuine step in overcoming economic underdevelopment. In this respect we welcome the support given at the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, which clearly showed the dialectic of these two phenomena. The consolidation of international peace and security and the normal development of the world economy and of international economic relations as well are interdependent and mutually linked processes. Many of the fundamental economic problems the world faces today, such as the external debt problem of the developing countries, the regulating of external trade, problems linked to the international monetary system, also require a political solution. It is solely through concerted efforts and political will by all countries that these problems can be overcome. Thus favourable external conditions - both political and economic - will be established for the social and economic development of the African countries.
At the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly the delegation of the People's Republic of Bulgaria distributed a document showing my country's principled approach on the advancement of its relations with the African countries. In the future as well our co-operation will be carried out on the basis of these principles, aimed at the overall development of the national economies of the African countries through the implementation of agricultural, industrial, and energy projects, the expansion of the transportation infrastructure, the training of personnel and so forth.
Here I should like to express my delegation's surprise at that part of the
report dealing with the question of official development assistance for Africa granted by the socialist countries.
(Mr. Tsvetkov, Bulgaria)
At the present session of the General Assembly the Bulgarian delegation distributed document A/C.2/42/5 on the assistance provided by the People's Republic of Bulgaria to the developing countries. For 1986 that assistance rose to 1.23 per cent of the national income of the country. In implementing the recommendations of the United Nations my country’s policy devotes particular , attention to economic assistance to the African countries. The fact that much of the assistance provided by Bulgaria to developing countries goes to countries of the African continent demonstrates this policy, since it accounts for 0.92 per cent of the national income for that same year.
I should like to stress, in conclusion, that in the future as well Bulgaria will continue to support, within the context of its possibilities, the African countries in their efforts to secure an independent socio-economic development.
Mr. FONDER (Belgium) (interpretation from French): The representative of Denmark has expressed here the point of view of the European Community and of its member States. In speaking now my objective is to illustrate his comments through a brief description of our national actions in Africa.
For obvious reasons, Africa occupies a privileged place in our bilateral and multilateral actions for the developing countries. Allow me to cite some facts in support of that affirmation. On the bilateral level, more than 80 per cent of our public development assistance is focused on Africa; at the present time that represents an annual sum of more than $200 million. The major sectors benefiting from our co-operation are, in order, development of human resources, agriculture, and public health. To this public assistance is added the co-financing of projects, through non-governmental organizations, in which Africa receives more than half of the budgetary allocations.
(Mr. Fonder, Belgium)
In addition, Africa is an important beneficiary of State-to-State concessional loans made by Belgium. For 1987, Africa's share in this credit programme also amounts to more than 50 per cent. These credits are granted on extremely favourable terms with regard to the grace periods, the length of time for reimbursement and interest rates not exceeding 2 per cent.
To those actions we should add Belgium's establishment of a Survival Fund in 1983. That Fund, which amounts to 10 billion Belgian francs - $260 million - is not designed for simple, short-term emergency actions but rather for combating the causes of hunger and manutrition. The Survival Fund is associated, to this end, with the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and non-governmental organizations. Actions undertaken in the field in Africa by means of the Fund deal in particular with integrated rural development and the struggle against desertification. The ■ approach taken by the Fund reaffirms that in our overall co-operation with the African countries the priorities of the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development, adopted at the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly, are being taken duly into account.
With regard to the multilateral financial sector, I would mention Belgium's participation in the Eighth Replenishment of the funds of tne International Development Association (IDA) by a sum of $193 million; the tripling of my country's participation in the increase of the capital of the African Development Bank; our participation in negotiations on a fifth replenishment of the resources of the African Development Fund; and, finally, Belgium's positive reaction to proposals aimed at tripling the resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
At the thirteenth special session of the General Assembly, on the critical economic situation in Africa, my Government announced specific initiatives to provide debt-servicing relief. Those proposals were later spelt out at the seventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and, more recently, at the annual meetings of the IMF and the World Bank in Washington« J
They are designed to meet the precise needs of African countries, in particular the poorest of them.
First, Belgium was one of the countries vigorously to support the proposal to link the debt-servicing of developing countries with fluctuations in the prices of the raw materials produced by them. We continue to regard that approach as fruitful, even if its application causes problems.
A second Belgian initiative consists in allowing the reimbursement of certain public or private debts in local currency, the resources thus realized then being allocated to development projects financed in local currency. That Belgian proposal to UNCTAD was aimed particularly at low-income countries that had agreed to carry out consistent structural adjustment programmes with the assistance of the IMF and the World Bank. The proposal is, however, applicable to other categories of countries to varying degrees, depending upon the ratio between debt servicing and public assistance to development.
In our view the major advantages of such measures would be that they would contribute to maintaining in good working condition the infrastructures and basic public services essential to the success of structural adjustment programmes and would bring about an increase in the effectiveness of public assistance for development by adapting it in a flexible manner to the priorities of the country receiving assistance and enabling it, in particular, to make use of local human resources.
Those are our actions and priorities in our co-operation with Africa. We are fully aware of the seriousness of the continent's economic problems. However, we are equally convinced that the spirit of shared responsibility to which we are trying to give effect will enable Africa get back on the path of growth and prosperity.
Mr. NOWORYTA (Poland) s A little more than a year has elapsed since the adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. The thirteenth special session of the General Assembly was a unique occasion for presenting the critical economic situation prevailing in Africa against the background of the roots of the emergency in question. The Programme of Action adopted at the special session relies on an original concept of co-responsibility in international economic co-operation, a concept that should also guide us in coping with other acute economic problems, including that of global indebtedness.
It is true that even in this relatively short period of time a number of important trends in the Programme's implementation have become visible. While some of those trends are positive, there are also grounds for serious concern.
As can be learned from the report of the Secretary-General, African countries have reaffirmed their primary responsibility for the development of their own continent. A large number of African Governments have undertaken policy reform and structural adjustment measures aimed at bringing about the accelerated recovery of their economies. At the same time as those enormous efforts are being made, the external economic environment has become even more aggravated. The financial requirements indicated in the Programme of Action are increasing, while commodity and other export earnings are inadequate, and debt-servicing problems have worsened, often becoming unmanageable.
Against such a background it is necessary to stress that a positive role in the implementation of the Programme of Action is being played not only by individual Governments but also by institutions at the regional and subregional
levels.
Similarly, serious efforts have been made by different organizations of the United Nations development system, namely, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) , the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) , the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Bank. Those activities have greatly contributed to the assessment of the external needs of African recovery and development. At the same time, the aforementioned organizations have undertaken many action-oriented activities, often of a novel character. As an example, I would mention FAO expertise on assistance-in-kind for African agriculture. It seems that activities in this direction should be further developed-
In the report of the Secretary-General (A/42/560 and Corr.l) emphasis is put on the development of agriculture and food production as a special measure to overcome the present economic crisis in Africa. I would recall that at the thirteenth special session of the Assembly my delegation expressed its opinion that one of the effective measures that could contribute to the attainment of that goal would be the adoption of the principle of the free flow of experience, technology and organizational arrangements in the area of food production, processing and storage. As a follow-up to such action that proposal was fully reflected in paragraph 14 of General Assembly resolution 41/191. I am deeply convinced that this idea is of even higher relevance today when, according to FAO reports, severe food shortages are predicted for some African countries.
Poland, for its part, could share with African countries its experience in the manufacturing of farming machinery and make available the results of research in high-yield plants adapted to dry climates. We would be ready to assist the interested countries in the adaptation of technology and organizational arrangements to local conditions on a bilateral basis or in co-operation with United Nations specialized agencies. It is also our intention to support FAO's efforts in fighting the desert locust in Africa.
It is rightly pointed out in the aforementioned report that human resources development is a pre-condition of the successful implementation of the Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development. As Poland's contribution to that end, thousands of top-class specialists in different fields from African countries have been educated in our universities as Polish Government fellowship holders. Every year several vocational training courses are organized especially for participants from Africa.
On the other hand, many Polish experts are working in Africa in various sectors of agriculture, industry and construction. There is growing co-operation in science and technology. Within the limits of our possibilities, we have been extending emergency aid to African countries.
Earlier this year Poland expressed its support for the noble objectives of the Fund for Africa, which constitutes an important supplement to the assistance rendered through bilateral channels and regional programmes to the nations and the front-line States of southern Africa struggling against apartheid. In our assistance programmes we shall make provisions for the priority projects identified in the Plan of Action for the Africa Fund, particularly in the field of technical assistance, personnel training and the supply of chosen goods and services.
Poland recognizes a number of important initiatives undertaken by the United Nations Secretary-General, such as the placing of the Programme of Action on the agenda of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, the establishment of a steering committee composed of the executive heads of key United Nations departments and agencies and chaired by the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, and - last but not least - the convening of the Advisory Group on Resource Flows to Africa.
In conclusion, I wish to stress that the Programme of Action that emerged from the special session provides an appropriate framework for a new partnership for African development, a partnership based on mutual commitment and shared responsibility between Africa and the international community. Poland stands ready to be involved in such a partnership and to express in deeds its sympathy for the African people.
Mr. ABDUL HADI (Malaysia) : For the past few decades the African continent has been experiencing traumatic events. The period after the Second World War saw the emergence of most of the nations in the continent as sovereign States. Many won their independence through peaceful change, but some fought wars of liberation to gain their freedom.
Independence, of course, does not necessarily guarantee economic progress.
Many African States had to struggle to put their economic priorities in order. For some it has been a major task to build a basic infrastructure for growth. These difficulties have been constantly aggravated by natural calamities, which in some instances put the clock back as regards economic progress and development. The international community is only too aware of disasters in the African continent, particularly in the drought-stricken Sudano-Sahelian region. Many nations have responded to these calamities with commendable speed, saving hundreds of thousands of the inhabitants of the region from hunger, misery and death.
Malaysia fully appreciates the positive steps taken by the international community through the United Nations. My country’s delegation is supportive of all programmes to alleviate the plight of those in the affected areas of the African continent. This is in consonance with the call by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) for a special session of the General Assembly to discuss exclusively the critical economic situation in Africa. It is also timely to make an initial assessment of the first year of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
My delegation is very much aware of the disappointment expressed by the Organization of African Unity in its preliminary assessment of the implementation of the United Nations Programme, as annexed to document A/42/614. It is evident that the OAU countries, for their part, have undertaken various actions, at the national, regional and continental levels, to promote this Programme. Therefore it is relevant that outside nations should be more responsive to the plight of the people in that disaster-prone region of the African continent. This is not, of course, to deny the role played by many of the more advanced and industrialized nations of the world in helping substantially to reduce the sufferings of the African people in the disaster-struck region, but much more could be done. The international community can always exercise its discretion and wisdom in channelling humanitarian contributions in the best possible ways. It need not necessarily be restricted on the basis of international or regional groupings in initiating or increasing humanitarian and economic contributions. Nor should members of the international community be inhibited by economic or commercial interests in the African continent in contributing to the well-being of the affected areas. Assistance and contributions of any kind and in whatever form, as long as they are meant to alleviate the critical economic situation in the affected areas, should be welcomed, if not encouraged.
All of us are very much aware that most, if not all, of the newly sovereign African nations continue to enjoy the best of relations with the former colonial Powers. These ties could provide a climate conducive to assistance programmes being channelled to the continent, particularly in times of great need. The former colonial Powers certainly have moral obligations to their former territories, especially in relief activities. With their vast resources, these former colonial Powers have the capacity not only to contribute towards short-term relief programmes but also to provide economic assistance for long-term solutions. Probably they could also influence their own private commercial and financial organizations that have ties with their former territories to be more sympathetic to the plea for economic relief and assistance by the nations of Africa.
When it comes to the four major areas of action envisaged by the international community under the United Nations Programme of Action, Malaysia is in accord with African countries in calling for an improvement in the quality and modality of external assistance and for an increase in the concessionality of development assistance to the African countries.
My delegation joins in the call for an increase in both official and private financial flows to African countries. We agree that multilateral financial institutions could assist in creating conditions conducive to increasing flows of financial resources, in particular from private sources, especially in cases where countries have implemented adjustment and policy reforms. We also fully support urging such multilateral financial organizations as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank to increase substantially their concessional lending to Africa and urging the IMF to relax its conditions in order to increase its assistance to African countries to help reverse the net resource outflow from Africa to the Fund.
With regard to improvements in the external environment, Malaysia is in full agreement with African countries in calling upon the industrial countries, in particular, not to undertake policies hostile to commodity-based economies such as those of African and Asian countries, including Malaysia. We agree that the developed countries of the West must try for greater co-ordination and harmonization of their macro-economic policies and take action to maintain exchange rate stability and reduce real interest rates. In order to improve the external environment and make it supportive of recovery and growth in Africa and the rest of the developing world the Western nations should also take action immediately to increase market access for products from Africa and other developing countries and to withdraw all protectionist measures, as agreed at the 1983 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Ministerial Meeting. We agree that the improvement and
stabilization of overall commodity export earnings should be given special attention. In this regard we urge that progress be made in the ratification of the agreement on the Common Fund for Commodities to enable the Fund to begin operations.
African countries utilized 35 per cent of their exports of goods and services to service their debts in 1986. Despite the debt-relief measures adopted by some creditor countries, such as the rescheduling of official debts by the Paris Club and the cancellation of other official bilateral debts owed by African countries, the situation has not improved. We fully support the proposal that all initiatives taken to address Africa's external debt be formally submitted, discussed and assessed within a multilateral framework, and in this regard we recall our support in the past for the convening of a conference on the subject.
The crisis in Africa is such that it requires sustained action. This is recognized in part III of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Recovery and Development. At the current session the Assembly is requested to consider and establish the preparatory mechanism for a review session. My delegation will participate actively in the consideration of such mechanisms. In addition, we support the proposal for the General Assembly to meet as a committee of the whole prior to the forty-third session to consider arrangements to bring Africa and the international community together in relation to the evaluation exercise.
For its part, Malaysia will continue to extend whatever assistance it can in accordance with its ability and capacity. We appeal to other nations, in particular the developed countries, to do their utmost to help to bring relief and assistance to Africa, for we share the view that the economic viability of the continent affects the viability of the entire international community.
The meeting rose at6.25 p.m.
NATIONS UNIES
Â
Assemblée générale

PROVISIONAL

A/42/PV.64
16 November 1987
ENGLISH

Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 11 November 1987, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
-	Tribute to the memory of His Excellency General Seyni Kountche, President of the Supreme Military Council and Head of State of the Republic of Niger
-	Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte [29]
(a)	Report of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
- Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs [15]
(c)	Election of five members of the International Court of Justice
(i)	Memorandum by the Secretary-General
(ii)	List of candidates
(iii)	Curricula vitae
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
87-64383/A 1288V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10. 25 a. m. 
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL SEYNI KOUNTCHE, PRESIDENT OF THE SUPREME MILITARY COUNCIL AND HEAD OF STATE OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE NIGER
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): It is my sad duty to inform the General Assembly of the untimely death of the President of the Supreme Military Council and Head of State of the Republic of the Niger, His Excellency General Seyni Kountché. It is with deep sorrow that I have learnt of the death of General Kountché, who always stood for the cause of peace, understanding, self-determination and development, that is, for the cause of the United Nations. 
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the representative of Niger to convey our condolences to the Government and people of Niger and to the family of the deceased. 
I invite the assembly to stand for one minute in silent tribute to the memory of General Seyni Kountché. 
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the Secretary-General
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): It is with the greatest sorrow that we have learnt of the death of His Excellency General Seyni Kountché, President of the Republic of Niger. 
During the 13 years that he was at the head of his country he showed himself to be not only an enlightened leader of his people, but also a symbol of moderation and reason in Africa and the world. The rugged natural environment into which he was born, that of the Sahel, his homeland, moulded the character of this statesman who knew how to lead his people with exemplary vision, courage, wisdom and dedication. 

In Africa and throughout the world his tireless efforts to promote co-operation and solidarity among nations were inspired by those same virtues. With his death the world has lost a great statesman and Africa a man who had faith in it and in its destiny. With his death the United Nations has lost a great champion and a great defender. 
On the occasion of this great loss, I offer my most sincere condolences to the people and the Government of Niger. 
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Malawi, Mr. Timon Sam Mangwazu, who will speak on behalf the Group of African States.. 
Mr. MANGWAZU (Malawi): I speak at this early hour, at the beginning of the Assembly’s work for today, 11 November 1987, to join in marking the sad and untimely passing yesterday at La Pitié Salpétrière Hospital, in Paris, France, of one of the distinguished sons of Africa, His Excellency General Seyni Kountché, who was until his death President of the Supreme Military Council and Head of State of the Republic of Niger. He had been taken into the hospital as an emergency just before his death, but he had been ill since December 1986.
General Seyni Kountché was born in Fandou, in Niger, in 1931. He began his career in the army in 1944 as a cadet. He received extensive military training in both Niger and France and rose to various ranks, finally becoming General. On 15 April 1974 he became President of his country.
The deeds of every man are judged most by the results, and in this respect President Kountché managed all the affairs of his country with great wisdom and success. For example, during his rule the economy of Niger registered a significant growth rate. This was because of his courageous economic policies. It has been observed that the economy of Niger is balanced and self-sustaining. Gerieral Kountché was a pragmatist who put the interests of his people first, before anything else. As a result, Niger has enjoyed exceptional political stability.
General Kountché was personally known to some of the representatives and others who are here in the Assembly, and was also well known all over the world. He will, I believe, be remembered, first, for his success in managing his
(Mr. Mangwazu, Malawi) country's affairs and secondly for his contribution to the promotion of regional and international understanding and co-operation, for example, in the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in the Economic Organization of West African States (ECOWAS), in Lome/European Economic Community co-operation and, last but not least, in the United Nations.
Words alone cannot fully express our sense of loss at the passing of a man with such outstanding qualities of leadership who made a big impact both in his country and abroad. Africa and the world mourn His Excellency General Seyni Kountche. He was truly a great man.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Bahrain,
Mr. Karim Ebrahim Al-Shakar, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. AL-SHAKAR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): The Group of Asian States learnt with sorrow of the passing of His Excellency General Seyni Kountche, President of the Republic of Niger. With his passing, the people and Government of Niger have lost a remarkable leader and a faithful son. He was a politician and an exemplary statesman. Throughout his life he served his country with dedication and loyalty, participating actively in the process of its development and stabilization. He was also active in the cause of international peace and in the work of the Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Movement of Non-aligned Countries and the United Nations.
On behalf of the Asian Group, over which my country has the honour to preside this month, I should like, through you, Mr. President, to extend to the family of the deceased, to the Government and people of Niger and to the delegation of Niger our sincere condolences on their painful loss. We pray that the Almighty will show grace to the deceased and call him to paradise.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Poland, Mr. Eugeniusz Noworyta, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. NOWORYTA (Poland): On behalf of the Group of Eastern European States, I have the sad duty to convey to the Government and people of the Republic of Niger our sincere condolences on the death of the President of the Supreme Military Council and Head of State of the Republic of Niger, His Excellency Seyni Kountché.
With the death of Seyni Kountché, Head of State of the Republic of Niger, the people of that Republic and the whole African continent have suffered the loss of a dedicated leader committed to the development of his country and to the cause of African unity.
The contribution of Seyni Kountché to the promotion of the welfare of the people of his country and to the process of the liberation of Africa is well known and greatly appreciated far beyond his country and the African continent.
We join the people of the Republic of Niger in their sorrow over the death of their distinguished and respected leader.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Argentina, Mr. Marcelo Delpech, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American States.
Mr. DELPECH (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): It was with deep sadness that the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, which is presided over this month by my country, learnt of the passing of the President of the Supreme Military Council and Head of State of the Republic of Niger, His Excellency General Seyni Kountche.
General Kountche' enjoyed great prestige in the international community. His firm commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and his invaluable support for efforts to establish a more just political, economic and social order earned him a special place among the great men of our era. In addition, he was one of Africa's longest-serving and most eminent leaders and a person of influence in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Group of Latin American and Caribbean States joins in this well-deserved tribute with a feeling that it has lost an outstanding personality. We should like to convey to the people and Government of Niger and to the family of General Kountche our sincere and respectful condolences. We are convinced that the courageous people of Niger will appropriately honour the memory of their great leader.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Luxembourg, Mr. Jean Welter, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. WELTER (Luxembourg)(interpretation from French): As Chairman of the Group of Western European and other States, I have the honour to speak in my turn on the occasion of the death of His Excellency General Seyni Kountche, Head of State of the Republic of Niger.
(Mr. Welter, Luxembourg)
I associate myself with the Chairmen of the other regional groups in extending sincere condolences to Ambassador Joseph Diatta, Permanent Representative of Niger to the United Nations, and, through him, to the Government and people of the Republic of Niger.
Like some of the previous speakers, I too wish to pay a very brief tribute, first, to President Kountche's political work, in particular his efforts to promote the political and constitutional stabilization of the Republic of Niger, and, secondly, to the role of mediator which, through him, Niger played in 1985 in the conflict that could have involved Mali and Burkina Faso. I commend the efforts which President Kountche made for 13 years to promote his country's development, efforts which were all the more courageous and praiseworthy in that Niger had to face particularly difficult conditions, such as the drought that ravaged the country in past years.
I am convinced that the international community will retain a lasting memory of General Kountche and the reforms that he carried out at the head of his State.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of the United States of America, Miss Patricia Byrne, who will speak in her capacity as representative of the host country.
Miss BYRNE (United States of America): It was with very deep regret that the delegation of the United States learnt of the death of President Kountche. On this sombre occasion we pay tribute to President Kountche's statesmanship as a force for peace and stability in west Africa and to the wisdom with which he guided Niger's constructive approach at the United Nations. We salute his leadership in many other areas as well, including his manifold and consistent efforts to revitalize Niger's economy in trying circumstances. He was a pioneer in finding effective solutions to Africa's problems of economic recovery and reform.
All of us here, who admired his leadership, will miss him.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call on the Permanent Representative of Niger to the United Nations, Mr. Joseph Diatta.
Mr. DIATTA (Niger)(interpretation from French): On behalf of the Government and people of Niger and of my delegation, I thank representatives most sincerely for the touching words and expressions of sympathy that they have been kind enough to extend to us on the occasion of the tragic loss of our beloved General Seyni Kountche, President of the Supreme Military Council and Head of State of the Republic of Niger.
General Seyni Kountche was a Head of State who had a deep love for and devotion to his country and people.
Having come to power in April 1974 at a time when the population of Niger was a prey to despair, in particular because of an unceasing drought - that natural disaster which continues severely to hamper the development of the Sahel and numerous other African countries - General Seyni Kountche, thanks to his determination and charismatic faith, was able quickly to establish the conditions necessary to set our people resolutely on the path of advancement of the economic and social development of the country and to do so in complete harmony with the realities and needs of a developing country. Food self-sufficiency was the major thread in all his actions and he succeeded in meeting and mastering that challenge. Inspired by a lofty pragmatism, he gave to the people of Niger positive economic guidelines that made it possible to achieve national recovery in all spheres and to ensure the stability of our country in the developing world and the framework for the consultation, concerted action and participation in which our people freely engage.
(Mr. Piatta, Niger)
On the international level, he devoted himself with ardour and selflessness not only to strengthening our brotherly relations with other African countries and giving constant support and active solidarity to the peoples of our continent struggling for their self-determination and independence, but also to the tightening of our relations of friendship and co-operation with all peace-loving countries committed to respecting our values, our identity, our dignity and our sovereignty.
His loss therefore leaves an immense void in Niger, where our people had identified with him in his struggle to free our country from the natural restraints which bind it, but also in the whole of Africa, where he was one of the most respected Heads of State.
(Mr. Diatta, Niger)
The people of Niger will continue in union and harmony to complete the work of building the nation for which he laid the solid foundations, guided in this noble task by his outstanding example, marked by selfless sacrifice and his noble ideals, which were focused wholly on the happiness of our nation, the dignity and development of our continent and peace and understanding among all the States of our planet.
I should like, before concluding, to express to you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General and to all representatives here, who have during this ceremony kindly shared our profound sadness and immense sorrow at the loss of President Kountche, our great appreciation and our heartfelt and sincere thanks. We shall make it our duty to convey your condolences to the Government and people of Niger and to the family of President Kountche.
AGENDA ITEM 29
QUESTION OF THE COMORIAN ISLAND OF MAYOTTE (a) REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/42/602) (b) DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/4 2/L.2 4)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I would remind representatives that, in accordance with the decision taken yesterday afternoon, the list of speakers in the debate on this item will be closed today at 11 a.m. I therefore request those representatives who wish to participate in the debate to put their names on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
I call on the representative of the Comoros, who wishes to introduce draft resolution A/42/L.24.
Mr. KAFE (Comoros) (interpretation from French): Before beginning my statement I should like, on behalf of the Government and people of the Comoros, to extend to the delegation of Niger to the United Nations our most sincere
condolences on the death of that illustrious son of the African continent President Seyni Kountche. We ask the delegation of the Niger kindly to convey to the Government and the brother people of Niger our feelings of sorrow and deep sympathy« My country, the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, has just celebrated ' the twelfth anniversary of its accession to international sovereignty. That happy event, which crowned 12 years of development efforts by the people and Government of the Comoros, would undoubtedly have served as a symbol of the national unity of our country had it not been marred by that problem which, for the twelfth consecutive year, is the subject of our discussions within this Assembly. I am referring, of course, to the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte.
Today, as in past years, we have come here to share with the Assembly our concern and our profound anxiety at the fact that so far, despite the relevant resolutions of our Organization and those of all the other international organizations that consider this question, no satisfactory political solution is in sight. Therefore we should like briefly to remind the Assembly once again of the origin of this question, simply for the purpose of shedding light on our debate and refreshing the memories of representatives regarding the facts of a problem with which it is already familiar.
It will be recalled that each time we have had to debate this matter, whether in our Organization or in any other international or regional organization on whose agenda it appears, we have reaffirmed unequivocally and determinedly that Mayotte is and can only be a Comorian land. We have also shown how this problem was artificially and subtly created in order to destroy the unity of a country whose homogeneous people shares the same language, culture and religion.
’	(Mr. Kafe, Comoros)
Indeed, during more than a century of presence in the Comoros France never disputed or called into question the affiliation of Mayotte or any other island of our archipelago to the Comoros. On the contrary, successive French Governments, basing themselves on history, have on numerous occasions stressed the need to respect the territorial unity of our country, in accordance with the provisions of articles 72 et seq. of the French Constitution. As a result, all administrative laws and provisions adopted during the colonial period established most precisely the unity of the Comoros archipelago.
That unity is therefore not based on mere administrative expediency, as some would like to have us believe. Rather, its origins and strength lie in tne common history of the sister islands that make up the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, namely, the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte and Moheli.
This was why, when France did recognize the aspiration of the Comoros to independence, a referendum on self-determination was organized, on
22 December 1974, under a law. The terms of that law provided for the ballot results to be counted on a global basis and not island by island, in order to emphasize the indisputable unity of our archipelago.
Thus, the Secretary of State for Overseas Departments and Territories, speaking of our self-determination referendum to the French National Assembly on 26 August 1974, stated that the French Government had decided on comprehensive consultations for three reasons, which he described as follows.-
"The first reason is legal, because in terms of the rules of international law a territory preserves the borders which it had as a colony.
"Secondly, one cannot conceive of a plurality of statutes for the various islands of the archipelago.
"Finally, it is not the mission of France to set Comorians against each
other."
21
(Mr. Kafe, Comoros) He continued:
"France refuses to divide the Comoros, which have the same people, the same Islamic religion and the same economic interests." Two months later, those remarks were confirmed by the President of the French Republic in his press conference on 24 October 1974. He said:
"Is it reasonable to imagine part of the archipelago becoming independent and an island, regardless of the feelings one might have for its inhabitants, retaining a different status? I think we have to accept the realities of our time. The Comoros are united and have always been united. It is natural for their destiny to be shared. On the occasion of the independence of a territory, we do not intend to break the unity that has always existed in a single archipelago of the Comoros." After such statements, it will be understood why, on 22 December 1974, the population of the Comoros calmly ano tranquilly went to the ballot box to decide on its future. The question the people had to answer was "Do you wish the Comoros to become independent?"
None of our islands was called upon to take a separate stand on its destiny on 22 December 1974. The question was therefore clear and unequivocal, and the answer even more so, since 95 per cent of the Comorians favoured independence for their country. It remained only for the French Government and Parliament to draw the logical conclusions from that ballot.
Unfortunately, to the great surprise of all, the results were totally different. Instead of respecting its commitments and the clearly and freely expressed will of the Comorian people, the French Government voted in a law consecrating the balkanization of our country.
That law recognized, to be sure, the independence of the Comorian State, but it cut off part of its national territory, the island of Mayotte, on the pretext that part of its population had come out against independence.
That illegal, unjust and arbitrary act was immediately and unanimously condemned by the international community because it violated not only internal French law but also international public law.
In fact, it violated the sacrosanct rule of the indivisibility of overseas territories and colonial entities dear to the French Constitution and also the sacred principle of the inviolability of borders inherited from colonization provided for in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621 (XXV), on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples.
It was, moreover, in accordance with that principle that my country, the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, was admitted to the United Nations on 12 November 1975 as a sovereign State made up of four islands, including Mayotte, by the unanimous vote of the General Assembly on its resolution 3385 (XXX).
Faced with the international community's unanimous condemnation of what it considered to be interference in the internal affairs of the Comorian State, our former Administering Power, seeking justification and legal backing, decided to organize on 8 February and 11 April 1976 two referendums on the island of Mayotte, based on paragraph 3 of article 53 of the French Constitution, which stipulates that "No exchange, addition or removal of territory is valid without the consent of the populations involved."
The argument put forward was intended to give the inhabitants of that island the possibility of expressing choice regarding their destiny, but it was
deliberately forgotten that in the case in question it was not a matter of adding, exchanging or removing territory: what we were speaking about was in fact the unique territory of the archipelago of the Comoros, and the procedure and modalities used for it to decide on its destiny on 22 December 1974 had been in good and due form.
Here we may recall that our Organization's reaction was categorical. In fact, on 21 October 1976 the General Assembly declared that the occupation of Mayotte by France "constitutes a flagrant encroachment on the national unity of the Comorian State" and declared that it:
"Condemns and considers null and void the referendums of 8 February and 11 April 1976 organized in the Comorian island of Mayotte by the Government of France, and rejects:
" (a) Any other form of referendum or consultation which may hereafter be organized on Comorian territory in Mayotte by France". (General Assembly resolution 31/4)
Like the United Nations, ¿11 the major international and regional organizations in turn unanimously expressed condemnation.
Such are the real, irrefutable facts of the painful problem which we are still discussing today.
When one remembers the homogeneity of the Comorian population and the blood ties woven from the very outset between the various islands of the archipelago, one better understands the pain felt by our people, which has always had an intimate, closely linked social life. Moreover, we deplore that all the efforts undertaken to make progress on the matter continue to run into a wall of incomprehension; and the present situation will not dispel concern.
Nevertheless, many initiatives and stands were taken last year, and everyone thought something positive was finally going to happen. Of those initiatives, we might recall, inter alia, the meeting between the French Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac, and a delegation from the Organization of African Unity.
The latter reaffirmed to the French authorities the position of the pan-African Organization regarding respect for the unity and territorial integrity of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros. The French Prime Minister was attentive and demonstrated his will to continue dialogue with the Organization of African Unity in order actively to seek a solution to the problem.
Following that meeting, we were gratified by the withdrawal from the French Parliament of a bill aimed at organizing consultations in Mayotte.
In the same spirit, it will be recalled that during the last debate on the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte the representative of France to the United Nations made an encouraging statement to the Assembly; I should like to quote it because of the interest it evoked. He stated:
"I believe that everyone in this Hall wants a just and lasting solution to this problem to be found as soon as possible. This is also France's position." (A/41/PV.53, p. 43)
He said that the President of the Republic haa himself declared that the French Government has no intention of organizing a referendum and that France would spare no effort to find a lasting solution to this question.
The Comorian people and Government have been waiting with great interest for specific proposals, at last to be rapidly submitted to them so that, within the framework of friendly relations between France and the Comoros, a solution acceptable to all may be found. Indeed, this problem, which has remained unsolved for too long, bears the seeds of a future explosion which, in the last analysis, could harm the good relations which have existed for more than a century between the two countries.
I am sure the Assembly will agree with me that this problem is no different from those other problems which throughout our planet cause tension in entire regions, creating a climate of violence and anarchy.
It is time, we believe, for France, whose historical brilliance has always been based on the unity of its great people, to take an imaginative approach, together with the international community, to the search for a just and lasting solution to this problem that will preserve the unity of our country.
In fact, regardless of the arguments that may be put forward, a just settlement of this problem is necessarily dependent on respect for the unity and territorial integrity of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros. By re-establishing law and justice in our country France, in our view, would emerge the greater from involvement in a problem which is not in keeping with its image at the time of the decolonization of other, African Territories.
The people and Government of the Comoros, aware of their right and of the justice of their claim, remain ever open to dialogue and determined to pursue their efforts until the triumph of their just cause. The international conununity, for its part, faithful to the sacred principles enshrined in the Charter of our Organization, must redouble its vigilance and demonstrate greater firmness in giving its support.
The draft resolution submitted to the Assembly, which would endorse the present debate, emphasizes the need to establish a frank and serious dialogue between the two parties with a view to reaching a just and lasting solution to this problem. We sincerely hope that the Assembly will adopt the draft resolution unanimously•
Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French): Our colleague from Malawi, as Chairman for November of the African Group, has on our behalf paid a moving, well-deserved tribute to General Kountche, the late President of the Republic of Niger. On behalf of the people and Government of Senegal I should like once again to express to the delegation of Niger our sympathy and the sorrow that we feel on the occasion of this cruel loss. We bow before their sorrow.
For the twelfth consecutive year the General Assembly is taking up the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte. As will be recalled, the item was placed on the agenda of the General Assembly in 1975, and since that time the question has been given sustained attention by the international community. For more than a decade the international community has been the attentive witness of the tireless efforts made by the parties - France and the Comoros - and by the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the United Nations to bring about the just and final settlement of the problem.
In spite of all those efforts, progress has clearly fallen short of the expectations of the overwhelming majority of the countries represented in this Hall. There has, however, been no lack of initiatives. Suffice it to remind the Assembly of the generous representations made on 8 July 1986, in Paris, to the French Prime Minister, by the Committee of Seven of the OAU, which had been asked to follow the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte and to consider the
(Mr. Sarré, Senegal) pressing appeals of the Organization of the Islamic Conference at its sixteenth session, in January 1986, in Fez, Morocco, the more recent appeals of the eighth summit Conference of the non-aligned countries, held in Harare in September 1986, the official visit by the Prime Minister of France, Mr. Jacques Chirac, to Moroni on 19 October 1986 and the official working visit to France of President Abdallah in April 1987.
The Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, at its forty-sixth regular session, held in Addis Ababa from 20 to 27 July 1987, adopted resolution 100 (XLVI), in which, in particular, it asked the ad hoc Committee'of Seven of the OAU and the Secretary-General of the pan-African organization to pursue the efforts already begun and encourage the impetus provided by the meeting with the French authorities, in order to bring the Comorian island of Mayotte back into the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros with the least possible delay.
It is regrettable that the constructive proposals that I have just mentioned and the commitment entered into by the parties directly concerned to bring about through negotiations a final settlement with regard to Mayotte, have not produced the desired result. In this connection, the OAU documents and those of the United Nations, in particular the Secretary-General's report (A/42/602) , indicate clearly that the situation regarding Mayotte has remained unchanged.
Senegal, which maintains excellent relations with both the Comoros and France, is aware of the sensitive nature of this problem. That is why we are convinced that only the determined pursuit of the dialogue already entered into by the two parties can create the conditions needed for a just settlement that is acceptable to all.	■
(Mr. Sacré, Senegal)
In the circumstances, my country welcomes the fact that both the Comoros and France have, by their frank and cordial bilateral relations, given the international community proof of their common desire to surmount the remaining obstacles on the way to a genuinely constructive dialogue. This common desire to find an honourable solution to the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte strengthens iny delegation's belief that a peaceful, just and lasting settlement of the problem of Mayotte is possible provided that both parties show the same political willingness to make progress. Senegal earnestly desires a resumption of serious dialogue, in keeping with the spirit of the United Nations Charter and the relevant OAU and United Nations texts, in particular resolution 3385 (XXX), of 12 November 1975, which reaffirmed the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed - as I need hardly remind the Assembly - of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte and Moheli.
It is vital that a just settlement quickly be found for the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte, for that question could not only needlessly tarnish the image of a great country that has always set an example in the area of decolonization, but could also, in the long run, pose a threat to international peace and security.
One of the Organization's primary tasks is to promote peace and understanding among peoples and nations. It therefore has an obligation to make an urgent appeal to the parties directly concerned to give a new impetus to their consideration of this problem and commit themselves to engage in a process that will lead to the speedy preparation of an agreement that would bring a final solution to the question of Mayotte.
For its part, Senegal will continue - as it has, indeed, in the past - to spare no effort in contributing to the creation of a climate of confidence between the two parties and to the search for an honourable solution. That settlement, provided it is just and lasting, will obviously improve relations between the authorities of two countries and between the French and Comorian peoples who, above and beyond their historical and cultural bonds, remain equally attached to the common ideals of international peace and solidarity.
Mr, BADAWI (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): It was with great regret and sadness that we learnt of the death of the President of the Niger. His death is a great loss to his country and to the African continent, the loss of a great leader who played a larger role in his country's welfare. We should like to convey, on behalf of the Government and people of Egypt, our deep condolences to the fraternal people of the Niger.
Egypt's concern with the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte, as well as its desire to see its just and speedy solution, both stem from the relations of firm friendship and close co-operation which it has always maintained with both
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt) parties. Our oft-repeated position is firm and consistent with the principles in which we believe, principles that also underlie the United Nations itself. Egypt supports the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros over the Island of Mayotte.
That position has repeatedly been reaffirmed by resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, all of which have called for respect for the unity of the Comoros Archipelago and its territorial integrity. Through our constant contacts with both parties, we can appreciate and understand the causes of concern felt by the Government of the Comoros as a result of the lack of tangible progress in reaching a settlement.
The situation has remained unchanged since the Comoros' attainment of independence and accession to membership in the United Nations in 1975. We believe that the persistence of such a problem carries with it the seeds of political instability, which could have a negative effect on the peaceful atmosphere of the region as a whole. We continue to believe, however, that there are grounds for optimism and hope for the achievement of a just, negotiated solution to the problem.
We have read with great interest the report submitted by the Secretary-General (A/42/602) , of 5 October 1987. That report makes reference to the continued wish of the Governments of the Comoros and of France to pursue their dialogue and to keep open the channels of communication between them, as well as to their stated intention to make intensive efforts to achieve a solution affirming the territorial integrity of the Comoros, while taking into account the interests of all parties.
We would take this opportunity to support the continuation of contacts by the Secretary-General with the two parties and to pay tribute to him for his readiness to continue to make efforts with both of them in order to achieve a
(Mr. Badawi, Egypt) peaceful solution. It is still our great hope that the goodwill and intensive efforts of both sides will lead to tangible results in the near future, results that will enable the Government of the Comoros to exercise full sovereignty over all the islands of the archipelago, including the island of Mayotte, and enable the fraternal Comoros people to intensify their efforts and direct all their energies towards progress and development.
Mr■ GARDEZI (Pakistan): We are deeply grieved and distressed to receive the sad news of the demise of President Seyni Kountche yesterday in Paris. His untimely death has deprived the Niger and the continent of Africa of a great son, a patriot and a man of vision and action. We feel bereaved by the passing away of a close friend^who maintained his country in bonds of fraternal friendship with Pakistan. We mourn his loss and salute his memory.
Pakistan has traditional ties of friendship and co-operation with France, and the Comoros is a fraternal, Islamic and non-aligned country with which we enjoy close relations. My country has therefore followed closely and with great interest the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte from its inception and has maintained a special interest in its expeditious and satisfactory solution.
The question of the Comorian island of Mayotte has remained on the agenda of the General Assembly since the accession of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros to independence and its membership in the United Nations some 12 years ago.
We debate the question today in order to encourage the two parties which are in disagreement to institute a constructive and purposeful dialogue with a view to achieving a just solution to that question in keeping with the relevant resolutions of our Organization.
The General Assembly has adopted a number of resolutions on the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte which reaffirm the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago composed of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte and Moheli and emphasize that a just and lasting solution to the question of Mayotte is to be found in restoring it. In this context, we recall General Assembly resolution 3291 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974. Also, General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, clearly maintains that the principle of self-determination applies to a colonial entity as a whole, which should have been the case in regard to the Comoro Archipelago.
Successive resolutions adopted in other international forums, including the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and the Organization of the African Unity (OAU), have also reaffirmed the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros. These positions were most recently reiterated in the final declaration of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at Harare, last year, at the Summit Conference of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in Kuwait, this January, and lastly, at the OAU summit at Addis Ababa in July.
The Government of France has informed the Secretary-General that it is "committed to strengthening its ... close relationship with the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros." (A/42/602, para. 5) Likewise, the Comorian Government
(Mr. Gardezi, Pakistan) has conveyed its intention to continue legitimate efforts "in a spirit of dialogue and consultation ..." (A/42/602, para. 7). We consider these assertions to be positive elements to the process of negotiations and look forward to an early resumption of the useful exchanges betwen France and the Comoros that characterized 1986. We believe that the best possibilities for the solution that we seek lie through dialogue imbued with a spirit of co-operation and understanding and building upon the foundation already laid by the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution before us restates the principled position maintained by the international community on this issue and urges the acceleration of the process of negotiations between France and the Comoros. My delegation hopes that every effort will be made to resuscitate this dialogue, which generated optimism last year. My delegation fully supports the draft resolution, which is moderate and balanced, and expresses its desire to witness an expeditious process of negotiations leading to an early solution of the problem on the basis of recognized principles, which will undoubtedly have beneficial effects on the relations between the two countries, as well as for the preservation of the peace and security which prevail in the region.
Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): My delegation wishes to convey its sincere and profound condolences to the Government and people of Niger on the tragic loss of their illustrious leader and late President. The Government and people of Thailand share their bereavement with heartfelt sympathy.
This is the twelfth year that the General Assembly has had once again to take up the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte. The problem has remained unresolved despite every effort that has been made during the past years by the United Nations as well as by other international organizations such as the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and the Non-Aligned Movement in order to seek an honourable and just solution of the question.
Since it was put on the General Assembly's agenda in 1975 numerous General Assembly resolutions, the most recent being resolution 41/30, have been adopted, reaffirming the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte, inviting the French Government to respect the commitment made prior to the referendum of 22 December 1974 and urging France to negotiate with the Comorian Government to ensure the return of Mayotte to the Comoros. But none of them has been fully implemented.
May I recall that the referendum on self-determination of the Comorian people as a whole, not island by island, was held on 22 December 1974 by the French Government. The Comorians freely determined their own future when 95 per cent of them voted in favour of independence. Consequently, the Comoros as a sovereign State was admitted to membership of this Organization by General Assembly resolution 3385 (XXX) of 12 November 1975, which also reaffirms the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro archipelago comprising the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comoro, Mayotte and Moheli. Regrettably, the island of Mayotte today is still separated from the other sister islands of the Comoros.
It should be noted, at the same time, that, with some recent initiatives taken by France, the latter seems to have demonstrated its willingness for co-operation in the search for a settlement of the issue. Following the meeting between the French Prime Minister and the OAU delegation in June 1986, the French Government withdrew from the National Assembly the bill on the holding of a consultation in Mayotte and agreed not to organize a referendum there. Moreover, in October 1986, a brief visit to the Comoros was paid by the French Prime Minister.
In his statement of 29 September 1987 before the General Assembly during the general debate the Comorian Foreign Minister, Mr. Said Kafe, reiterated his Government's earnest desire to seek a just solution by peaceful means when he stated:
"We therefore make an urgent, solemn appeal to the French Government toj take a decisive step, within the framework of the friendly relations that exist between our two countries, to make possible a final solution to this distressing problem.
"In conclusion, I reaffirm my Government's unswerving commitment to the United Nations system and its ideals and noble objectives." (A/42/PV.17, pp. 92, 93) Today my delegation welcomes the eloquent statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, in which he reaffirmed his country's readiness for dialogue and determination to pursue its efforts until its just cause triumphs.
For its part, the French Permanent Mission to the United Nations, in a note verbale dated 7 September 1987 addressed to the Secretary-General on this issue, again reaffirmed that France was committed to strengthening its already close relationship with the Comoros.
My delegation would like to see a speedy and just solution of the question of Mayotte in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter and relevant United Nations resolutions and on the basis of respect for tfie sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Comoros. We also hope that the two parties in the question will continue their constructive dialogue with a view to seeking a just and lasting solution to the problem.
In view of the above, my delegation supports draft resolution A/42/L.24, now before us, which again reflects the common will of the international community on
(Mr. Kasemsri, Thailand) the urgent need to restore the territorial integrity of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros. In the light of our good relations with both parties to the dispute, my delegation appeals to both parties to accelerate constructive dialogue with a view to ensuring a just, honourable and permanent settlement of the question of Mayotte, in keeping with the United Nations Charter and relevant United Nations resolutions, and the declared goodwill of the parties concerned. We earnestly hope that, with good faith and sincere intentions on both sides, the desired solution to the problem can be achieved in the near future.
I should like to conclude my statement by expressing my delegation's deep appreciation to the United Nations Secretary-General and all the other organizations concerned for their tireless efforts to create all the necessary conditions to facilitate a just and peaceful settlement of the problem.
Mr. AL-HOSSANI (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to convey sincere condolences to the delegation of Niger on the death of the President of the Republic of Niger.
Once again the Assembly is considering the problems of our contemporary world, whose wounds continue to bleed and whose pain continues to increase. We can only hope that reason will prevail and wisdom reign supreme so that that sad situation may be ended.
Today the Assembly is considering yet another question that is a cause of concern to our world, the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte. Despite the numerous resolutions adopted by this world Organization and other regional and internacional organizations calling for the solution of this question, regrettably, no substantial progress seems to have been made in this regard.
The Sultanate of Oman, because of the friendly relations it maintains with the parties to the conflict and because of its foreign policy, which is based on
(Mr. Al-Hossani, Oman) respect for the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of all other States, hopes that the two parties will achieve a solution to the problem that will deepen the relations of friendly and mutual respect that exist between them.
My country believes in the policy of constructive dialogue. Therefore, it supports the continued dialogue between the two parties in this matter. They are linked by deeply rooted historical ties which we have no doubt they wish to maintain. Yet it is no exaggeration to say that for as long as the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte remains unresolved there will indeed be the danger of those ties being broken.
My delegation, in keeping with its keen interest in peace and security throughout the world, is among the sponsors of the draft resolution on this question now before the Assembly. We urge the parties concerned to reach a solution without delay so as to comply with international resolutions and demonstrate respect for the sovereignty and independence of States, thus enabling peace and well-being to reign in that part of the world. We call upon the Members of the Organization to support draft resolution A/42/L.24.
Mr. BIFFOT (Gabon) (interpretation from French): In June 1976 the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in accordance with resolution CM/Res.946, created a committee to deal with the question of the island of Mayotte. Since then, Algeria, Cameroon, the Comoros, Madagascar, Mozambique and Senegal, under the presidency of my country, have been working together to resolve problem of the independence of that island, which, as it appears on any map, must be considered to be part of the archipelago of which Comoros is the main island.
On 3 November 1986 the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 41/30, in operative paragraph 5 of which it requested the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, to maintain continuous contact with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and to make available his good offices in the search for a peaceful negotiated solution to the problem of Mayotte. The report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations clearly and objectively sets forth the representations that have been made. We might mention the official working visit, in April 1987, of President Abdallah to France; the consideration of the question of Mayotte in July 1987 at the forty-sixth regular session of the OAU Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs; the active campaign by the Islamic Federal Republic of Comoros in international organizations to dert public opinion to this question, which is of paramount importance to it.
From the various elements provided by the OAU, the Comoros and France, it is clear that progress towards a solution acceptable to both sides has been minimal. It is clear also that renewed expressions of goodwill are necessary, and that there must be concrete up-to-date recognition of the sovereign right of the Republic of Comoros to exercise sovereignty over its entire national territory, a territory everyone calls the Comoro archipelago.
On behalf of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, I would call on both parties concerned to increase their meetings in both the OAU and the United Nations in the spirit of dialogue and fraternity that lias characterized the meetings that have taken place so far. The combined efforts of the United Nations and the OAU, in an atmosphere of harmony and mutual respect, are admirable and provide striking evidence of the similarity of the views of the OAU and our Organization, the former being, so to speak, a sub-unit of the larger, world-wide Organization, the United Nations.
Here and now I wish to pay tribute to the Government of the Comoros and to the Government of France, which have readily accepted these combined efforts, this common approach to the question of Mayotte. I wish also to pay an equally deserved tribute to all the other Members of the Organization which have so readily accepted both approaches to the question of Mayotte: the continental approach and the world-wide approach.
Mr. BLANC (France) (interpretation from French): Like the preceding speakers, I should like to convey to our colleague, the Permanent Representative of the Niger, the sentiments of my country, Government and delegation on the death of President Seyni Kountche, and I should like to ask our colleague kindly to convey to his Government our most sincere condolences.
President Kountche, an African Head of State and a major figure, was respected by his people and esteemed by his country. In a difficult economic situation he increased efforts to ensure that his country could confront it and reduce to a minimum the suffering caused by it.
With the loss of this Head of State, Niger has lost a great President, and French-speaking Africa has lost a friend and one of its most outstanding leaders, and the same is true of the international community.
France regrets to note that this year again the island of Mayotte is on the General Assembly's agenda. It must indeed oppose the text that has been submitted (A/42/L.24), in particular because of its operative paragraph 1. Nevertheless, we have most carefully listened to the successive statements of speakers here, in particular that of Mr. Said Kafe, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Co-operation and Foreign Trade of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros, from which it emerges
(Mr. Blanc, France) that each of then hopes that a just and lasting solution can be found to this question as soon as possible. That is also the position of France.
We are committed to an active search for a satisfactory outcome to the problem of Mayotte, a search that does not exclude any solution which is in accordance with our Constitution and the wishes of the peoples involved.
(Mr. Blanc, France)
Guided by a spirit of responsibility and openness, the French Government is pursuing with the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros a dialogue which it hopes will be constructive. Moreover, this dialogue is based on the deep-seated ties of friendship and co-operation which unite our two countries. They were recently reinforced once again by the official working visit which President Abdallah made to France in April 1987. We are convinced that high-level contacts of this type, made with a consistent desire for conciliation and harmonization, can advance the joint search for an equitable solution, despite the difficulties. France, in any case, is determined to spare no effort to that end.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): We have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their votes before the voting.
May I remind members that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/4 01, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. VAN LIEROP (Vanuatu): The Government and people of Vanuatu extend sympathy and condolences to the Government and people of Niger on the loss of their loved and respected late President. Our deepest sympathy and condolences are also extended to the family of the late President.
Having weathered the storm of a secession movement crafted in the waning days of its colonial history, Vanuatu has a very deep and abiding interest in the question now before this body.
Vanuatu is well aware of the various subterfuges, deceits and distortions practised by _ome who never really welcomed the Declaration on decolonization or the leading role of the United Nations in the decolonization process. In its own
(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu) history, Vanuatu has heard and experienced many of the rationalizations and excuses put forth on this question. Many of the same rationalizations, excuses, subterfuges, deceits and distortions are similarly advanced with respect to Territories that are today Non-Self-Governing Territories in law as well as in fact.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution set forth in document A/42/L.24. The text is accurate, moderate and reasonable. We expect this text to be supported by the overwhelming majority of the Members of the United Nations, just as similar texts have in the past been supported by an overwhelming majority of our Members.
We note with interest the list of sponsors of the draft resolution and the long list of countries which have voted to support the fundamental principles enunciated within the text. We also note with consid< cable puzzlement that some who can easily recognize the principles involved on th? question of Mayotte do not, ironically, seem to be able to recognize similar and related principles with respect to the question of New Caledonia. Some who will vote in the affirmative on the question of Mayotte have not yet seen fit to vote yes on the question of New Caledonia. We respect every nation's right to make its own decisions. However, we cannot but observe that colonial Powers are often emboldened in one instance by inconsistency or indifference in another instance.
We are proud of the South Pacific region. We are proud of its peoples, and we are proud of the aspirations and strivings of its peoples. The people of the South Pacific region understand and empathize with rhe people of the Comoros, the people of Namibia, the people of South Africa, the people of Palestine and others who do not yet have their destinies completely in the ir own hands.
Our delegation will vote for draft resolution A/42/L.24 because of the principles involved and because of the justice ci the cause. We will not be threatened, intimidated, deceived, misled or sed.ced on this or any other issue.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu)
In a similar vein, we appeal to every delegation in this Hall to apply the same standards, the same reasoning and the same consistency when the question of New Caledonia is voted upon by the Assembly. If we, the international community, can stand with the people of the Comoros, if we can stand with the people of Namibia, if we can stand with the people of South Africa, if we can stand with the people of Palestine, then why do some find it so difficult to stand with the people of New Caledonia?
Mr. LOHIA (Papua New Guinea): My delegation endorses the statement just made by my dear friend and colleague, the representative of Vanuatu. The Papua New Guinea Government and people appeal to those who colonize, suppress and oppress people to free the people. It seems that when countries become independent, there is a shadow under which they still live. We will continue to support the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. We will stand by the Charter of the United Nations to encourage the people of the world to be totally freed from colonialism, racism and apartheid.
On those bases, therefore, my delegation will support the draft resolution before the Assembly.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A/42/L.24.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Kampuchea, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia
Against:	France
Abstaining: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution A/42/L.24 was adopted by 12.8 votes to 1, with 22 abstentions (resolution 42/17).*
The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from Russian): That concludes our
consideration of agenda item 29.
Subsequently the delegations of Yemen and Zimbabwe advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.
AGENDA ITEM 15 (continued)
ELECTIONS TO FILL VACANCIES IN PRINCIPAL ORGANS
(c) ELECTION OF FIVE MEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
(i)	MEMORANDUM BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/42/588)
(ii)	LIST OF CANDIDATES (A/42/589/Rev.1)
(iii)	CURRICULA VITAE (A/42/591)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The General Assembly will proceed to the election of five members of the International Court of Justice for a nine-year term commencing on 6 February 1988. The terms of office of the following Judges will expire the previous day: Mr. Roberto Ago, Mr. José Sette-Câmara, Mr. Stephen M. Schwebel, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui and Mr. Nikolai K. Tarassov. In connection with the election, I should like to bring the following matters to the attention of the members of the General Assembly.
First, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 264 (III) , a State which is a party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice but not a Member of the United Nations may participate in the election in the General Assembly in the same manner as the States Members of the United Nations. On this occasion I am happy to welcome here the representatives of Liechtenstein, San Marino and Switzerland.
Secondly, I should like to confirm that at this time the Security Council, independently of the General Assembly, is proceeding to elect five members of the Court. This procedure is in accordance with Article 8 of the Statute of the Court, which provides:
(The President)
"The General Assembly and the Security Council shall proceed independently of one another to elect the members of the Court.” Accordingly, the results of the voting in the General Assembly will not be communicated to the Security Council until all candidates have obtained the absolute required majority in the Assembly.
Finally, I should like to draw the attention of the members of the Assembly to the documents relating to the election. The list of candidates who have been nominated by national groups is to be found in document A/42/589/Rev. 1-S/19156/Rev.l.
The curricula vitae of the candidates are to be found in document A/42/591-S/19158.
The Assembly also has before it document A/42/588-S/19155 containing a memorandum by the Secretary-General on the present composition of the Court and the procedure to be followed in the Assembly and in the Security Council with regard to the election. For the present election, 82 votes constitute an absolute majority in the General Assembly.
In accordance with Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the Court, those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of votes in the General Assembly and in the Security Council shall be considered elected.
The General Assembly will now proceed to a secret ballot.
If on the first ballot fewer than five candidates obtain the required majority, it will be necessary to proceed to other ballots until all five candidates have obtained that majority. The General Assembly has decided that these ballots shall be unrestricted.
Representatives are requested to use only the ballot papers now being distributed and to place a cross at the left of the name of the five candidates for
(The President)
whom they wish to vote. Ballot papers on which more than five names are marked will be considered invalid. Votes may be cast only for those candidates whose names appear on the ballot.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs, de Incera (Costa Rica), Mr. Prodjowarsito (Indonesia), Mr. Ralebitso (Lesotho) and Ms. Haga (Norway) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 12.25 p.m. and resumed at 1.25 p.m.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The result of the voting is
as follows?
Number	of	ballot papers;	161
Number	of	invalid ballots:	0
Number	of	valid ballots:	161
Abstentions :	0
Number	of	members voting:	161
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui (Algeria)	149
Mr. Nikolai Tarassov (Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics)	133
Mr. Roberto Ago (Italy)	114
Mr. Stephen Schwebel (United States of America) 113
Mr. Jose Sette-Camara (Brazil)	72
Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen (Guyana)	71
Mr. Laurel B. Francis (Jamaica)	44
Mr. Erik Suy (Belgium)	42
Mr. Willem Riphagen (Netherlands)	26
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The following four candidates have obtained an absolute majority in the General Assembly: Mr. Roberto Ago, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Nikolai Tarassov and Mr. Stephen Schwebel.
eh/plj
(The President)
The Assembly will have to proceed to another ballot to fill the remaining vacancy. The ballot papers are being distributed. All candidates whose names appear on the ballot paper are eligible except those who have already obtained an absolute majority in the Assembly.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs, de Incera (Costa Rica), Mr. Prodjowarsito (Indonesia), Mr. Ralebitso (Lesotho) and Mr. Castroviejo (Spain) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
AW/PLJ
The meeting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 2.05 p.m.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of	ballot papers:	160
Number of	invalid ballots:	4
Number of	valid ballots:	156
Abstentions:	2
Number of	members voting:	154
Required absolute majority:	82
Number of votes obtained:
Mr.	Mohamed Shahabuddeen (Guyana)	71
Mr.	Jose Sette-Camara (Brazil)	59
Mr.	Laurel B. Francis (Jamaica)	20
Mr.	Erik Suy (Belgium)	3
Mr.	Willem Riphagen (Netherlands)	1
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): None of the candidates has »btained the necessary absolute majority. Therefore we shall be obliged to vote >nce again.
The meeting was suspended at 2.10 p.m. and resumed at 4.25 p.m.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The General Assembly will now vote on the one remaining vacancy.
Ballot papers are now being distributed. Only those canaidates whose names appear on the ballot paper are eligible for election.
May I remind representatives once again to place a cross next to the name of only one candidate. Ballot papers on which more than one name is marked will be considered invalid.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Brown (Australia) , Mrs, de Incera (Costa Rica), Mr. Prodjowarsito (Indonesia) and Mr. Sanyaolu (Nigeria) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
PKB/mh
The meeting was suspended at 4,35 p.m. and resumed at 5.15 p.m.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The result of the voting is
as follows:	
Number of ballot papers:	155
Number of invalid ballots:	1
Number of valid ballots:	154
Abstentions:	2
Number of members voting:	152
Required absolute majority:	82
Number of votes obtained:	
Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen (Guyana)	93
Mr. Jose Sette-Camara (Brazil)	46
Mr. Laurel B. Francis (Jamaica)	9
Mr. Erik Suy (Belgium)	3
Mr. Willem Riphagen (Netherlands)	1
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):	The following five
candidates have received the required absolute majority	in the General Assembly:
Mr. Roberto Ago, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Nikolai Tarassov,
Mr. Mohamed Shahabuddeen, Mr. Stephen Schwebel. I have conveyed the results to the President of the Security Council and I have received from him the following letter:
"I have the honour to inform you that at the 2760th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 November 1987 for the purpose of electing five members of the International Court of Justice to fill vacancies in February 1988, an absolute majority of votes was obtained by the following candidates: Mr. Roberto Ago, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Jose Sette-Camara, Mr. Stephen Schwebel, Mr. Nikolai K. Tarassov.”
(The President)
As a result of the voting which has taken place independently in the General Assembly and in the Security Council, the necessary absolute majority in both organs has been gained by the following four candidates: Mr. Roberto Ago, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui, Mr. Nikolai K. Tarassov and Mr. Stephen Schwebel. Consequently, they have been duly elected as members of the International Court of Justice for a nine-year period starting on 6 February 1988. I take this opportunity to extend to them the congratulations of the Assembly.
In accordance with the provisions of Article 11 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice it will be necessary to hold a second meeting to fill the remaining vacancy. I propose that this meeting should be adjourned and that a second meeting should be held today at 5.45 p.m. to vote on the remaining vacancy.	,
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FORTY-SECOND SESSION
Officiai Ricordi*
FIRST COMMIT TEIS 20th meeting held on
Monday, 26 October 1987 at 10 a.m.
New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 20th MEETING
Chairmans Mr. BAGBENI ADEITO NZENGEYa (Zaire)
CONTENTS
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
•Uno moni io M.hjed to (iitmiion (orrfthono fiottiti to' wm uftk't thè otgnnfute ni n memlui >>| il» deir Mainiti mmerned hiiIiih uni- «eri «t thr •hiic ..f f>uhlt< atum lo thè ChKl ni llk (Minai Uenmis I dump Se» Urti riami IM'J ■’W .’ I mieil Mainino l’U/a. ami imnrptir ned in a n>p ni il* moni
('mteolioni wi!l hr tonued atte» Ihr end ni thr oroomn. i» a * par .le lanu.lt l«r cach (ommiticc
87-63117 8407V (E)	n
Diatr. GENERAL A/C.1/42/PV.20 30 October 1987 ENGLISH
Th* m»ting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 66
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French)« The First Committee is holding this special meeting in observance of Disarmament Week, which began on 24 October 1987. In so doing, we are continuing a tradition established by the Genersl Aseembly at its first special session devoted to dissrmament.
For me it is both a great honour and a great pleasure to welcome to the First Committee Mr. Peter Florin, President of the General Assembly at its forty-second seseion. Allow me to express, on behalf of the First Committee and on my own behalf, our sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency of the United Nstlons General Assembly at its forty-second session. This is a tribute to your consummate diplomatic skill and to the great effectiveness with which you are fulfilling the high responsibilities entrusted to you.
I also hsve the distinct honour and pleasure to welcome to the First Committee Mr. Javier Perez de Cueller, Secretary-General of the United Nations. On behalf of the First Committse and on my own behalf, I congratulate you on the effectiveness and devotion which you have shown in carrying out your difficult task ot promoting pesce snd understanding among all peoples. Your unshakable commitment to the noblest ideals are a guarantee ot a promising future tor the United Nation».
Disarmament Week offers us today an additional opportunity t-’ share our thoughts on the state of the world in which we are living, but also and above all to consider the future In the light of the progress under way in the area of concern to us.
From the very first session of the General Assembly the subject of disarmament has bsen the object of constant attention by the United Nations, which was created "to save succeeding generations from the scourge ot war ...".
(Th« Chairman)
In tha Final Document of the first special seasion of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament the anniveraary of the eatablishment of the United Nations was proclaimed as the day beginning the annual Disarmament Week, which ia intended to promote disarmament goals.
This year the improvement in the East-West dialogue which we have been following daily ia of great help to us in thia taak. While last yesr the Reykjavik meeting did not immediately and tangibly respond to the aspirations of many of ua, the apirit of Reykjavik did survive and it allowed for an evolution of atunning rapidity in the area of negotiations on disarmament between the United States of America and the Soviet Union.
In this Organization the entire international community has constantly expressed its satisfaction at this development and its hope that it would finally see the conclusion of a treaty on the elimination of intermediate and shorter-range nuclear weapons, which w,ll, we hope, constitute a first step along the way to bringing about a safer world, free from all nuclear weapons and from all weapons in general.
Moreover, the international community was not satisfied to play the role of a spectator, merely taking note of the results of the discussions and meetings between the two major Powera. The General Assembly did take action in thia area and, in this context, last Wednesday, 21 October, on the eve of the meeting in Moscow between the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Shultz and the soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Shevardnadze, the General Aaaembly, upon the recommendation of the First Committee, adopted without a vote a decision encouraging the United Spates and the Soviet Union to conclude a treaty on intermediate and shorter-range nuclear weapons, and also to continue equally Intense efforts to bring about the achievemen: of an agreement on a 50 per cent reduction of their strategic offensive weapons.
MLü/1jb
(Th* Chairman)
The international community thus showed it« interest in contributing to the unfolding of a bilateral negotiating process the positive effects of which could not help but strengthen the multilateral disarmament process in all areas and to do so both at the world level and at the regional ana subregional levels.
(The Chaim.an)
I would recall that any undertaking to strengthen world peace and security cannot help but contribute to making the United Nations more effective in fulfilling its fundamental ideals. In this context I express my deep desire to see equivalent progress achieved in the areas of conventional, chemical and space weapons.
We know that the road to general and complete disarmament under effective international control is long and aifficult. None the less, recent developments 'n various areas encourage us to continue down it and to contribute positively to preparations for the third special session of tile General Assembly devoted to disarmament. The constructive results of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence-and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, lollowed by the encouraging conclusions reached at the Vienna follow-up meeting to the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe; the rapid and remarkable progress achieved this year in Geneva in negotiations on a convention for the complete banning of all chemical weapons; the success of multilateralism, marked by the unanimous adoption of the Final Document of the recent International Conference on the Relationship Between Disarmament and Development; ana the prospect of seeing the United States and the Soviet Union soon begin global, stage-by-stage negotiations on the cessation of nuclear testing - all these factors, and yet othe. ,, allow us to be full of hope at this time, as we commemorate Disarmament Week.
I now have the pleasure of calling upon the President of the General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Peter Florin, to address the First Committee.
Mr. FLORIN (President of the General Assembly) (interpretation from Russian):	It is a great honour and pleasure to address the First Committee at its
special meeting on the occasion of the ooservance oi Disarmament Week. During iny long-standing association with the work of the Unitad Nations I have always taken a particular interest in the important work of the First Committee in the vital
(Th« Preeident of th* General Assembly) fields of disarmament and international security, ao it ia a matter of course for me to be with the Committee on this occasion.
The first special aeaaion devoted to disarmament in 1978 in recommending tne holding of Diearmament Week, did so witti the aim of making the world public aware of the Increasing dangsrs of war and of generating widespread public underatanding and support for the objectives of arms limitation and diaarinament. Today, the original aima of commemorating Diaarmament Week are more timely and relevant than ever becauae of the growing urgency of genuine disarmament measures for political, economic, ecological and other reaeone, and becauae the survival of mankind aa a whole is at stake.
Among the many iaaues that need to be reaolved through unrelenting efforts by sll Statss, ths issuea of arms limitation and diaarmament and the maintenance and preservation of peace and security are of particular importance. These issues continue to be cf utmoet concern to the international community. The need to end the arms race in both the conventional and the nuclear fields and to prevent its expansion into outer space ia recognized as s global problem. The united Natione, and in particular thia Committee, has striven vigorously to find constructive solutions to these preeeing issue*. The responsibilities of and the challenges to the First Committee are growing, and I am confident that under your leaderahip, Mr. Chairman, the Committee will exhaust all possibilities to achieve underetanding and agreement.
On the occasion of Disarmament Week we should rededicate ourselves to our common responsibility and commitment to enhance the unique role of the United Nations in preserving peace, ending the arms race and promoting disarmament. In doing ao, we shall help to create conditions for lasting and comprehensive international security in accordance with the objectives of the Charter and the ; realities of the nuclear and space age.
JSM/tc
(The Preaident of the General Assembly)
In the past weeks we have been witnessing significant developments, in a turn for the better in the international situation, which will certainly have a decisive impact on the process of arms limitation and disarmament. The agreement reached, in principle, between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Unitea Statea of America to conclude a treaty on the global elimination of their intermediate-range and shorter-range nuclear missiles opens up a clear possibility of achieving measurea for nuclear diaarmament. It would involve for the first time the destruction of nuclear weapons and would thus move towards the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. The importance of that agreement has been strongly underlined during the general debate. For thia reason the decision adopted by the General Acsembly on 21 October upon the recommendation of the First Committee was a very timely one. It reflected the aspirations of all p' -pies. The conclusion of a treaty on the elimination of medium-range nuclear misailes at the present sees >n would indeed be a signal to the world. The negotiations which have juat taken place in Moscow should give reason for hope.
It is desirable that the positive news that has reached us from Moscow help intensify the work of the First Committse. I have to note, however, that the danger of the extension of the arine race to outer space has not yet decreased, it is still, like the sword of Damocles, hanging over the heads of mankind. It is to be hoped that we car. improve the situation through bilateral and multilateral efforts.
The road to agreement on arms limitation and diaarmament certainly is not like a four-lane highway; it rather appears to be a narrow and winding mountain path. But when one reaches the mountain-top, the view should be beautiful.
The announcement by the Soviet Union and the United States of their intention to begin full-scale, stage-by-stage negotiations on nuclear testing is another most encouraging development which could have a considerable impact on the process in the multilateral field, in particular in the Conference on Disarmament.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(The President of the General Assembly)
I share the view that progress in the bilateral negotiations will nave a substantial influence on the achievement of progress in multilateral negotiations. Considerable hopes are alao placed in tha increasingly realistic prospects of the conclusion of a convention on tha world-wide prohibition of chemic. 1 weapons. At ths same time efforta should be increased to bring about progress in other fields, in particular in the field of conventional disarmament and the implementation of regional disarmament meaaurea.
Much has been gained in recent montns ana the momentum should not be lost. Only a few weeks ago the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development aucceaafully concluded its work. It emphasized the need to put an end to the arms race, to p.oceed to disarmament ana thus to release additional resources for development purposes. What is necessary now is a sincere effort by all countries towards the implementation of the Final Document adopted at that Conference, in particular the programme of action.
The successful outcome of tha Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Meaaurea and Diaarmamant last year showed clearly the possibility of achieving agreements if the necessary political will prevails. Great hopes are now being placed in the continuation of this process.
The issue of verification is gaining more and more importance. It is well understood that appropriate verification mechanisms will have to be established to ensure the full implementation of disarmament agreements. Recent developments and recent proposals show that we should go forward in that direction, not backwards, in order to establish an atmosphere of confidence and trust. I fully endorse the idea expressed by the Secretary-General in his report to the forty-second session of the General Assembly regarding the significant contribution that the United Nations could make in this area. What tne world needs is more confidence, wider diaarmamant and strengthened common security.
(Th* Resident of the General Assembly)
This Committee will again this year have to tackle a large number of important issues during the coming weeks. In this connection, I call upon the Committee to sustain thia improved atmosphere, so conducive to disarmament, and to step up its efforts to attain the important objectives of disarmament. 
At this session the General Assembly will have, among many issues, to decide upon the date for the convening in 1988 of a third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. It is to be hoped that such a special session would reinforce the conclusions of the Final Document of the first special session devoted to disarmament. In so doing it would strengthen its position as a universal forum for a comprehensive dialogue on the basic issues of our time and be able to reach agreement on the means nec> 3sary for achieving real progress in arms limitation and disarmament. 
I thank the Committee for its attention and wish it all the best in its important work. 
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French): I call upon the Secretary-General. 
The secretary-general (interpretation from French): The observance of Disarmament Week is as always an occasion for reflection and rededication reflection on the current state of disarmament negotiations and rededication of our efforts towards the attainment of meaningful arms limitation and disarmament measures. 
While the proclamation of Disarmament Week was a product of the successful first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, the years that followed saw little or no progress in that field. Despite the terrible danger for humanity posed by nuclear weapons and the harmful effects of ever-growing military expenditures, no reduction either in arms or in their lethal quality could be agreed upon. During those years, therefore, it was in an atmosphere of deep
concern and frustration on the part of an international community facet4 with an apparent impasse in disarmament negotiations that Disarmament Week was often observed. 
This year developments in the various bilateral and multilateral forums for disarmament negotiations provide a more positive backdrop for the observance of Disarmament Week. At the bilateral level the first disarmament agreement which actually eliminates certain classes of nuclear weapons from the arsenals of the two major Powers is likely to be signed soon. While an agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States on intermediate-range and shorter-range weapons would reduce the world's nuclear arsenals by only a small percentage, the political significance of such a move should not be underestimated. Such a step could pave. the way for additional disarmament measures in other important fields. In this context I am particularly gratified to see the bilateral announcement of full-scale stage-by-stage negotiations on nuclear testing, and also that efforts are going forward to achieve a treaty on 50 per cent reductions in strategic offensive weapons. 
At the Conference on Disarmament at Geneva, as the negotiating parties have realistically applied themselves to eliminating the remaining obstacles, hope nas grown for the conclusion of a treaty banning the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons. Notwithstanding the complex work that remains to be done, there is solid reason to expect agreement in the foreseeable future. 
The positive results of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development also represent a significant achievement for multilateralism, made possible by a pragmatic approach. 

The growing recognition that both overarmament and underdevelopment constitute threats to international peace and security is a compelling factor for the vigorous pursuit of undiminished security at lower levels of armament. Resources now utilized for arms could then be put to better use in addressing economic, social, and humanitarian needs and thus contribute to overall security.

These developments, taken together, reflect a more constructive approach towards disarmament. Despite these reassuring signs, however, we must still realistically recognize and seek to overcome the ever-present threat of nuclear annihilation, the daily tragedy of the armed conflicts taking place in various parts of the world and the unabated growth of conventional weapons arsenals, with the enormous squandering of badly needed resources that this entails. These remain a burden on the present and a threat to the future peace and security of the world.

Bilateral disarmament measures coupled with multilateral agreements can reinforce the process of strengthening international peace and security. An agreement between the two major Powers on intermediate-range and shorter-range weapons would do much to improve the broader outlook for arms limitation and disarmament negotiations. Progress towards a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty and the prevention of an arms race in outer space would be especially significant and valuable achievements in enhancing international confidence. The forthcoming third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament to be held shortly can, after adequate preparation, constitute a catalyst for further progress and provide an opportunity to review the work of the United Nations in the disarmament field. Thus, I am convinced that verification is one area in which the United Nations could make a significant contribution in the future.
The international community has the task of seizing the momentum created by the various positive developments of the past year and carrying it forward. The 
absence of polemics and the greater pragmatism which have been evident in arms control deliberations in the recent past must continue to inspire ana guide our actions. Substantial disarmament agreements are needed in the interest of development, security and peace. There are opportunities for new ideas and innovative approaches to be applied. For our words and intentions to retain their credibility, the time to act is now. 
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French): I call on the representative of Madagascar, Mr. Rakotondramboa, who will speak on behalf of the Chairman of the Group of African States. 
Mr. RAKOTONÜRAMBOA (Madagascar) (interpretation from French): Sir, it is a great honour to express to you, on behalf of the Group of African States as a whole, and of my delegation in particular, great pleasure at seeing you preside over the work of the First Committee at the forty-second session of the General Assembly.
In nominating you to ttiis delicate post, the African group was well aware or your capacity for work, your intelligence, your experience and your skill as a seasoned diplomat. By unanimously endorsing the choice of the Group to which you belong, the international community has paid high tribute to you and to your great country, Zaire. The African Group reiterates its confiaence in you and assures you of its full support. We would ask the other members of the Bureau to accept our heartfelt congratulations and wish to assure them also of our fullest co-operation.
By proclaiming as "Disarmament Week" the week beginning 24 October, the anniversary of the founding of tne United Nations, the tenth special session of the General Assembly could not better emphasize the central role and fundamental responsibility of our Organization in the field of disarmament.
The United Nations remains, in fact, the appropriate forum to undertake joint efforts aimed at building a world tree ot war, a better world. And in that Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
A/C.1/42/7V.20 IB
(Mr. Rakotondramboa, Madagascar) context, the negotiations on disarmament are vital for all the peoples of the world, which have the right to participate on an equal footing in those negotiations wnen thoy affect thair national security and an inherent right to contribute to the success of such negotiations. Bilateral and multilateral negotiations on disarmament should benefit from each other's progress and should complement each other rather than one hindering or precluding the other.
To inform, to educate and to ensure that the public at large understands better and gives greater support to tne aims of the United Nations in the field of disarmament are the three objectives of the World Disarmamei.t Campaign.
in that context, the Conférerez of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, in its resolution AHG/Res.164 (XXIII), adopted at its twenty-third regular session in Addis Ababa, from 27 to 29 July 19H7, requested all States members of the Organization of African Unity to pay special attention to the question of disarmament and to ensure that it is better understood by the public through school and other educational programmes undertaken in the context of the World Disarmament Campaign.
In that same resolution, the leaders of tne African continent expressed their gratitude to the United dations, in particular its Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, for its invaluable co-operation in the elaboration of the final version of the Lomé declaration and programme of action.
Inaugurated barely one year ago, the Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, with headquarters in Lomé, Togo, is extremely active. However, its financial difficulties jeopardize tne proper fuifulment of its mandate and prompt js to extend to the international community the appeal of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity for the provision of substantial
assistance.
(Mr. Rakotoncramboa, Madagascar)
In thia connection, wa expresa our appreciation to the Secretary-General for convening thia afternoon the fifth United Nations Pledging Conference for the World Disarmament Campaign, and we thank past and future contributors for their generosity.
The year 1986 wa.. commemorated as the International Year of Peace. An International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development was held in new York from 24 August to 11 September 1987. Its outcome was the adoption of a final document by consensus. Next year, the third special session of the General .saembly devoted to disarmamunt is scheduled to be held. This shows the vitality of multilateralism in the dynamics of peace.
(Mr. Rakotondramboa, Madagascar)
The threats created by the policy of oppression, aggression and destabilisation pursued by the racist régime of Pretoria, added to its . »r capability, maintain a climate of permanent insecurity over the African continent and compel the front-line States to divert to defence the very limited resoures they need to promote their economic and social development.
Faced with the major problems of poverty, hunger, illiteracy, drought, external debt and the slow pace of economic growth, Africa stands speechless at the knowledge that nearly $1,000 billion are ai.nually spent throughout the world for military purposes, whereas more than BOO million human beings are living below the poverty threshold.
May the future prove the Secretary-General of the United Nations correct when, in his address on 15 September 1987, on the occaMon of the International Day of Peace, he statedi
"There are hopeful signs that Indicate a growing awareness that fewer weapons and greater development may mean greater security. People are perhaps beginning to understand that there can be neither stability nor balance in a world where abundance coexists with hunger, where freedom and dignity coexist with poverty."
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French): The Secreiary-General has duties that oblige him to leave the Committee room at this time. Before he goes, I should like to express to him, on behalf of the First Committee, our thanks and gratitude for having taken the time to be present at this opening ceremony in ooservance of Disarmament Week.
The next speaker is the Permanent Représentât ive of Turkey, Ambassador liter Turkmen, Chairman of the Croup of Asian States.
Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): It is an honour for me to address the First Committee on behalf of the Group of Asian states on the occasion of Disarmament
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr, Turkmen, Turkey) Week. Today, aa we begin the commemoration, it is fitting to recall that at the firet special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1978, the Assembly decided to designate the week of 24 October, the anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, as Disarmament Weak. Its dual purpose is, on the one hand, to create an atmosphere conducive to progress towards disarmament and, on the other hand, to increase public awareness of tne dangers of the arms race.
For the past 9 years that Disarmament Week has been observed, the arms race in both the nuclear and the conventional fields has continued unabated. However, we should note that world public opinion is conscious, more than ever before, of the dangers inherent in the arms race and its adverse consequences on the economic and social progress of all nations, and that its calls for disarmament are growing louder and more unified. The countries of tne Asian Group value highly the efforts of the United Nations for disarmament, including those made in the First Committee, at the two special sessions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, at tne Conference on Disarmament at Geneva and in the United Nations . isarmament Commission. We also believe that Disarmament Week is serving a useful purpose by providing international public opinion with a forum where it can make itself felt in the disarmament efforts within the United Nations framework.
This year the observance of Disarmament Week is taking place ag inst a background of some encouraging developments in the field of disarmament. The finalization of an agreement which is under way between the United States and the Soviet Union on the elimination of their intermediate-range and shorter-range missiles will be a particularly welcome development. This accord will mark for the first time in nuclear history the elimination of an entire category of nuclear weapons, rather than setting ceilings for them, through tne global application of the so-called double-zero option. It will contribute positively to tne stability and security of Europe, as well as of Asia. Nevertheless, the elimination of the
(Mr. Turkmen, Turkey) intermediate-range and shorter-range missilea will reduce only a email portion of the nuclear weapona of the two countriea. Therefore we earneatly hope that the conclusion of the treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forcea will be followed by aubatantial reductiona in the category ci strategic nuclear arme.
The convening of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development was, in many respects, a turning point in our long and determined efforts to deal witn all aspects of that relationship. The Final Document adopted by consensus by the Conference will provide the international community with a viable framework for achieving our dual objective of disarmament and development in the years to come.
We have also witnessed progress in some other fields during the courue of 1987. We note with satisfaction the progress made by the Conference on Disarmament on a convention on the complete prohibition of chemical weapons. We should also note in this connection the long-awaited announcement by the Soviet Union and the United States that they were resuming their bilateral negotiations on a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing.
The developments of the past 9 year» have confirmed and hignlighted the validity of the principles and goals set forth in the Final Document of the first special session of the General Asaemo..y devoted to disarmament. As we are now in the process of preparing for the third special session devoted to disarmament, it is high time for all of us to reflect on those principles and on how to further our common cause for general and complete disarmament.
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French): I now call upon the Permament Representative of Hungary, Mr. Ferenc Esztergalyu*, who will make a statement as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mt« E82TERGALY0S (Hungary) i Today, as we observe Disarmament Week, I have the honour and pleasure of specking as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States.
The obaervanoe of Disarmament Week affords all of us the opportunity to reflect on the most basic aspirations of mankind, which are peace, disarmament and security, and on how the international conununity has striven to achieve those goals.
Now we are pleased to see that new attitudes have emerged, bringing new life to the long-sterile disarmament scene. For the first time there appears to be a good prospect for a net reduction in nuclear weapons. The agreement in principle between the USSR and tne United States on the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear missiles can encourage progress in other negotiations, including those on nuclear and apace weapons, and can uive impetus to other disarmament negotiations now in progresi. Moreovar, it can bo seen as constituting a first step towards the goal of eliminating all nuclear weapons. The same ideas were also expressed by the Secretary-General in his annual report.
An agreement between the two great Powers on 50 per cent cuts in strategic offensive weapons and on strict compliance with the 1978 Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems would be major steps towards strengthening strategic stability. Het a too, the Reykjavik summit meeting last year laid the groundwork for bringing closer together positions that still differ on several Issues. The range of problems that continue to Impede the successful conclusion of the multilateral negotiations that have been going on for over 10 years on the complete prohibition and destruction of chemical weapons is also being reduced, and that work should be concluded as soon as possible.
(Mt. Esztergalyos, Hungary)
In our view, nothing could justify efforts to downgrade the role of multilateral disarmament forums, on the contrary, the United Nations snd all other multilateral negotiating bodies - ba they of s global or a regional character -still have considerable possibilities yet to be explored and a great potential yet to be mobilized tor Implementing the noble objectives and principles of the Chsrter. To avert and eliminate the danger of a nuclear catastrophe, to halt the arms race and adopt effective disarmament measures are tasks for nations and for the international community, tasks in the solution of which the United Nations and its agsncies should take more Initiative and play a more active and pioneering role. We must all, jointly, seek ways and means of bringing about a solution. An excellsnt opportunity for this will be provided by the forthcoming third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. That special session should map the road to security through disarmament.
Events of recent years have reinforced tne conclusion that national and international security can no longer be separated and that neither can be preserved in a lasting way to the detriment of, or in subordination to, the other. Given the realities of our age, no one country can rely exclusively on military-technical means for guaranteeing its security. This can ba achieved only through political means and joint actions. The creation of a new structure of security policies presupposes the active partlciatlon of all States, whatever their size, political and social systsms. In our day and age it is impossible to remove th« threats to common security except by comprehensive management of tne various problems, whether they emerge separately or together in the political, military, economic, ecological, human rights and humanitarian fields.
Last year the General Assembly adopted resolution 41/86 D, in the operative part of which it, inter alia, requested Governments to continue to Inform the Secretary-General of activities undertaken to promote the objectives of Disarmament
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Eaztergalyos, Hungary) Week. I am pleased to report that the countries of the Group of Eastern European States are in complianoe with the aforementioned resolution. Wu are also satisfied that Disarmament Week la widely observed at United Nations Headquarters and elsewhere in the world by the organisations of the United Nations system. The Department for Disarmament Affairs and the Department of Public Information have endeavoured to invo. 'a as many segments of the public as possible in the obser/ance of Disarmament Week. The network of United Nation* Information Centres plays an essential role in stimulating and supporting activities undertaken by concerned constituencies around the world.
The event* of Disarmament Week organized in the countries for which I speak have contributed effectively to acquainting broad segments of public opinion with questions of international peace and security and of disarmament, to a fuller development of related activities by the general public, and to a manifestation of mass support for increasing the role of the United Nations in this field.
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French): I call on Mr. Lloydstone Jacoba, the Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda and Chairman of the Group of Latin American States.
Mr. JACOBS (Antigua and Barbuda): I wisn to express the sentiments of the Latin American and Caribbean Group in recognizing your distinct qualifications, Sir, as Chairman of the First Committee. I am sure that your country, Zaire, is proud of your contribution toward* making this world in which we live a more peaceful and equitable place.
Latin America and the Caribbean wish to place on record the fact that we welcome the progress in the Geneva talks on reducing intermediate-range nuclear weapons, but we stress that for us the progress made at Geneva is only a very small first step.
(Mr. Jacoba, Antigua and Barbuda) At representatives are aware, in Latin America and the Caribbean a number of our countriea haa declared our region a sone free of nuclear arms. We feel a great deal aafer becauae of the absence of such weapons in our territory and we consider it unlikely that others will feel the need to employ such weapons against us. We have no hesitation in commending our Treaty for the conaideratlon of other regions of the world as a poaaible model.
At the Geneva talks the agreement to reduce intermediate-range nuclear weapons must not be regarded aa a major aucceaa. The partioipanta in thoae talks should view their progress thus far merely as a means of opening the door to agreement on eignificant reductions in strategic nuclear arms in ordsr to prevent an arms race in outer apace and to terminate it on Barth.
I need not reiterate here the fears of ths world, but I would be remiss if I did not draw attention to the inoreaeing aonoerna of large numbere of people in Europe and North America for their continued eurvival in a context of nuclear miasiles pointed at the heart of their exiatence. This fear is engendered by the two super-Powers and theik allies, which operate in an atmoaphere in which the buildup cf nuclear weapons is sesn as s deterrsnt to nuclear war. The argument appears to be that aa long us neither side has superiority in weapons nsither side will initiate a conflict. But the argument is based more on calculated risk than on compelling logic, and the danger with taking risks is that they are subject to failure. It is such failure that ia sensed by those who protest tne continued buildup of nuclear arms.
The only sure deterrent to a nuclear war ia the abandonment of nucieur weapons. While we cannot hope for this, we can at least ui the cessation of their production and a massive reduction in their deployment.
We in Latin America and the Caribbean also welcome the recent agreement between the United States of America ana the Soviet Union to entei into
(Mr. Jacobs, Antigua and Barbuda) negotiations with a view to agreeing on effective verification measures which would make it possible to ratify tha 1974 Treaty on tne Limitation of Underground Nuclear Weapons Tests and the 1976 Treaty on Underground Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes. We particularly welcome their declared intention to negotiate further limitations on nuclear testing.
If no othsr message goes home to the United States of America and the Soviet Union fr^.n this week of deliberations on disarmamsnt, thiy should hsar that the world wishes to see an immediate halt to the testing of nuclear weapons and the achievement of a negotiated and verifiable comprehensive test-ban treaty.
(Mr. Jacoba, Antigua and Barbuda)
Moat of the world stands on the aidelinea of the negotiatlona on disarmament. We are spectators rather than actors in the drama of discussions. We are spectators because, happily, we do not possess nuclear weapons. But our non-possession of such weapons should not dispossess us of a voice in their limitation. For the use of nuclear weapons will be no less catastrophic for us than for thvir possessors. Nuclear wars cannot be limited; nor can their consequences bypass those who were not participants in their promotion.
Thus, while we in Latin America and the Caribbean sit at no table in Geraeva and have no say in the negotiations on reducing nuclear weapons and halting their testing, we urge those who do to take account of our deep concern that the world be made safe and secure through effective and verifiable disarmament.
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French): I now call on the representative of Italy, Mr. Aldo Pugliese, who will speak on behalf of the Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. PUGLIESE (Italy): I am honoured to address the First Committee on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States on the occasion of the observance of Disarmament Week. It is a particular privilege for me to do so at a time when encouraging signs are emerging from the bilateral negotiations between the United states and the Soviet Union on the reduction of nuclear arms and from their understanding to seek progress on a number of other major disarmament issues. The last 12 months have been marked by significant achievements at various levels in the field of arms control and disarmament. The positive outcome of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe has stimulated the dialogue on security and disarmament between East a.id West. Developments such as the acceleration of the talks between the United States and the Soviet Union and the current discussion in Vienna on a mandate lor alks
(Mr, Pugliese, Italy)
on conventional stability in ths whole of Europe« as well as the progress achieved in the negotiations on a global ban on chemical weapons, further strengthen the positive trends characterising the present international situation. It is to be hoped that these developments will rapi< lead to balanced and verifiable disarmament agreements and thus contribute to strengthening international peace and security all over the world.
The	observance of Disarmament Wee)	c is a major opportunity for all of	us	to
consider	effective ways to enhance the	central role of the United Nations	in	the
field of	disarmament and in support of	ongoing disarmament negotiations.	It	is
also an opportunity to increase public		awareness of these problems, with	the	
purpose of creating an atmosphere that could promote concrete progress in existing negotiations.
The States members of the Group of Western European and Other States rem in committed to looking constructively at all possibilities for promoting progress towards disarmament agreements in conditions that strengthen security and stability and therefore contribute to safeguarding international peace.
It is in that spirit that today we participate in the observance of Disarmament Week.
The CHAIRMAN (interpretation from French)i The First Committee has thus come to the end of this meeting devoted to the ob rvance of Disarmament Week.
On behalf of the Committee, I wish once again to thank the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly for honouring and enhancing by their presence this first meeting opening the observance of Disarmament Week.
The meeting rose at 11.55 ¿.m.
NITED ATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.100
29 February 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDREDTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 29 February 1988, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
later:	Mr. LEGWAILA	(Botswana)
-	Resumption of the forty-second session - Tribute to the memory of Mr. Sean MacBride, Former Minister for External Affairs of the Republic of Ireland and former United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
-	Tribute to the memory of Her Excellency Dr. Nora Astorga Gadea, Former Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
-	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations [121] (continued)
-	Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country. Reports of the Secretary-General [136] (continued)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
88-64026/A 3324V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
RESUMPTION OF THE FORTY-SECOND SESSION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I declare the forty-second session of the General Assembly resumed.
As members are aware, the Assembly is being reconvened to consider agenda item 136 - "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country" - which, by decision 42/460 of 21 December 1987, has been retained on the agenda of this session.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF MR. SEAN MACBRIDE, FORMER MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF IRELAND AND FORMER UNITED NATIONS COMMISSIONER FOR NAMIBIA
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF HER EXCELLENCY DR. NORA ASTORGA GADEA, FORMER DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF NICARAGUA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before taking up the agenda for this morning I should like'to invite the Assembly to join in a tribute to two international personalities that we have lost in recent months.
It is with deep regret that I must refer to the death of Mr. Sean MacBride, Minister for External Affairs of Ireland from 1948 to 1951 and United Nations Commissioner for Namibia from 1973 to 1977.
Serving with	distinction	in the cause of human rights, justice and	peace, he
was	the recipient	of both the	Nobel Peace Prize, in 1974, and the Lenin	Peace
Prize, in 1977.
On behalf of	the members	of the General Assembly I extend to the members of
Mr.	MacBride's family, and to	the Government and people of Ireland, our	profound
and sincere condolences.
I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Mr. Sean MacBride.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The passing away of Mr. Sean Mac Bride of Ireland has been deeply felt throughout the international community. He was one of those personalities, rare in any age, whose idealism remained undiminished through a crowded experience in public life. 
After having won many laurels, and at a time of life when most men would think of retiring to a more tranquil regime, he agreed to serve as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia for a period of four years. This was but one sign of his devotion to the cause of human dignity and international justice. Likewise, the award to him of both the Nobel Peace Price and the Lenin Peace Prize indicated a remarkably broad recognition of his stature as a dedicated and eminent servant of peace. 
He was a true friend of this House, and I wish, therefore, to pay a heartfelt tribute to his memory. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): We have also learned with great sorrow of the passing of our colleague Her Excellency Dr. Nora Astorga Gadea, former Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations. As a Vice-President of the General Assembly during its current session Ambassador Astorga dignified the Assembly with her diplomatic skills. Her death represents a great loss not only for her country but also for the international community. 
On behalf of all her friends and colleagues assembled here, I should like to express to her family and to the Government and the people of Nicaragua our profound and sincere condolences.
I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Her Excellency Dr. Nora Astorga Gadea.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call upon the
Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): It is with deep sadness that I reiterate to the Government and the people of Nicaragua the condolences of the United Nations and my own very sincere condolences on the untimely demise of Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea, Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations. 
We have all witnessed her courage in the face of physical illness and the calm strength of her convictions, as well as her valuable contribution to the activities of the Organization. We shall long cherish her memory. 
As Secretary-General it is with deep emotion that I associate myself with this tribute to her memory. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call upon the representative of Senegal, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States. 
Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French): Since the suspension of the forty-second session of the General Assembly, the international community has lost two worthy members of the great multilateral family.
With the passing of the Ambassador of Nicaragua, Her Excellency
Mrs. Nora Astorga Gadea, we have lost a courteous, gracious and responsive colleague. Regardless of differences that may have existed between her delegation and others, which are in any case part of the normal order of things, her open-mindedness always made contact and dialogue easy.
(Mr. Sa r re, Sen ega 1)
She thus demonstrated how the United Nations can be used intelligently and responsibly to find solutions to the many problems before us. Mrs. Astorga Gadea also did a great deal to contribute to the Non-Aligned Movement, of which she was a militant member and in which she will be sorely missed.
With the death of Mr. Sean MacBride the ideals of justice, disarmament and peace among peoples have suffered a loss. He was a militant advocate of peace and the multilateralism reflected in the Charter of the United Nations, and during his work with the United Nations as Commissioner for Namibia he left an indelible mark and made a vast contribution to international affairs, for the triumph of justice and law, and for Namibia's accession to independence.
Reading the papal encyclical Pacem in terr is a few days ago, I noted how those two personalities drew inspiration from that historic document in their daily actions. On this occasion the African Group wishes to associate itself with the tributes being paid to those personalities of our time. We extend sincere condolences to their Governments and their families. We hope that in his infinite goodness God will grant them mercy.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Burma, who will speak on behalf of the Asian States.
Mr. GYI (Burma): It is with deep sadness that the Group of Asian States has learned of the passing of Mr. Sean MacBride and Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea, Permanent Representative of Nicaragua. The reconvening today of the General Assembly is indeed a solemn and auspicious occasion on which to remember and honour them.
In my capacity as Chairman of the Asian Group for this month, and on behalf of the Group, I assume the sad duty of joining the international community in paying tribute to the memory of those two outstanding personalities, who during their lifetimes were prominent on the international scene. Their passing is all the more Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Gyi, Burma) deeply felt because in their time they pursued their endeavours within this Organization, in which we continue to strive for understanding and tolerance.
Many of us who are gathered here today may not have had the privilege of meeting Mr. Sean MacBride personally. It is, however, well known that his long years of devotion to international service and his espousal of the cause of peace, justice and understanding won him honours and the respect of the international community. He will be particularly remenbered for the important role he played in the cause of the independence of Namibia. I have the honour to express on behalf of the Asian Group our deep condolences to the Government and people of Ireland anc to the family of Mr. Sean MacBride in their hour of bereavement.
The untimely passing of Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea has touched us most deeply, she was in our midst as recently as during the forty-second session of the General Assembly. In her life she was well known for her devotion and service to her country. Here in the United Nations she will be remembered with deep respect for her human qualities and the dignity with which she represented her country.
She bore her illness with courage and fortitude, and she served her country till the last days of her life. I deem it an honour to extend, on behalf of the Group of Asian States, our profound condolences to the Government and people of Nicaragua and to the members of the bereaved family on their sad loss.
In these days of hope and despair, this sad occasion brings to mind the brevity of our own lives} whatever our worldly pretensions may be, we share a common human destiny, for after all we live on the same planet, we belong to the human race, and we are all mortals.
With these words, and in all humility, we pay our tribute to Mr. Sean MacBride and Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea. They have indeed fulfilled their dignity and worth as individuals in this life, and we offer our prayers for them in the life hereafter.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call on the representative of the Soviet Union, who will speak on behalf of the East European countries.
Mr. BEI0N0G3V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I should like to pay a tribute to the memory of our good friend and colleague the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations, Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea. The news of the untimely death of that talented Nicaraguan diplomat, who was a prime example of noble service in the interest of her country and of the United Nations, has left a deep pain in our hearts. We have lost more than a distinguished representative of Nicaragua, who I know enjoyed well merited respect among all of us*, we have also lost a revolutionary, a genuine fighter, a remarkable person endowed with exceptional personal qualities.
(Mr. Belonogov, USSR)
Nora Astorga Gadea's wide-ranging knowledge, particularly of the law, knowledge that was recognized by the award of a doctorate, made it possible for her to cope brilliantly with the responsible tasks she had to carry out in high Government posts. At the Ministry of Justice, the Foreign Ministry - indeed, everywhere - this energetic and ardent revolutionary was motivated by a passionate desire to promote the progress and well-being of her people and by a boundless love for her people which sustained her to the end of her regrettably short life.
One can only feel inspired by the dignity and bravery with which Nora Astorga, who faced a severe illness all alone, continued to carry out her duties, giving her strength to the cause of the Nicaraguan people and for a glorious and peaceful future for that people, right up to her last day.
The last years of the life of Nora Astorga were closely related to the work of the United Nations. I am sure that representatives present remember her not only as a skilled leader of the Nicaraguan delegation at sessions of the General Assembly, who proved to be a skilled orator and showed a mastery of political dialogue, but also as an active participant in the numerous meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement. One can say with every justification that here at the United Nations her name is linked with the implementation of the noble principles of the policy of the non-aligned countries.
While paying tribute to the great and energetic work done by Nora Astorga as a diplomat, one cannot overlook the striking fact that at the same time she remained a caring mother, who gave her children in her free time the full warmth of her heart.
On behalf of the Group of East European Countries, I request that the Nicaraguan delegation convey to the Government of Nicaragua and the family of Nora Astorga our most sincere deep condolences.
(Mr. Belonogov, USSR)
On behalf of the Group of East European States, I also wish to express our deep condolences to the delegation of Ireland on the death of the former United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, Sean MacBride, Honoi ary President of the World Federation of United Nations Associations and a distinguished Irish political and public figure, diplomat and jurist. It was through his vigorous efforts in the noble cause of a settlement to the Namibian question, as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, that it proved possible in 1976 to open in Lusaka the United Nations Institute for Namibia and for the United Nations to take a number of concrete steps to bring about a practical solution to that problem.
It is noteworthy that in whatever official post Sean MacBride occupied, at home or abroad , his desire to uphold highly humanitarian principles in the practice of diplomacy was always evident. Those principles were primarily those of peace, justice and the friendship of peoples, his dedication to which were manifested in his frequent participation in international forums of peace-loving forces and in international movements and organizations struggling for peace and disarmament. It is no accident that for those reasons he had the great honour of being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the international Lenin Peace Prize for the strengthening of peace among peoples. The glowing pages of Sean MacBride's biography show he was a man who generously gave his own strength to serve the interests of his people and to implement the noble purposes of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Belize, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. TILLETT (Belize) ; It is appropriate that we pause for a few minutes today to recognize the life and contribution of Mr. Sean MacBride. His career, both in his native land of Ireland and in the international community, was illustrious. Before coming to the United Nations he distinguished himself in
(Mr. Tillett, Belize) service to his country. Among his many contributions to Ireland, he served as Minister for External Affairs. In any nation that is one of the highest positions in Government.
Ireland has lost a great son, and so has the international community. Mr. MacBride was well known for presiding over the Commission on the Study of Communications Problems and writing the book "Many Voices, One World" as a result. He was also well known for winning the Nobel Peace Prize and the international Lenin Peace Prize and for his campaign for Namibian independence.
On behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I offer to Mr. MacBride's family and friends and to his Government and people our sincere condolences.
Mr. President, on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I thank you for including a tribute to Her Excellency Nora Astorga on this occasion.
After a long struggle against cancer, Nora Astorga died two weeks ago. She bore her illness well, with such strength and grace that many who worked with her did not even know she was ill.
We live in a time when materialism and greed characterize a large section of humanity. Personal riches and self-aggrandizement have become the primary purpose of living. In such a world, there is no room for a cause. Nora Astorga lived in this time, but portrayed a new era. She did not have to become a revolutionary. The oppression by the Somoza regime and the poverty of Nicaraguans had little effect on her. Hers was a wealthy family, a family that was associated with, and favoured by, the Somoza regime. As a result, she was able to study sociology at the Catholic University in Washington DC, and to complete her law degree at the University of Managua. She could have joined the Somoza regime and helped to oppress her fellow Nicaraguans. But Nora Astorga chose differently, she chose to join the Sandinista guerrilla movement to free Nicaragua of the Somoza oppression.
(Mr. Tillett, Belize)
We here at the United Nations knew Nora Astorga as Her Excellency the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations; kind, friendly, beautiful, active, hardworking and a defender of Nicaragua and the principles of the Non-Aligned Movement.
To her people and Government she was known as a heroine of the revolution, a leader of guerrillas, chief special prosecutor of members of the Somoza regime's National Guard, Deputy Foreign Minister, representative to Contadora, and the voice of Nicaragua at the United Nations and many other international organizations and conferences. U.S. News & World Report paid this tribute to her:
"Her life turned into a legend after she abandoned family and privilege to become a jungle guerrilla leader, chief prosecutor of 6,000 'war criminals' and, in 1986, Ambassador to the U. N. "
(Mr. Tillett, Belize)
The New York Times recorded her defence against critics of the Sandinista Government as follows*.
"Revolutions are not exportable like Coca-Cola or paperbacks or something like that. You don’t produce it internally and send it away. Revolutions are made in a country when the conditions in that particular country are for a process of change."
Last Wednesday, in a solemn ceremony, the Latin American and Caribbean Group paid tribute to Nora Astorga. Numerous Ambassadors took that opportunity to express their sense of loss and their admiration of Nora, as well as condolences to her family, people and Government. Among them was Ambassador Moya-Palencia of Mexico, who said: "Nora Astorga possessed the virtues of the new Latin American woman".
In this decade, when developing nations are struggling against poverty, rejecting interference in their internal affairs and defending their independence against economic and military colonialism, those virtues of the new Latin American woman will be needed not only in Latin America and the Caribbean, but in all developing nations throughout the world.
During her life, Nora called us to peace, solidarity and commitment to a cause. In her untimely death, she calls us to be prepared to meet our God.
On behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I extend to her family and friends, her people and her Government, our deepest condolences.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of New Zealand, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. McDOWELL (New Zealand): I speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States in paying tribute to the memory of Mr. Sean MacBride and Ms. Nora Astorga-Gadea. Both were known to us all. Both were revolutionaries in their own very different ways.
Sean MacBride has been called a revolutionary humanist. If there was a thread running through his remarkable career, it was a commitment to justice and equity for his fellow human beings and a compassion for the oppressed, not least in southern Africa.	'
He was one of those all too rare people who believe passionately in the importance of fostering understanding between the unlike and in bridging the gap between ideologies, cultures and ethnic groups. As Foreign Minister of Ireland, as co-founder of Amnesty International, as Secretary-General of the International Commission of Jurists, as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, and in a host of other roles, Sean MacBride worked for the peaceful resolution of conflict and for respect for human rights.
It has been said of Sean MacBride that if he was occasionally a figure of controversy then this may have been because "his thinking was too challenging, his perspective too broad for conventional wisdom". It is not difficult to imagine that Sean MacBride himself might have found that an acceptable epitaph.
We extend to his family and to the Government and people of the brother country of Ireland our condolences on the loss of a great son, but also our gratitude for Sean MacBride's personal contribution to the cause of human reconciliation and justice.
My delegation is suffering from a particular sense of loss at the untimely death of our colleague and bench-mate in this Hall, Ambassador Nora Astorga-Gadea, Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations.
There is always a particular poignance in the cutting down of a person in the full flower of her professional skills. Nora had earned the admiration of us all for the dedication, distinction and courage she brought to her demanding task here.
She came to New York with an already illustrious background as lawyer, revolutionary, widely travelled diplomat and Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua. Her quiet professional ism was immediately apparent. But it was as a warm and gracious colleague that she also made her mark here. We shall greatly miss her.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I extend our condolences to the Nicaraguan delegation, to the members of Nora Astorga's family and to the Government and people of Nicaragua on this sad and premature loss.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Bahrain who will speak on behalf of the Arab States.
Mr. AL—SHAKAR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, over which my delegation has the honour to preside this month, and on behalf of my delegation, it is a great honour for me to express to the people and Government of Ireland, and to the family of the late Sean MacBride, the former United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, our sincere and heartfelt condolences on this tragic loss.
With his death the United Nations has lost a prominent and active international personality, after a life full of giving spent in the service of peace, justice, freedom, respect for fundamental human rights and the non-use of force in the settlement of international disputes; and with his death Ireland has lost an illustrious son, a seasoned diplomat and a first-rate statesman.
The international community cannot but recall the great contributions he made during his service as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia from 1973 to 1977, and his prominent role in mobilizing concerted international efforts to achieve full and complete Namibian independence. Mr. MacBr ide's contributions will remain in our minds an example for us to follow, a source of inspiration to us all to do more in the service of peace and justice, human rights and the peaceful settlement of disputes, and to be tireless in our continued sincere efforts to achieve an independent, free and united Namibia.
The Arab Group requests the friendly delegation of Ireland to convey our sincere condolences to the bereaved family and to the people and Government of Ireland on this great loss.
The Arab Group also shares in the sorrow that you, Mr. President, and the Chairmen of regional groups have expressed on the untimely death of our dear departed colleague Ambassador Nora Astorga-Gadea, the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations. She commanded our great admiration and full respect. She was a beautiful and attractive young woman who possessed great diplomatic skill. We have often heard her in this Hall, enthusiastically defending, with devotion and sincerity, the interests of her country and the issues of world peace, justice and equality.
The passing of Anbassador Nora Astorga Gadea is a great loss that will be felt for a long time to come. We will always remember her as a talented and brave representative of Nicaragua and a good friend of the Arab Group.
Nora Astorga Gadea remained a brave fighter in both word and deed until the very end of her great life. The Assembly will long remember her - not only as a very competent, talented and prominent representative of her country in the Organization, but also as an illustrious and gifted human being whose unique human qualities earned her the sympathy of all in the Organization. She will certainly be missed by all her colleagues at the United Nations. We of the Arab Group cherish her memory and take pride in our long friendship with her.
On behalf of the Arab Group and the delegation of Bahrain, I extend to the friendly delegation of Nicaragua, to the Nicaraguan people and Government and to Ambassador Astorga Gadea's bereaved family our sincere and heartfelt condolences on her untimely death.
May her soul rest in peace. Unto God we all return.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of the United States, the host country.
Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): We have recently lost two distinguished former colleagues.
On behalf of the United States I wish to note with deep sorrow the death of Mr. Sean MacBride. We pay a tribute to him as a world renowned crusader for human rights and as a co-founder of Amnesty International. He was in the forefront of the campaigning on behalf of political prisoners all around the world. As Foreign Minister of Ireland he carried out his duties with dignity and imagination. His lifelong advocacy of human rights earned him a Nobel Prize in 1974. As an Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations and as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, Mr. MacBride exhibited the same selfless dedication that
(Mr. Walters, United States) marked his endeavours on behalf of the Government of Ireland and international humanitarian organizations. I wish on behalf of my country to convey sincere condolences to the family of this extraordinary man.
On behalf of the United States I also wish to express sorrow at the untimely death of Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea, Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations. Ambassador Astorga was a dedicated representative of her country. She defended its interests and carried out her duties with dignity and spirit. Her ability to represent her country effectively in spite of her illness was a tribute to her character, grace and courage. She worked among us almost to the end. I also wish to express sincere condolences to the children and family of Ambassador Astorga and to the Government and delegation she served so ably with such dedication, brilliance and courage.
Mr. McDONAGH (Ireland): On behalf of the Irish delegation, Sir, I wish to express appreciation for your words of sympathy and condolence on the passing of Mr. Sean MacBride.
As Minister for External Affairs from 1948 to 1951, and in many other capacities, Sean MacBride played a prominent part in the political development of his country. He lived through demanding and testing years which posed difficult choices for so many of his generation. Although no stranger to controversy , he showed courage in following the tradition of his great parents, Maud Gonne and John MacBride. Across most of a century we can recall the verse of Yeats: "McDonagh and MacBride And Connolly and Pearse Now and in time to come Wherever green is worn Are changed, changed utterly".
In international affairs Sean MacBride was perceptive in his awareness of the position of newly independent countries, his efforts to bridge the gap between the East and the West and his belief in the force of justice in international
(Mr. McDonagh, Ireland) relations. He won regard as Chairman of Amnesty International, Secretary-General of the International Commission of Jurists, and United Nations Commissioner for Namibia. His contributions earned him the Nobel Peace Prize, the Lenin Peace Prize and other major international awards. He will indeed be remembered not only wherever green is worn but in every continent.
We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for your words and we appreciate the tributes paid to the memory of Sean MacBride by speakers representing all parts of the world at this meeting.
The Irish delegation would wish, too, to add their regrets to those expressed here today in connection with the passing of our respected Nicaraguan colleague, Nora Astorga Gadea. Her dedication and sincerity and the warmth of her personality became very clear to us during her relatively short time among us. She will be remembered not least for the courage and good cheer with which she faced the final challenge. May she rest in peace.
Mr. SEVILLA BOZA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish) : On behalf of the people and Government of Nicaragua, and also on behalf of her family and her colleagues in the Nicaraguan Mission to the United Nations, I should like to thank you, Sir, the Secretary-General and the representatives of the different regional groups for the tributes paid in the General Assembly this morning to the memory of our dear colleague and leader Ambassador Nora Astorga Gadea. Her physical passing is an irreparable loss to our country, but her example will always remain in the minds and hearts of present and future generations in our beloved Nicaragua.
(Mr. Sevilla Boza, Nicaragua)
For those of us who had the honour and privilege to know her and to work under her leadership, her life leaves us with vivid memories of a person who was an exemplar of dignity, sacrifice, strength, struggle, hard work, revolutionary consistency and an enormous love of her people, for which she wanted, above all else, peace and economic and social progress.
Nora Astorga was and shall remain always a heroine of the homeland and the revolution. Upon her death, the Government of Nicaragua granted her that honour in tribute to her work and her example.
In the diplomatic sphere her efforts were always aimed at preserving unity and achieving lasting peace in our long-suffering Central American region. The highest tribute we can pay to her memory is to continue to fight for that peace which she so dearly wanted for our peoples.
Nora had an infinite capacity to love, not only her Nicaraguan brothers and sisters, but everyone; Last December we saw this at the Christmas dinner at her home.
We wish once again to convey our deep thanks to all for this tribute to the memory of Ambassador Nora Astorga. Nora, our dear colleague and leader at Nicaragua's seat in the General Assembly: You will always be with us.
We should like in conclusion to extend our solidarity and condolences to the friendly delegation of Ireland in connection with the passing of Mr. Sean MacBride. As previous speakers have already said, he was one of the finest sons of that fraternal country.
AGENDA ITEM 121 (continued)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (A/42/925)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before turning to the item on our agenda for this morning, I should like, in keeping with the established
(The President) practice, to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/42/925, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General, in which he informs the General Assembly that 13 Member States are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under Article 19 of the Charter, "A Menfoer of the United Nations which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in the General Assentoly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding two full years."
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of that information? It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 136 (continued)
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RELATIONS WITH THE HOST COUNTRY: REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/42/915 and Add.l)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : In connection with this item, the General Assembly has before it two reports of the Secretary-General, issued in documents A/42/915 and A/42/915/Add.l.
As members are aware, on 18 February 1988 I received a letter (A/42/919) from the Permanent Representative of Bahrain who, in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab states, transmitted to me on behalf of the Arab States a request to resume the forty-second session of the General Assembly in order to consider further agenda item 136. On 22 February 1988 I received a letter (A/42/921) from the Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe who, in his capacity as Chairman of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, transmitted to me on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries a request along the same lines as the request of the Arab States. I have also received two letters of support for
(The President) members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in New York (A/42/922), and one from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, on behalf of the members of that Committee (A/42/924). 
Following consultations with the Chairmen of the regional groups and taking into account the concurrence of the overwhelming majority of members, I decided to resume today the forty-second session of the General Assembly. 
I should like to recall that on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee the General Assembly adopted resolution 42/210 B, and by paragraph 4 of that resolution decided "to keep this matter under active review". 
In the light of the consultations held before this resumption, it is my understanding that the Assembly wishes to proceed with the consideration of this item in plenary meeting. If I hear no objection, the Assembly will proceed accordingly. 
It was so decided. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call first on the Secretary-General. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: In two reports that I have made to the General Assembly on the matter before it, dated 10 and 25 February 1988 respectively, I have provided a factual and full account of the efforts I have undertaken as the chief custodian of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement to ensure that the present arrangements in New York for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which was granted Permanent Observer status by the General Assembly in 1974, are maintained. 

As Member States will be aware, I and my colleagues have been deeply involved in such efforts since well before the adoption of General Assembly resolution 42/210 B on 17 December last. Our efforts were redoubled following the adoption of that resolution and have been undertaken at every level of the Government of the United States. It is a matter of considerable regret to me that these efforts have thus far failed to bring about a solution to the problem and that it has proved necessary to reconvene the General Assembly for this purpose. 
I believe that the reports I have issued are self-explanatory. I should like, however, to take this occasion to state once again the position of substance I have taken in my contacts and communications with the host country. 
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO) is an invitee of the United Nations by virtue of General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and the United States is, as a consequence of the Headquarters Agreement, under an obligation to permit duly accredited PLO personnel to enter and remain in the United States in order to carry out their official functions. This is the position I have taken from the very beginning, and it is endorsed in resolution 42/210 B. It is my hope that even now it will prove possible for the host country to reconcile its domestic legislation with its international obligations in such a manner as to ensure full respect for the spirit and the letter of the Headquarters Agreement. 
However, should the host country consider that it must give effect to the legislation, then I trust that it will recognize the existence of a dispute between the United States and the United Nations and agree to the utilization of the dispute settlement procedure provided for in section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement, so that the dispute can be definitively settled in a reasoned and lawful manner. 

Let me say in closing that the question the General Assembly is taking up today has immediate and profound importance for the United Nations as a party, together with the united States of America, to the Headquarters Agreement, which governs the functioning of the Organization in the United States. The integrity and viability of the Headquarters Agreement, I should recall, has until now withstood the test of more than 40 years of practice. 
That being said, I should like to urge that attention remain focused on the particular issue which has led to the reconvening of this session of the General Assembly. That issue relates to the substantive and procedural obligations of the host country under the Headquarters Agreement. It is my hope that the debate in this Assembly will be conducted having regard to this specific issue and with the measured deliberation that the subject-matter warrants. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before calling on the next speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate be closed today at 5 p. m. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided. 
It was so decided. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I therefore request representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names as soon as possible. 
I now call on the representative of Bahrain in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. AL-SHAKAR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): At the request of the Group of Arab States, over which my delegation has the honour to preside for this month, I should like at the outset to express our sincere thanks and deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your immediate response to treat this vital question of utmost importance to us; your personal presence here has added special importance to the convening of the General Assembly. The Group of Arab States owes
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) you a debt of gratitude and appreciation for the efforts you made, the inconvenience incurred in your having to travel and the time you spent in order to conduct immediate negotiations and consultations to reconvene this session. It is a pleasure to see you once again presiding, at the beginning of 1988, over the work of the General Assembly at its resumed forty-second session after your huge success during last year’s proceedings. During your presidency you have given proof of your able and wise leadership in guiding the work of the General Assembly. We are confident that, thanks to your wealth of knowledge, expertise and proverbial diplomatic skills, you will guide the work of our resumed session successfully.
On behalf of the Group of Arab States I should like to express to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuellar, our sincere appreciation for his valuable and full report. We would like sincerely to thank him, as well as Mr. Carl-August Fleischhauer, Under-Secretary-General of the Office of Legal Affairs and the Legal Counsel of the United Nations, for their efforts aimed at a satisfactory resolution of this question according to the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement.
Out of concern for the need to maintain the integrity and independence of the Organization and because of our fear of any direct or indirect interference by any branch of the Government or authorities of the host country, the members of the Group of Arab States submitted a request that the forty-second session of the General Assembly be reconvened in order to resume consideration of agenda item 136, entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country". The Islamic Group and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, as well as regional groups, have supported our request? the non-aligned countries have submitted a similar request to the General Assembly. This attests to the utmost importance given by the international community to this
(Mr. Al-Shakar , Bahrain) question, which represents a standing dispute between the United Nations and the country in which the Headquarters of this Organization is located.
On 10 January 1946 the General Assembly opened its first session in London and adopted numerous important resolutions, among which was resolution 22 A and B (I) of 13 February 1946. That resolution concerns the privileges and immunities of the United Nations, as well as the negotiations conducted with the United States authorities on the establishment of a permanent Headquarters for the United Nations in that country. At its second session the General Assembly adopted resolution 169 (II) of 31 December 1947 on the "Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations", signed on 26 June 1947.
The purpose of that Agreement was to organize relations between the international Organization and the host country, including the details of the functioning of the Organization in the host country. But, equally, it is a beacon that shows the way to deal with many possible disputes and differences between the United Nations and the Permanent and Observer Missions accredited to the Organization over the past 40 years.
Because of that Agreement, or through the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, the United Nations and the Permanent and Observer Missions accredited to the United Nations have been able to conclude conventions in accordance with its letter and spirit. Those conventions have made it possible for the Organization and the representatives of the Permanent and Observer Member States accredited to the Organization to overcome, in co-ordination with authorities of the United States of America, many difficulties faced by those representatives.
Headquarters agreements are not innovations in international relations.
Indeed, they are much more common than international treaties so far as the establishment of the headquarters of an international organization in a certain country is concerned. The purpose of headquarters agreements concluded between host countries and international organizations, including the Headquarters Agreement concluded between the United Nations and the United States, is to define the legal status of the international organization in the territory of the host country.
The Headquarters Agreement concluded between the United Nations and the host country - the United States of America - was drafted in order to organize the relations between, on the one hand, United Nations and the Member States, non-Member States, bodies, authorities and organizations invited by the United Nations to participate in its work and, on the other hand, host country. Thus, it
37
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) is a crucial agreement, of utmost importance for the independence and integrity of the United Nations.
The legal status of the United Nations in the territory of any country in which it has a headquarters, in accordance with an agreement, precludes any unilateral action by the host country, such as enacting legislation or using excuses to put pressure on the Organization or its Member states or observer States because of controversial political questions, bilateral or otherwise, between the host country and the countries and organizations represented in the United Nations. If anything like that were to be allowed, it would act to the detriment of and be at the expense of good relations within the framework of agreements between the host country and the United Nations. It is inadmissible for the legislative, judicial or executive authorities of the host country to adopt any measures infringing in any degree or to any extent that host country's obligations under the Headquarters Agreement.
We must repeat that the legal capacity of the United Nations has been recognized de facto. The United Nations acquired that capacity under Articles of the Charter and various agreements concluded with several States and other organizations. Article 104 of the Charter stipulates that
"The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its Members such legal capacity as may be necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfilment of its purposes".
Paragraph 1 of Article 105 of the Charter confirms that
"The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the fulfilment of its purposes".
38
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) Paragraph 2 of Article 105 states that
"Representatives of the Members of the United Nations and officials of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization".
And paragraph 3 of Article 105 reads:
"The General Assembly may make recommendations with a view to determining the details of the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or may propose conventions to the Members of the United Nations for this purpose". The International Court of Justice stressed that the United Nations has that legal capacity. It did so in its well-known advisory opinion of 11 April 1949 concerning reparation for injuries suffered by officials of the United Nations during the exercise of their functions. The Court issued that opinion upon the request of the General Assembly following the assassination in 1948 of Count Folke Bernadotte, the United Nations Mediator in Palestine, at the hands of a Zionist gang. That advisory opinion recognized that the United Nations has legal capacity vis-à-vis Member States and non-Member States, and that that capacity is not contingent on recognition by Member States and non-Member States of that capacity. In another part of the advisory opinion, the Court affirmed that, under the rules of international law, the Organization must be deemed to have powers which, though not expressly provided in the Charter, are essential to the performance of its duties.
There is no doubt but that the States Members of the Organization play an important part that cannot be disregarded. It was those States that founded the United Nations. They participate in the formulation of its collective will. They bear the responsibility of ensuring a climate propitious to the effective Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
functioning of the Organization. Hence, it is inadmissible for the host country -regardless of the degree of the support, including financial support, it provides to the Organization - to exercise pressure on the Organization and on other parties accredited to it to induce them to deviate from the framework of the collective will.
It is unacceptable for the host country to impose any legislation or law contravening the goals and purposes of the United Nations. The host country has no right to close the permanent mission of a Member State, of a non-member State having observer status or of a national liberation movement accredited to the united Nations, invoking the requirements of its own national security, particularly since many States Members, non—members of the United Nations and organizations are not represented in the host country, the United States of America, but are represented at United Nations Headquarters.
According to the Headquarters Agreement, therefore, the law recently enacted does not give the host country the right to close any observer or permanent mission or to prevent it from exercising its representative role in the United Nations, including its establishing a permanent headquarters in the host country. The Agreement makes it incumbent upon the host country to facilitate the entry into and residence in the United States of those authorized to participate in meetings of bodies of the Organization, to facilitate their departure from the country, and to refrain from erecting obstacles that affect the independence of the United Nations or the representatives of States and organizations and hamper the smooth and easy exercise of their functions.
It is unacceptable for the relationship between the Organization and the States or bodies accredited to it to be dependent upon the whims and caprices of the host country. Here, it is of the utmost important to reaffirm the independence of the United Nations and its integrity and to oppose by all means the host country's attempt to use to its awn ends the Charter, the Headquarters Agreement and other international conventions and instruments - in particular the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 1969 and the 1975 Vienna Convention concerning the representation of States in relations with international organizations. It is
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) inadmissible under any circumstances to allow the host country unilaterally to change the legal status of the international Organization. If that should happen, the very nature of the Organization would be made subject to the legislation of the host country and would be continuously at the mercy of political dianges and currents in the host country and that country's public opinion. Certainly the United Nations cannot be subjected to such pressures and cannot, as an independent Organization, accept or bear such pressures and influences, which would undermine its performance and activities and the purposes and principles of the Charter.
Therefore, in the present instance, we believe that the united Nations must protest and have recourse to the International Court of Justice because of the pressure and unilateral actions of the host country, which would weaken or disrupt the United Nations ability independently and neutrally to exercise its functions, to carry out its activities and to fulfil its goals and purposes in accordance with the Headquarters Agreement.
Agreements and treaties are concluded with the consent of the parties to them. It is therefore important to note that the host country entered into an agreement to respect its obligations under the articles of the Headquarters Agreement. That applies to all its various authorities - executive, legislative and judicial. The host country must fully and strictly respect the spirit and letter of the Agreement and avoid taking any measures that would disrupt or undermine its legal obligations under the Headquarters Agreement.
The current dispute between the United Nations and the host country must therefore be viewed within the framework of General Assembly resolution 42/210 B. Section 27 of the Headquarters Agreement states:
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) "This agreement shall be construed in the light of its primary purpose to enable the United Nations ... fully and efficiently to discharge its responsibilities and fulfil its purposes."
It is therefore natural that, in the full and efficient discharge of its responsibilities and purposes, the United Nations should enjoy the privileges and immunities that guarantee its independence and the smooth exercise of its international functions. This can be achieved primarily by non-application of national legislation enacted by any Member State - in particular the legislation of the host country that now confronts us - that would undermine the functioning of the United Nations and its independence and integrity as an international Organization and damage the rule of equality that must prevail in relations between Member Sta tes.
The Headquarters Agreement provides that missions and officials accredited to the United Nations are not subject to the national legislation of the host country with regard to monetary, customs and other regulations concerning the entry of aliens, freedom of movement and the right to residency in its national territory, and that it is responsible for the convening of meetings and the establishment of headquarters for those missions, whether they are permanent or observer missions. The 1969 Vienna Convention reaffirmed this in its articles 26, 27 and 46.
It will be useful to state here some agreed principles of international law. First, pacta sunt servanda, that is, agreements must be observed. The contractual nature and character of the Headquarters Agreement must be respected. Secondly, no party to a treaty shall invoke its own national laws as an excuse to fail to implement it. Thus, the United Nations and the United States of America, the host country, as parties to the Headquarters Agreement, must fulfil their obligations under that Agreement in good faith. Thus the host country cannot shirk the
obligations enshrined in the Agreement in the event that those obligations run counter to current or earlier legislation. Thirdly, one of the accepted principles of international law and the law of treaties is the fulfilment of obligations deriving from respect for international conventions. No host country may commit itself to a national law that would alter those obligations.
Therefore, an international convention is above national law. International treaties and conventions and international law are sovereign and have primacy over national law. That is internationally accepted.
It should be recalled that when the General Assembly examined the matter last December in a search for a solution or to take preventive action - at a time when the legislative branch of the United States Government was pursuing legislation that would prohibit the PLO's having an Observer Mission here at Headquarters, thus impeding its carrying out of its official tasks as an invitee of the United Nations, including participation in sessions of the General Assembly and the work of the United Nations on the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East - it was said that we were putting the cart before the horse. The General Assembly was requested to take no action*, it was asked to be patient and wait instead of rushing to adopt a resolution, because the legislation had not yet become effective. But today it is almost certain that it will be enforced by 21 March this year, unless the United Nations faces up to it. In addition to being interference in the affairs of the United Nations, the legislation infringes upon the independence and freedom of the United Nations.
The Arab Group looks forward to the Member States' fulfilling their responsibilities in reaffirming the need for the host country, the United States, fully to respect the Headquarters Agreement, to meet its international obligations under the Agreement and to take all the necessary steps to prevent the enactment of any law that would affect the status of the PLO's Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York, because that Mission is covered by the Headquarters Agreement, which provides for the enjoyment by the PLO of freedom, privileges and immunities as a representative organization to the United Nations.
Last December the Arab Group expressed the hope that the Government of the host country, the United States, would reconsider its legislation, so that it would be in conformity with the position of the majority of Member States and the international community, reflected in General Assembly resolution 42/210 B, adopted by a majority of 145, with only one vote against, that of Israel. The Arab Group has no desire to enter into a discussion and analysis of the American position in all its details, as put forward by the Secretary-General in his report, but we wonder about the credibility of the host country in fulfilling its responsibilities and obligations under the Headquarters Agreement. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that we very much question the host country's credibility.
It is true that the United States, the host country, has not yet rejected international arbitration on the closing of the PLO Observer Mission to the United Nations. I repeat that that Mission is covered by the Headquarters Agreement. The United States has not yet decided to close the Mission, according to American law. But the facts lead us to question the American Administration's sincerity and firmness in making serious efforts to find a satisfactory and acceptable solution under the Headquarters Agreement.
We would have hoped that resolution 42/210 B would be a stimulus and incentive to the executive branch of the Government of the host country to make efforts to nullify the legislation adopted by the United States Congress and signed by the President. We would have hoped that in these circumstances the host country would refer the dispute to arbitration, in accordance with section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement.
It is true that the United States Administration has responded positively to the Secretary-General's efforts to resolve the question satisfactorily, but it did not give the matter the necessary priority and the urgency it deserves after the signing of the law on 22 December 1987, and it was not sincere in using the 90-day grace period before the law’s enactment to rectify the situation.
The Arab Group knows very well that the death sentence handed down on the PLO Observer Mission in the host country is part of a feverish Zionist campaign against the Palestinian people and its sole, legitimate representative. The campaign, which started with the prohibition of any contact between representatives of the PLO and officials of the United States, is aimed at discrediting the just right of the Palestinian people to resist the Zionist settler colonialism and the foreign occupation of its land and the exercise of its right to self-determination, a legitimate right of all peoples, enshrined in the United Nations Charter and numerous United Nations resolutions.
It is very surprising and strange that the law was passed by the host country, which has often upheld the right to freedom and self-determination of colonial peoples suffering under the yoke of foreign occupation. At the same time, it denies the Palestinian people its right to continue the struggle for its freedom and the exercise of its right to self-determination, under the leadership of its sole, legitimate representative, the PLO, doing so by making the bogus accusation that the PLO encourages terrorism. It has not given the accused, the PLO, the right to defend its cause and to defend itself against that charge.
The law aims at thwarting the successes of the Palestinian people in its just struggle to regain its legitimate rights, repeatedly recognized by the General Assembly.
By resolution 3 23 7 (XXIX) of 2 2 November 19 74 and other resolutions, the General Assembly has invited the representative of the PLO to participate in all the efforts, deliberations and conferences convened under united Nations auspices on the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East, on an equal footing with other concerned parties, in order to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and just peace in the Middle East.
The ongoing popular uprising in occupied Palestinian territories is a strong response in defence of the PLO; it is rallying firm support for the PLO as the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. In speaking on behalf of the Arab Group, I cannot but hail and bless this massive popular uprising, this epic struggle which is now in its third month, fueled by children throwing stones and by an unlimited number of martyrs who sacrifice themselves for the soil of occupied Palestine. This immortal epic of resistance against an army of occupation is the creation of a helpless people armed only with its will and its resolve to resist the bloody hand of the occupier in order to achieve its legitimate rights to freedom, independence and self-determination and the establishment of its own independent State.
The events now taking place in the Palestinian territories reflect a legitimate struggle; they are in response to the American law aimed at discrediting the legitimate struggle waged by the Palestinian people, under the leadership of its sole and legitimate representative, the PLO.
Many representatives have raised doubts on the probability of success in resolving the dispute amicably, having discovered the real reason behind the enactment of that law. We have been told in the corridors of the United Nations that the weak response of the United States Administration to that law is due to the requirements of the presidential campaign, to the frenzied race between the candidates. Thus, we the Member States in this Organization are asked to subject ourselves to the influences of the host country and to accept that the resolutions and independence of the United Nations be subordinated to political currents and tendencies in the host country.
The Secretary-General's reports in documents A/42/915 and A/42/915/Add. 1 have been drafted with meticulous care. They are not confined merely to a faithful and realistic analysis of the various aspects of the dispute and its origins} they also provide the optimal methods to arrive at a satisfactory, acceptable solution in keeping with section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement and in conformity with international practices and instruments agreed by all. The points made in the Secretary-General's reports and its contents are crystal clear because they are based on legal foundations enshrined in the Headquarters Agreement concluded between the United States of America, the host country, and the United Nations more than 40 years ago.
The fact is that a dispute has arisen and that the host country must do a great deal to fulfil its obligations and resolve it. This will be achieved only if the United States of America abrogates the law and adopts a logical policy in conformity with its international obligations under the Headquarters Agreement.
The reports' contents indicate to us that there is an urgent need to find an acceptable solution, all the more so since the date of enforcement of that law draws near. The Arab Group has no doubt that the General Assembly will resolve this important question in an objective and unbiased manner in keeping with the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement. The Arab Group believes that the ideal way to solve this dispute is through the mechanism proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 9 of his report (A/42/915), namely, for both parties to accept arbitration provided for in section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement.
Out of its sincere desire to settle the dispute amicably and to avoid any confrontation between the United Nations and the host country, the Arab Group feels that the General Assembly would be wise, at its resumed session, to adopt a resolution calling upon the host country to accept settlement of the dispute
.	(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain)
as provided for in section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement and requesting the Secretary-General to continue his valuable efforts, take the necessary measures to initiate settlement of the dispute in accordance with section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement and submit a report to the General Assembly on developments at the earliest date possible before enactment of the law.
On that basis, we call upon the Government of the United States of America, the host country, to heed the international will and accept the resolution of that dispute, according to its obligations, by nominating an arbitrator on its behalf as soon as possible following upon the constructive step of the Secretary-General of the United Nations in appointing an arbitrator on behalf of the United Nations. Failure by the host country to accept that amicable settlement would be an act towards undermining, frustrating and aborting the Headquarters Agreement.
The Arab Group believes that, in order to maintain the independence and the integrity of the United Nations, it is important to have recourse to the International Court of Justice and seek to obtain a legal opinion defining the character and nature of the current dispute in order to settle it according to the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement and international norms. We must seek an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice as far as the applicability of the Headquarters Agreement in this dispute, in particular as far as the arbitration process is concerned, and about the measures necessary to maintain the status quo while awaiting a final judgement from the Court, in the hope that those measures would expedite a satisfactory settlement of the dispute.
We hope that the host country will express its readiness to accept an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on this question and on the dispute, which has now reached a critical stage. The Arab Group looks forward to the General Assembly's shouldering its responsibilities and taking a common and unified stand, in the same way as it did when adopting resolution 42/210 B.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
JSM/td
A/42/PV.100
56	■
Thus the General Assembly might wish to adopt the reasonable solution for the dispute proposed by the Secretary-General, which would be ideal. Let us follow the path he has defined. Will the host country agree to do so?
The Arab countries will spare no effort to work jointly with all the other Member States of the Organization to follow that path and arrive at an acceptable solution to this important and vital question,	.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In accordance with General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, I now call on the Observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)J: At the outset, Sir, permit me to thank you for having convened this resumed session of the General Assembly to address developments affecting relations of the United Nations with the host country, the United States of America.
I wish to extend our thanks and great appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts as demonstrated in his reports in documents A/42/915, dated 10 February 1988 and A/42/915/Add.1 of 27 February 1988. Both reports reveal the perseverance of the Secretary-General, as true custodian, and his determination to preserve the Headquarters Agreement and to seek assurances that the Organization will be free and independent to carry out its smooth functioning, free from domination by the host country. His keen interest and concern that the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement be respected and adhered to is very clear.
The General Assembly is meeting not in a vacuum or in isolation from the events and visitations inflicted upon the Palestinian people inside occupied Palestinian territory and even here. The Assembly is meeting at a time when Israel, the occupying Power, has been condemned for its brutal practices against our people but still persists in its policy of breaking bones, causing pregnant
Palestinian women to abort involuntarily through beatings and/or the inhaling of gas, and the shooting, killing and injuring of hundreds of unarmed Palestinian civilians. The repressive fascist methods of the Israeli armed forces and the colonial settlers are brought to us by the hour through the television screen, radio announcements and the printed media. The aim is the realization of Israel's wish to "transfer" the Palestinians from their homes into the wilderness, into the desert. The term "transfer" is a misnomer applied here to mean the elimination of the Palestinian people. The Security Council has addressed the grave situation, but no concrete action was taken in response to the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 605 (1987).
The negative vote of the united States, a permanent member of the Council, proved to be the obstacle, and our peoples' request for protection against the brutal repressive measures of the occupying Power, Israel, was turned down despite the almost unanimous support of the international community. The Government of the United States thought it was not timely. A few more hundred innocent and unarmed Palestinian civilians could be sacrificed while the United States is engaged in attempting to enforce its Pax Americana-Pax Israeli on the area. Our heroic people, in their uprising, led the way and signalled a clear-cut rejection of the plan, which attempts to replace self-determination by self-administration - a plan to ensure the near-perpetuation of Israeli occupation of our homeland. What our people rejected was a plan also aimed at fragmenting the Palestinian people into two categories: those on Palestinian soil under occupation, and those denied entry into their homeland, namely those in dispersion.
Let me make it clear here that the Palestine Liberation Organization has repeatedly expressed its willingness to meet with the representatives of the
(Mr. Terzi, PLO) Government of the United States in any Arab or foreign capital, including Washington, D.C., to address the issue of a comprehensive and just peace that will guarantee the attainment and exercise of our national rights of freedom and independence based on the principles of the Charter and all the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and under the auspices of the United Nations. The Palestine Liberation Organization has reiterated that any Palestinian delegation will be comprised of both Palestinians from the occupied Palestinian territory and Palestinians from the "Dispersion". We are simply one people, with one destiny, one aim, one leadership and one will.
The Assembly has convened at a time when the Secretary of State, Mr. George Shultz, has read out a statement in Jerusalem "extending a hand to the Palestinians". The media reported that Mr. Shultz said, "I had hoped to hear firsthand from leading Palestinians about your aspirations and your point of view." Mr. Shultz is on a mission pontificating. But Mr. Shultz could not recall that on 27 January 1988, exactly one month earlier, he did receive an appeal — hand delivered to him - asking for his personal active involvement, and that of the United States Government, in the peace process. I shall quote from that appeal. It says?
"Our people are in urgent need of immediate international protection from the brutality of Israel's military authorities which have been unleashed against our unarmed civilian population to kill, maim and terrorize our women and children. TO this end, we hope the international community will immediately authorize the provision of an international force to intervene in the occupied territories, to whose trusteeship our population can be delivered as a first step towards the convening of an International Peace Conference.
JSM/td
This conference is to be held under the auspices of the united Nations and will be attended by all concerned parties to the conflict, including, foremost, the Palestinian nation through its legitimate representative, the
PLO."
The appeal continues,
"During the past few weeks the occupied territories have witnessed a popular uprising against Israel’s occupation and its oppressive measures. This uprising has so far resulted in the martyrdom of tens of our people, the wounding of hundreds more and the imprisonment of thousands of unarmed civilians.
"This uprising has come to affirm further our people's unbreakable commitment to its national aspirations. These aspirations include our people's firm national rights to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent State on our national soil, under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization as our sole, legitimate representative. The uprising also comes as further proof of our indefatigable spirit and our rejection of the sense of despair which has begun to creep into the minds of some who claim that the uprising is the result of despair".
That appeal was signed by Palestinian nationalist institutions and personalities from the West Bank and Gaza.
Certainly, the appeal was ignored, and the efforts to impose the Pax Americana-Pax Israeliana on our people continue.
But the Assembly has reconvened with a specific purpose, namely to consider action by the United States, the host country, targeting as its first victim the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York. Members will recall that on 17 December 1987, by its resolution 42/210 B, adopted almost unanimously, the General Assembly reiterated that the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York was covered by the provisions of the Headquarters
Agreement and should be enabled to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional facilities, and that the personnel of the Mission should be enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out their official functions.
In adopting that resolution the General Assembly was guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant provisions of the Charter. In particular, the General Assembly was guided by the miscellaneous provisions of Chapter XVI. Thus, with the adoption of resolution 42/210 B, and in conformity with the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement of 26 June 1947, the host country - the United States - is under obligation to abide by its treaty obligations under the Agreement. In our opinion, the question is one of compliance with the provisions of the Agreement and international law, and not a question of a domestic Law, namely Title X of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989.
In his report, the Secretary-General tells the Assembly that he had informed the host country - the other party to the Agreement - that
"it had to be concluded that a dispute existed betwen the United Nations and the United States concerning the interpretation and application of the Headquarters Agreement". (A/42/915, para. 5) We are cognizant of the fact that the United States has neither denied nor confirmed the existence of a dispute. But we are informed by the Secretary-General that
"the United States was not in a position and not willing to enter formally into the dispute settlement procedure under section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement [and that] the United States was still evaluating the situation and had not yet concluded that a dispute existed ... at the present time", (para. 6)
The information provided by the Secretary-General indicated that the United States was postponing or delaying admission both of the existence of a dispute and of the need to invoke operation of the provisions of section 21 of the Agreement, their reason being that the legislation in question had not yet been implemented.
The Secretary-General further informs the Assembly that
"The Executive Branch was still examining the possibility of interpreting the law in conformity with the United States obligations under the Headquaters Agreement regarding the PLO Observer Mission, as reflected in the arrangements currently made for that Mission, or alternatively of providing assurances that would set aside the ninety-day period for the coming into force of the legislation", (para. 6)
Permit me to state here that we fully concur with the position of the United Nations, that the question was one of compliance with international law. The Headquarters Agreement is a binding international instrument, and the United States is under an obligation to abide by it. The legislation which has been enacted violates that obligation.
Let us recall that on 30 March 1950 the International Court of Justice stated that
"whether there exists an international dispute is a matter for objective determination. The mere denial of the existence of a dispute does not prove its non-existence."
Moreover, the Court held that
"Either party is obligated, at the request of the other party, to co-operate in constituting the Commission, in particular by approving its representative. Otherwise the method of settlement by Commissions provided for in the Treaties would completely fail in its purpose."
In the case under review - namely the position of the Government of the United States vis-à-vis the applicability of the Headquarters Agreement - the decision of the Court explicitly places the United States under obligation to put into operation the dispute settlement procedure, in conformity with section 21 of the Agreement, and to constitute the tribunal of arbitration. It is natural that this should become the case as the United States Government has not shown any inclination to resolve the problem in an amicable way.
The late Professor James Garner wrote in 1935 that "A treaty is to be interpreted in the light of the general purpose it is intended to serve”. The central purpose or objective of the Headquarters Agreement is clearly to ensure the independence of the United Nations, as a public body representing the world community, from domination by the host country, subject only to the legitimate security interests of the host country, while providing an appropriate Headquarters area. It is in the context of that objective that section 21 must be interpreted.
Let me digress for a moment to address this legislation: the Act. His Excellency the President of the United States said the following on 22 December 1987, when he signed the Act:
"Certain issues raised by its provisions, however, require comment. Section 1003 of the Act prohibits the establishment anywhere within the jurisdiction of the United States of an office 'to further the interests' of the Palestine Liberation Organization. The effect of this provision is to prohibit diplomatic contact with the PLO. I am signing this Act only because I have no intention of establishing diplomatic relations with the PLO, as a consequence of which no actual constitutional conflict is created by this provision. ''
On 23 December 1987, a spokesman for the Secretary of State of the United States stated that the provisions of the Act concerning the Palestine Liberation Organization Observer Mission may infringe on the President's constitutional authority and, if implemented, "would be contrary to our international legal obligations under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement".
A bona fide interpretation of the Act in conformity with the interpretation and intention of the President of the United States will of necessity lead us to believe that the Act is not applicable to the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York and consequently has no effect whatsoever on the Headquarters Agreement.
However, this simplistic and honest-to-God interpretation would have spared the General Assembly and the Secretary-General and the parties concerned - namely, the host country, the United States, and the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York - all this concern and these efforts. This same interpretation would have also exempted the Headquarters Agreement and the parties covered by the Agreement from applicability of the Act. This same interpretation would have also asserted good faith in international relations on the part of the host country.
Regrettably, on 27 January 1988 the Legal Counsel of the United Nations was informed that
"the United States was not in a position and not willing to enter ... into the dispute settlement procedure under section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement ... because the legislation in question [the Act] had not yet been implemented". (A/42/915, para. 6)
This position by the host country revealed the total disregard for the interpretation and intention of the President of the United States as expressed on 22 December 1987, and it also revealed some not-so-honest intentions of the Administration. So the question now is more than just one of compliance with international law, it is one of the absence of good faith as well.
Let us diverge once again.
When we read through the so-called Grassley Amendment, which became Amendment No. 940, which is numbered 1003 under the Act - and here I shall refrain from
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Terzi, PLO) recalling the legislative history and how the amendment was passed in the Senate without going through due process and against the opposition of specifically the Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Pell, who expressed his will that the Congressional Record show on that voice vote "that I voted in the negative". Mr. Pell has also declared in the Senate, "I think the PLO office in New York had the right to be there because of a treaty we have with the United Nations". I should think that Mr. Pell, when speaking about the right of the PLO to have an office in New York, knew exactly what he was talking about.
Moreover, the draft or bill was, to our knowledge, never considered in the House. Again this is a matter of domestic concern, but we thought it might be of lelp to know the facts concerning the Grassley Amendment that eventually was signed into law.
A campaign of slander was being launched against the Palestine Liberation Organization to eliminate its presence in the ranks of representatives of the International community, thus facilitating the way for a settlement at the price of the rights of the Palestinian people, the principal party to the conflict, as the □eneral Assembly declared in its resolution 3210 (XXIX) .
It is a fact that some members of the United States Government are determined io maintain and escalate this campaign of slander based on falsehoods.
On the other hand, it is to be admitted that other members of the United itates Government were and are more responsible. The Congressional Record of the Senate includes a letter from the Secretary of State addressed to an honourable Senator and dated 29 January 1987 in which he says,
"The PLO Observer Mission in New York was established as a consequence of General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of November 22, 1974, which invited the PLO to participate as an observer in the sessions and work of the General Assembly. The PLO Observer Mission represents the PLO in the United Nations.
(Mr. Terzi, PLO) It is in no sense accredited to the United States. The United States has made clear that PLO Observer Mission personnel are present in the United States solely in their capacity as 'invitees' of the United Nations within the meaning of the Headquarters Agreement. While we therefore are under an obligation to permit PLO Observer Mission personnel to enter and remain in the United States to carry out their official functions at United Nations Headquarters, we retain the right to deny entry to, or expel, any individual PLO representative directly implicated in terror ist acts. It is moreover the policy of the United States to restrict the travel of members of the PLO Observer Mission to within a 25-mile radius of Columbus Circle".
On 5 November 1987 the Department of State addressed a memorandum to the honourable Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs in the House of Representatives. It reads in part as follows;
"The proposed legislation would also effectively require closure of the PLO Observer Mission in New York. Such a move would break a forty-year practice regarding observer missions by nations hosting United Nations bodies and could legitimately be viewed as inconsistent with our responsibilities under Sections 11-13 of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement. We could expect strong criticism in the United Nations, including from our friends. The United Nations could moreover refer the issue to the World Court, where we would probably lose and the PLO would reap a propaganda gain.
"The United States considered the fulfilment of its obligations under the Headquarters Agreement important to its relationship to the United Nations and its Member States. We believe it would be unwise to violate those obligations even with respect to organizations such as the PLO ...".
Thus it is clear that the host country was very much aware of the legislation and its consequences. The General Assembly, on 17 December 1987, reiterated that the Headquarters Agreement covers the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York and upheld the arrangement "to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional facilities, and that the personnel of the Mission should be enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out their official functions". (General Assembly resolution 42/210 B) Thus we see that the host country does admit that a dispute exists, even in its own recorded analysis of the situation. The Secretary-General, with his prudence and his concern for the smooth functioning of the United Nations in New York, sought from the host country an admission that a dispute exists arising from the applicability of the Act as against the applicability of the Headquarters Agreement. Such an admission was not forthcoming. This failure led to the invoking of the dispute settlement procedure under section 21 of the Agreement. Again the United States, the other party to the Agreement, failed to respond.
The General Assembly is now faced with a major issue. When one of the two parties to the Headquarters Agreement fails to honour its obligations - and specifically as stated in the remedial section, section 21 - the status of the Agreement should be considered.
Should it be decided that the Agreement should be preserved, the status of and current arrangements for the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York will also be preserved and assured, In the event that the host country, the United States, maintains its position of waiting until after "the implementation of the Act", the General Assembly is called upon now to take preventive steps and, in our opinion, to refer the matter to the International Court of Justice in any form it deems fit, with a view to seeking endorsement of the position of the General Assembly and that of the Secretary-General, obligating the host country to put into operation the remedial procedure in conformity with section 21 of the Agreement. In our opinion, the General Assembly should be prepared to resume once again to consider the situation in the event the threat of violation of the Agreement persists, and, as we hope, in the light of an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice on the eve of 21 March 1988 - and the closest time to that date is 18 March 1988.
In conclusion, the Assembly will also have to consider the fate of the Agreement and the consequences resulting from the failure of the host country to abide by it. Will the United Nations Headquarters in New York be in a position to continue operating in the absence of a respected and adhered-to Headquarters Agreement?
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, over which Kuwait has the honour of presiding, I extend our deep thanks to you, Mr. President, and to all those who supported the resumption of this session of the General Assembly to consider the decision of the United States of America to close the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to the United Nations. In all objectivity and impartiality, that decision must be regarded as a serious precedent in the annals of international agreements, because, for the first time, we are witnessing a threat to the Agreement concluded by the United Nations with the host country, the United States of America.
I extend thanks also to the Secretary-General for his report in document A/42/915 of 10 February 1988, and the subsequent report in document A/42/915/Add.1 of 25 February 1988, in which he has truthfully and candidly stated the magnitude of the problem and informed us of the parties to it and the developments that have taken place in connection with it, and has outlined the only possible method of solving the problem.*
I hasten to say that I agree with the Secretary-General that the problem now before us - for the consideration of which we have called upon the General Assembly to resume this session - is a problem between the United Nations and the United States of America as the host country. Hence, it is a problem that concerns every Member, every observer, and every invitee to the United Nations. The seriousness of the problem is obvious from that fact.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The PLO, which occupies a legitimate position in the United Nations, is of course the direct victim. But the real victim is the principle of membership of the United Nations, in all its forms and manifestations. The real victim, also, i the established concept in international relations that international agreements take precedence over all national legislation of States parties to such international agreements.
The question before us today takes on even greater magnitude when we recogniz that it has a political dimension in addition to its legal dimension. Hence, the consequences of the implementation of the United States decision to close down the office of the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO is not only a breach of a binding legal undertaking, but also a violation of the inalienable political rights of an entire people: the Palestinian people.
The General Assembly has resumed this session because of a clear, flagrant violation of the international agreement concluded by the United States with the United Nations in 1947 - known as the Headquarters Agreement. That Agreement affirms that the international Organization alone has the right to define those who participate in its work, and that there must be no interference in this regard.
To give credit where credit is due, it must be said that our task in defending the rights of the international Organization and in demonstrating the illegality of the decision to close the office of the PLO has not been difficult, thanks to the explicit and clear nature of the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement. Above all, our task has been made easier by the acknowledgement of that fact by the State Department of the United States itself and its public opposition to the procedure in question in the letter from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of 5 January 1988, in which he indicated that the implementation of the provisions regarding the Observer Mission of the PLO in the legislation signed by
BCT/pt
the President of the United States on 22 December 1987 would be contrary to the international obligations of the United States under the Headquarters Agreement. Indeed, the position of the mass media of the United States in general - which are not known for their sympathy with Arab causes - has been a position of opposition to, and in some cases highly critical of, this illegal action that is contrary to the most elementary principles of the United States Constitution itself, in which the host country takes pride as a bastion and citadel of fundamental freedoms, foremost of which are freedom of expression and freedom of opinion. Those are purposes pursued specifically by the PLO Mission in New York and its Information Office in Washington - and the latter was the first victim of the decision by the legislative branch of the United States Government.
If we concede, for the sake of argument, that the United States Congress today, after all these years, has the right to reinterpret the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement, we nevertheless believe that the United States Administration, which is entrusted with the implementation of legislation and which knows and states publicly, as I have just mentioned, that the recent Act is in violation of the Headquarters Agreement, must then resort to the arbitral procedure set forth in the Agreement or to the International Court of Justice. The United States accepted that procedure when it framed, approved and adopted the Headquarters Agreement, which sets forth the methods for settling any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of the agreement that cannot be settled by negotiation or otherwise.
World public opinion is amazed, and advocates of human rights and champions of democratic principles await to see how one of the foremost models of freedom and democracy - the United States of America - will act vis-à-vis a legitimate Mission whose only guilt is to explain the cause of an entire nation whose homeland has been usurped, a nation that enjoys the complete support and sympathy of the entire world, with the exception of the United States and Israel.
The United States authorities admit that no violation of law and no illegal practices have been proved against the Office of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) or any of its staff. The situation we are facing today is a totally new episode in a long series of dichotomous positions the United States has adopted with regard to the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. In this connection I cannot resist citing the analogy drawn by a writer in The New York Times between the position of one of the better-known United States Senators opposed to the closing down of the Rhodesian Information Office in 1977 and his
(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait) position in support of shutting the Palestinian Office under the same circumstances 10 years later. Needless to say, the result of the analogy requires no comment.
The Secretary-General, whose noble position in favour of a just cause we once again applaud, has stated that the action of the United States Congress is a clear and flagrant violation of the Headquarters Agreement. The Legal Counsel has found the legislation to be in violation of sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Agreement. Section 11 provides that the United States shall not impose any impediments to transit to or from the headquarters district of persons invited to the Headquarters district by the United Nations. Section 13 states that the privileges referred to in section 11 apply, regardless of the nature of relations between the United States and such persons or Governments. Last December the General Assembly reiterated this in resolution 42/210 B and noted the Secretary-General's statement that members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PDO) Observer Mission are invitees to the United Nations and covered by sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Headquarters Agreement. They must be enabled to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional facilities and the personnel of the Mission should be enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out their official functions.
As for the political dimensions of the question for which we resumed this session of the General Assembly, they make it one of the most important of our time. We all know the origins of this question and the facts surrounding it, just as we are all alarmed by its tragedies and paradoxes. The organization targeted by the closing of the offices of its Mission speaks for the Palestinian people and for their legitimate aspirations, and it is supported by the overwhelming majority of the international community, as has been often proved. However, in our age's greatest paradox, that organization and its valiant people have been branded with
terrorism, while the Zionist entity and its Fascist forces are favoured and given preferential treatment. Recently we have witnessed the campaign waged by those forces and the brutal terrorism against the population of the occupied territories. Every member of the international community knows that, no matter how brutal, oppression cannot force the people of Palestine to submit to occupation because that is against the nature of things in a world longing for freedom and decolonization. The uprising of the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza and the other Palestinian terrorities occupied since 1948 is a revolution of a land in the strict sense of the word "revolution" and in the original sense of the word "land". It is the historic culmination of the revolutionary phase of the struggle of that small and steadfast people. Today, we see the revolutionary law crystallized by human experience entering the phase of action and implementation, as the revolutionary action by the vanguard organization, launched by the PLO in the recent past, has now been embraced by the ordinary citizen to release the genie of the masses from the bottle of occupation.
As Western journalists and observers have noted, the Palestinians, from seven years of age to 70, armed with nothing but stones, have been resisting their Zionist executioners, the murderers of women and children, beating against the gates of history. Those are the events that accompany the present move to close the offices of the oppressed Palestinian people; hence the international community's wholehearted support for resuming the session of the General Assembly. On behalf of the Islamic countries, Kuwait feels that at this session the General Assembly should seek an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice on whether the artibral procedure set forth in section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement between the United States of America and the United Nations is a binding means for solving any dispute over the interpretation of the Agreement. Through
that advisory opinion the world's loftiest legal body would legitimize and formalize the unanimous international position, which rejects the United States decision to shut the PLO Mission to the United Nations.
In view of what I have said, we are confident of the General Assembly's support for this legitimate request, just as we are confident that the Assembly will vote in favour of it when it is placed before us.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
Generai Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV. 10 5 21 March 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 18 March 1988, at 10 a.m.
President*.	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
later*.	Mr. MAHBUBANI	(Singapore)
(Vice-Pres ident)
-	Resumption of the forty-second session
-	Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Pham Hung, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
-	Appeal to commute the sentences of the Sharpeville Six in South Africa
-	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations [121] (continued)
-	Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country: Reports of the Secretary-General [136] (continued)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
8 8-64 056/A	3 53 3V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10. 35 a. m. 
RESUMPTION OF THE FORTY-SECO ND SESSION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I declare the forty-second of the General Assembly resumed. 
As members are aware, the Assembly is being reconvened to consider agenda item 136, Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 42/210 B of 17 December 1987 and 42/229 A of 2 March 1988, and decision 42/461 of 2 March 1988. 
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF HIS EXCELLENCY MR. PHAM HUNG, CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before taking up the agenda for this morning I should like to invite the Assembly to join in a tribute to His Excellency Mr. Pham Hung, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, who passed away on 10 March 1988. His long and distinguished career in the service of his country was characterized by his devotion to tiie cause of national liberation and development. 
On behalf of members of the General Assembly I extend to the members of Mr. Pham Hung's family and to the Government and people of Viet Nam our profound and sincere condolences. 
I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to tlie memory of Mr. Pham Hung. 
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence. 
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): We have learned with sadness of the passing of His Excellency Mr. Pham Hung, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which occurred on 10 March, at the
end of a long career in the service of his country. 

Before assuming high Government office Mr. Pham Hung fought side by side with President Ho Chi Minh and played an important role in the struggle for national liberation and independence. He was Minister of the Interior after the reunification of Viet Nam and then Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. Mr. Pham Hung was elected Chairman of the Council of Ministers in June 1987. 
He was thus entrusted with the responsibility to conduct the business of his Government in the implementation of an important programme of reforms to promote the recovery of Viet Nam's economy. There is no doubt that the efforts and energies he deployed in that task will be a source of inspiration for his successor. 
I join in the tribute the General Assembly is now paying to the memory of Mr. Pham Hung. In should like, in these sad circumstances, to express sincere condolences to the Government and people of Viet Nam and extend to the bereaved family the expression of my deepest sympathy. 
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of Sierra Leone, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States. 
Mr. KARGBO (Sierra Leone): The passing away of Mr. Pharn Hung, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, robs the people of Viet Nam and the international community of a statesman of exceptional ability.
We are all familiar with the distinction with which he accomplished the awesome task of holding his country together in the face of overwhelming internal and external challenges.
We realize that a tragedy such as the one currently faced by Viet Nam can easily paralyse a nation for generations. However, our knowledge of the enormous capacities of the Vietnamese people assures us of their quick recovery from this trauma.
With these words, we pay tribute to the memory of Mr. Pham Hung and offer our condolences to his family and the Government and people of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Cyprus, who will speak on behalf of the Asian States.
Mr s. DIAMAT AR IS (Cyprus): On behalf of the Group of Asian States, I wish to join other speakers in paying tribute to the memory of a distinguished son of Asia, Mr. Pham Hung, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and Political Bureau Member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Viet Nam.
Mr. Pham Hung devoted his entire life to the struggle of his people, and distinguished himself in service to his country. His long and outstanding involvement in the political life of Viet Nam, ranging from his early revolutionary activities, and imprisonment for one and a half decades, to the assumption of the high posts of Vice-Premier of the Government, Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Minister of the Interior and, recently, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Viet Nam, was characterized by his dedication to the interests of his
(Mrs. Dia ma tar is, Cyprus) people and to national liberation and the national reconstruction of his country. For his devotion to these noble causes and principles, Mr. Pham Hung was awarded the Sao Vang (Gold Star) order, the highest order of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, as well as other orders, both by Viet Nam and a number of other countries.
On behalf of the Asian Group, I extend to his family, the Government, the people and the delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam our sincere and deep condolences on the loss of a great leader and son of a fellow Asian State.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Bulgaria, who will speak on behalf of the Eastern European States.
Mr. GARVALOV (Bulgaria); On behalf of the Group of Eastern European States, I wish to convey to the delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the entire Vietnamese people our sincerest condolences and deepest sympathy on the occasion of the passing away of Comrade Pham Hung, Member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Viet Nam and Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
The name of Comrade Pham Hung will remain indelibly linked with the heroic struggle of the people of Viet Nam for national and social liberation, and with the successful advance of his country to socialism. A steadfast revolutionary and a dedicated Communist, Comrade Pham Hung was an active participant in the national liberation and unification struggles of the people of Viet Nam, as well as in the post-war peaceful reconstruction of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
Throughout his life, from his early participation in the battlefields of the national liberation struggle to his subsequent promotions to highly responsible posts in the State and party organs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Comrade Pham Hung was noted for his enormous political popularity, and was greatly respected for his wisdom and selfless dedication to the noble ideals of freedom,
(Mr. Garvalov, Bulgaria) progress, equality and socialism. Until his last breath he remained a courageous and staunch champion of these lofty ideals and an untiring fighter for national independence and social justice. His death is a grievous loss for the Government and Communist Party of Viet Nam and the entire Vietnamese people. His memory will live forever in the hearts of his comrades and compatriots, as well as of all honest and progressive-minded people throughout the world. We pay homage to his memory.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Bolivia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean states.
Mr, NAVAJAS MOGRO (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): This is the first time I have had the honour to speak in the Assembly. Although I do so representing the Latin American and Caribbean Group, may I as representative of my country express to you, Sir, our congratulations on the excellent manner in which you have been discharging your duties. At the same time, I pay tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, a distinguised Latin American statesman to whom Bolivia is particularly grateful and whom it strongly supports.
It is with deep regret that I express on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group to the Government and people of Vietnam our heartfelt condolences on the passing of one of their most outstanding statesmen, a distinguished member of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Viet Nam and Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Mr. Pham Hung. His passing on 10 March constitutes a regrettable and irreparable loss for the Government and the noble people of Viet Nam. The loss is also felt by the international community, which today is paying tribute to his memory.
Mr. Pham Hung dedicated his life to his country, to the noble cause of liberation and the national reunification of his country. His life was an example
(Mr. Navajas Mogro, Bolivia) of sacrifice and determination; it was a continuing struggle for the building and consolidation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. It will doubtless serve as an inspiration to future generations of Vietnamese, and his memory will inspire those fighting and making sacrifices for peace and the well-being of the courageous people of Viet Nam.
The Latin American and Caribbean Group also extends its condolences to the members of Mr. Pham Hung's family.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of the Netherlands, who will speak on behalf of the Western European and other States.
Mr. JAOOBOVITS DE SZEGED (Netherlands): On behalf on the Group of Western European and Other States, I am speaking to pay tribute to the memory of Mr. Pham Hung, the late Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
Mr. Pham Hung played a key role in the history of his country over the pgSt decades. From the beginning of his political career in the 1920s he devoted his life to the realization of the revolutionary ideals he believed in. He has served his country in a great number of different capacities, among others as Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Minister of the Interior, before he was elected Chairman of the Council of Ministers by the National Assembly last year. Mr. Pham Hung will be commemorated as a dedicated politician who was able to make a significant contribution to the developments in his country over more than half a century. On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States, I wish to extend our condolences to the Government and people of Viet Nam and to the Vietnamese delegation on the loss their country has suffered.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Tunisia , who will speak on behalf of the Arab States.
Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, over which Tunisia has the honour to preside this month, I wish to express our condolences to the people and Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and to the family of the deceased. Mr. Pham Hung was Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam at the time of his death on the tenth of this month as the result of a heart attack. We wish to express our deepest sympathy and sincerest condolences at the passing of Mr. Pham Hung, who died at the age of 76. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has lost a glorious son as well as an experienced leader and statesman, one who had devoted almost six decades of his life to his country and people. He began the struggle for his
(Mr, Ghezal, Tunisia) country at a very young age and fought alongside Ho Chi Minh. Therefore, the life of this great man was a very rich and active one devoted to the long struggle for the liberation of his country and for ensuring its progress and prosperity.
The Arab Group would request the delegation of Viet Nam to convey our sincere condolences to the people and Government of Viet Nam and to the family of the deceased on its great loss at the passing of its leader.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the host country, the representative of the United States of America
Mr. ROSENSTOCK (United States of America): Like others who have spoken before us, we, as host country, wish to express our regret at the unexpected death of Mr. Pham Hung, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Premier Pham Hung served his Government faithfully for many decades in positions of great responsibility. Our condolences are extended to the Vietnamese people, their Government and the family of the former Premier.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs, NGUYEN SINH THANH (Viet Nam) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, the delegation of Viet Nam is deeply moved as we convey, on behalf of our Government and people, our sincere thanks to you, to the Secretary-General as well as to the representatives of the various regional groups for the tribute that the General Assembly has paid this morning to the memory of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, the late lamented Comrade Pham Hung.
Viet Nam has just lost one of its best sons, an outstanding and revered leader, one who had been in the forefront in the bitter struggle waged for nearly half a century by our people for its independence.
(Mrs. Nguyen Binh Thanh, Viet Nam)
The life of Chairman Pham Hung, one of the best disciples of President Ho Chi Minh, was typical of all freedom fighters in the world, a life filled with self-denial.
After 16 years of untold suffering endured in the colonialist gaol of Poulo-Condor, the notorious "ANH HAI HUNG" - the "elder brother", as our combatants called it affectionately - he took up the struggle once again and was present in key posts on all fronts in the long and bitter struggle conducted by our people against successive foreign occupation, for national salvation and the happiness of future generations.
In view of the outstanding services rendered to the nation, the Vietnamese party and State posthumously awarded to Chairman Pham Hung the Order of the Golden Star, the highest distinction of our State. Because of his commendable contribution to the cause of the freedom of peoples, Chairman Pham Hung was awarded the highest honours by fraternal countries: the Order of the October Revolution, by the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics! the Order of Ernesto "Che" Gueverra First Class, by the Republic of Cuba*, the National Defence Order First Class, by the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia*, and the George Dimitrov Order by the People's Republic of Bulgaria.
Chairman Pham Hung fell fighting on the field of honour. That great heart, inspired by the noble ideals of freedom, equality, fraternity and social justice, which is shared by the whole of humanity, beats no more. But those ideals, which are also shared by the great human family of the United Nations, are still alive, and for us, the people of Viet Nam, as well as for all peace— and justice-lovin<g peoples represented in this Assembly, the struggle continues so that, finally, the light of dawn of a humanity totally delivered from all oppression and social injustice can shine on the earth once again.
(Mrs. Nguyen Binh Thanh,
Viet Nam)
I should like to renew the expression of our sincere and profound gratitude
for the tribute paid this morning by the General Assembly to the memory of our late lamented Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Comrade Pham Hung.
APPEAL TO COMMUTE THE SENTENCES OF THE SHARPEVILLE SIX IN SOUTH AFRICA
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian)-. I should like to draw the General Assembly's attention to a disturbing development in South Africa.
The international community has been gravely concerned at the intention of the South African authorities to execute the six young south Africans known as the Sharpeville Six. The world has responded to that intention by addressing to South Africa protests and pleas for clemency, including my own as President of the General Assembly and those of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
On 16 March 1988 the Security Council unanimously called upon the South African authorities to stay the execution and commute the death sentences imposed on the Sharpeville Six, and urged all States and organizations to use their influence and take urgent measures to save the lives of the six young South Africans. I take it that the General Assembly fully shares and supports the Security Council's appeal - all the more since the threat to the lives of the young South Africans is not over.
AGENDA ITEM 121 (continued)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTI0M4ENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (A/42/92 5/Add.2)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to document A/42/925/Md. 2, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General informing me that since the issuance of his communications dated 29 February and 1 March 1988 Benin, the Central African Republic and the Congo have made the necessary payments to reduce their arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of that information? It was so decided.
17
AGENDA ITEM 13 6 (continued) REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RELATIONS WITH THE HOST COUNTRY: REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/42/915 and Add.1-3)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian) : At the current session, the General Assembly has adopted on this item resolutions 42/210 A and B of 17 December 1987 and 42/229 A and B of 2 March 1988. In addition, the Assembly has before it the reports by the Secretary-Gen er al issued as documents A/42/915 and Addenda 1 to 3.
As members may recall, the Assembly at its 104th meeting took a decision to keep the matter under active review, which clearly would permit resumption of expeditious consideration of the item if developments so required, upon receipt of the report by the Secretary-General requested in paragraph 6 of resolution 42/229 A. Two reports of the Secretary-General have new been received and are available in documents A/42/915/Adds.2 and 3. Therefore, in the light of consultations held prior to this resumption of the session; it is my understanding that the Assembly wishes to proceed with the consideration of this item and to do so in plenary meetings.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I shall first call on the Secretary-Gen er al.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Since the Last meeting of the General Assembly I have made two further reports, on 11 and 16 March 1988, respectively, in which I have provided information concerning the evolution of the situation arising from the implementation by the United States of the legislation contained in the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, as it affects the maintenance of the present arrangements in New York for the Palestine Liberation Organization Observer Mission. The two reports are factual in nature and speak for
themselves.

In the light of these latest developments, I feel it is my duty to reiterate my strong conviction that the dispute which has been engendered by the legislation in question is one that must be resolved within the framework of the Headquarters Agreement. My concern in this regard goes well beyond the present legislation and relates to the integrity and viability of international agreements in general and the Headquarters Agreement in particular. The approach which I have taken is, in my view, the only one that is consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and resolutions 42/210 B and 42/229 B, which were adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 1987 and 2 March 1988, respectively.
The International Court of Justice has been requested by the General Assembly to give an advisory opinion on the procedural obligations of the United States under the Headquarters Agreement. As members of the General Assembly know, the Court has fixed time limits for the presentation of written statements and oral hearings which are clearly designed to accelerate the Court procedure. For my part, I fully intend to meet these accelerated time limits. The opinion of the Court will clarify the legal issues as regards the applicability of the Headquarters Agreement to this dispute and the relevance of section 21 of that Agreement to its resolution.
As we reconvene today, I trust that our deliberations will once again be marked by the seriousness which characterized our last discussion of this item. I trust also that the message of the General Assembly will be clear and that it will contribute to a solution of the problem before us in a manner that is consistent with international law, and the Headquarters Agreement in particular.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): At this point I should like to inform the General Assembly about our programme of work.
(The President)
I have received a request from a nunto er of delegations that the Assembly should not meet this afternoon and should continue its consideration of this item on Monday, 21 March, at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. and on Tuesday, 22 March, as well.
I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate be closed today at 5 p.m.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I therefore request representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names on the list of speakers as soon as possible.
Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the Tunisian delegation and of the group of Arab States, over which it is my honour to preside this month, I wish to express to you, Mr. President, our appreciation for your enlightened decision to convene this resumed session of the General Assembly for the second time in a three-week period to continue consideration of agenda item 136, entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country". The resumed sessions were convened following the host country's adoption of the Anti-Terror ism Act of 1987, which called for the closing of the Permanent observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to the United Nations in New York. The competence and effectiveness with which you have guided the work of the many meetings of the General Assembly guarantee the success of our future work and of our achievement of the expected results at this resumed session.
I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for the two reports before the Assembly: A/42/915/Add. 2 and Add. 3 of 11 March 1988 and 16 March 1988 respectively. We appreciate his constant effort in the service of the noble purposes of the United Nations and to ensure respect for those who bear the standard of those principles.
The General Assembly is meeting today pursuant to resolution 42/229 A, by which the Assembly decided to keep under active review the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country". It is thus that the Assembly has been reconvened to resume consideration of that item in the light of the information contained in the reports of the Secretary-General.
Members will have read in the report of the Secretary-General (A/42/9 15/Add. 2) that the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States handed to the Secretary-General a letter stating that the Attorney General of the United States had determined that he was required by the Anti-Terror ism Act of 1987 to close the
office of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York irrespective of any obligations the United States might have under the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations. The letter went on to say that if the Palestine Liberation Organization did not comply with the Act, the Attorney General would initiate legal action to close the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization on or about 21 March 1988, the effective date of the Act. Finally, the letter stated that the United States believed that submission of this matter to arbitration would serve no useful purpose.
In an appendix, the report also contains the text of a letter dated 11 March 1988 from the Attorney General of the United States to the Permanent Observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations. That letter indicates that as of 21 March 1988 maintaining the Palestine Liberation Organization Observer Mission to the United Nations in the United States will be unlawful and that should the Palestine Liberation Organization fail to comply with the Act the Attorney General would take action in United States federal court to ensure compliance.
I would note that, as reported in The New York Times of 12 March 1988, Mr. Charles J. Cooper, an Assistant Attorney General of the United States, commented on this matter, saying on 11 March that the United States would not take part in proceedings before an arbitration panel or the international Court of Justice.
Those are the developments that led to this resumption of the current General Assembly session. No one is unaware of the threat they pose to the credibility of the United Nations and its Charter, and to respect for accredited Observers.
(Mr. Ghezal, Tunisia)
A protest has been lodged with the host country, since closing the offices of the Permanent Observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations constitutes a flagrant, premeditated violation of the Headquarters Agreement concluded between the United states as host country and the United Nations. Moreover, it constitutes a violation of international Law.
That decision of the host country came at a time when everyone was hoping that the United States would finally agree to respect its international obligations vis-à-vis the United Nations under the Headquarters Agreement and the Charter. Everybody was hoping that the host country would respond to the relevant General Assembly resolutions on this subject - resolutions 42/210 B of 17 December 1987 and 42/229 A of 2 March 19 88.
In the first of those resolutions the General Assembly reiterated that the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO) to the United Nations was covered by the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement and should be enabled to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional facilities, and that the personnel of the Mission should be enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out their official functions. It also requested the host country to abide by its treaty obligations under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement and in that connection to refrain from taking any action that would prevent the discharge of the official functions of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations.
In resolution 42/229 A the General Assembly affirmed that implementation of the An ti— Ter r or ism Act of 1987 would be contrary to the international obligations of the host country under the Headquarters Agreement; it also called on the host country to abide by its treaty obligations under that Agreement and to provide assurance that no action would be taken that would infringe on the current arrangements for the official functions of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization in New York.
The first resolution was adopted by 145 votes and the second by 143. Everyone hoped that the host country would heed the repeated urgent appeals addressed to it from this rostrum by all 63 delegations which spoke in the General Assembly debate
(Mr. Ghezal, Tunisia) less than three weeks ago. It was also hoped that the efforts of the Secretary-General and his assistants would be appreciated by the host country and lead to the latter's reconsidering its decision and deciding not to implement that Act; or that it would take action under section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement. However, the Government of the host country insisted on implementing that unjust Act.
Here we should like to reaffirm that the host country has not responded favourably to those appeals; it has not taken into account the near-unanimous appeals of the General Assembly; it has not lived up to its international obligations, although those obligations were entered into in complete freedom; and it has defiled the sacred nature of international law.
At the end of the last meeting of the General Assembly on 2 March 1988, the delegation of the host country declared that its Government considered the resumed session of the General Assembly useless and premature; that it would consider the opinions expressed by Governments in the course of this resumed session; and that it would try to arrive at an appropriate solution of this question on the basis of the United Nations Charter, the Headquarters Agreement and American law. However the United States decision, as expressed in the letter of 11 March from the Permanent Representative of the United States addressed to the Secretary-General relating to the implementation of that Act and statements that have been made all indicate that the United States does not accept its obligations.
The host country is a great State which assumes vast responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and says it is proud of being a law-abiding country which implements international law. What has happened? Why has that country adopted this attitude?
I wish representatives to recall the statement of the Secretary of State of the United States Department of State, but no initiative has yet been taken indicating that the law to close the office of the Permanent Observer Mission has been set aside. The Government of the host country does not question the legitimacy of the presence of the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO in New York, which came after an invitation was addressed to the PLO by the General Assembly in its resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, at its twenty-ninth session, to participate as an Observer in sessions of the General Assembly and all international conferences held under the auspices of the General Assembly and other United Nations bodies.
The General Assembly reaffirmed the legitimacy of the PLO as the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people in its resolutions 3375 (XXX) and 42/209, guaranteeing participation by the PLO on an equal footing with all other members, in all deliberations and conferences held on the question of the Middle East, including the international peace conference, under United Nation auspices. The host country has not questioned and cannot question the fact that the PUD Mission in New York is covered by the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement, in particular articles 11, 12 and 13-, neither has the host country called into question the fact that implementation of the Anti-Terrorism Act will not curb terrorism or help the Middle East cause.
Terrorism has not been caused by the PLO or the Palestinian people, but it has been caused specifically by Israel's forces in occupied territories. The fact is that the PLO has an inalienable right, representing as it does the people of a generation whose aspirations will not be broken by any kind of manoeuvring and which will win out over injustice and colonialism.
The aim of the Headquarters Agreement is to govern relations between the United Nations and the host country and to preserve the independence of the Organization with a view to ensuring the free accomplishment of its international mission and, further, adequate working conditions for the Secretariat and for those accredited to the United Nations, whether Missions or various delegations. Hence any measure aimed at preventing a Member or an Observer from accomplishing its official tasks is a flagrant intervention in the functioning of the Organization that cannot be tolerated.
The Anti-Terrorism Act of 1987 has given rise to a legal dispute between the United Nations and the United States of America. That Law, and its implementation, constitute a flagrant violation of the Headquarters Agreement concluded between the Organization and the United States. Should the United States refuse to accept the means for a solution in keeping with section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement -that is, arbitration - the General Assembly must then fully assume its responsibilities with a view to ensuring that the PLO is able to carry out its official functions at the United Nations under normal conditions and to have access to the offices and services it requires.
The General Assembly must also authorize the Secretary-General, who is responsible for ensuring respect of the Headquarters Agreement, to take the necessary measures to meet this goal. The Group of Arab States is concerned that, regrettably, the Organization should be faced - through the action of a great
Power, the United States of America - with this violation of the Headquarters Agreement. In so doing the United States of America is flouting international law and obligations. If this great Power, which is a mender of the Security Council, openly proceeds to such a violation, who will be to blame if others follow suit? And what would the United States do if others also violated international law?
In fact, the host country's letters addressed to the Secretary-General and to the Observer of the PLO constitute a dangerous development and precedent that threatens the Organization and the immunity of its Member States. This action is also a dangerous precedent vis-à-vis the Headquarters Agreement and the Charter itself; it also poses a threat to other international and regional organizations in various parts of the world governed by headquarters agreements. Hence it also sets a dangerous precedent that undermines the inviolability of international law and the foundations on which international relations rest.
This episode brings to mind the attitude of a hunter pursuing his quarry armed with a rifle who is determined to achieve a kill at whatever cost, even to the extent of burning down the forest although the forest is as vital to him as it is to others. Is it possible that, driven by hatred, those who are hunting down the Palestinian people are capable of pursuing the host country into violating the United Nations Charter and international law?
The United Nations is the hope of all weak and oppressed peoples; they look to the United Nations to win their freedom and join others in international co-operation. In it is vested mankind’s aspiration for international peace and security, for a life free from wars and conflicts. The United Nations is the indispensable framework for all constructive dialogue among nations, civilizations and cultures. In order for the Organizations to remain a forum for international understanding and co-operation, it is necessary that it be endowed with all
(Mr. Ghezal, Tunisia) necessary guarantees for its viability and progress and that everyone act in good faith to ensure respect for its independence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In accordance with General Assembly resolution 323 7 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, I now call on the Observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)): The General Assembly has reconvened for the second time in two weeks. We believe that it woul<3 be appropriate to recall the developments relating to the item under consideration since the Assembly suspended its work on 2 March 1988.
In his closing statement on that day the representative of the United States sa id:
"It remains the intention of this Government to find an appropriate resolution of this problem in the light of the Charter of the United Nations, the Headquarters Agreement and the laws of the United States."
(A/42/PV.1O4, p. 59)
He gave us the following assurance:
"I assure those countries which have approached this debate, and the subject
at issue, seriously, that my Government approaches it with equal seriousness." (ibid.)
During the debate on both occasions - in December 1987 and in March 1988 - the United States adopted an escapist policy and behaviour. We all know that escapism is always fraught with ill-intentions and malice aforethought. On both occasions the United States regarded the debate and the resumed session as premature and
inappropriate. Through its representative in this Hall the United States has informed us that
"the United States has again chosen not to participate in the vote on the resolutions which have just been adopted." (ibid.)
(Mr. Terzi, Palestine Liberation Organization) Why did the United States view the resumed session as unnecessary and premature? To explain its escapism, it alleged that
"The United States has not yet taken action affecting the functioning of any Mission or invitee." (A/42/PV. 10 4, p. 5 9) However, to add a sugar-coating of sweet talk, he said:
"The debate of the past three days has dealt with a subject to which the United States Government has given a great deal of attention. We regard this as a serious issue, since it involves important questions of United States law and international law, and we have been in regular and frequent contact with the United Nations Secretariat over the past several months concerning an approporiate resolution of this matter." (A. 42/PV. 104, p. 58 et seq. ) That in itself constitutes a testimony, a testimony by the representative of the United States that clearly admits that a dispute exists. For otherwise, why should the United States, the host country, be in regular and frequent contact with the Secretariat of the United Nations, the other party to the Agreement and thus the other indispensable party to the dispute? The host country has refused to respond to all the calls by the Secretariat to put in motion the agreed-upon procedure to settle disputes in conformity with the provisions of section 21 of the Agreement.
At last, on 11 March 1988 the United States came out with a clear position, and it can no longer claim that
"the United States Government has made no final decision concerning the application or enforcement of recently passed United States legislation". (Ibid.)
Thus, the escapist route reached a dead end.
To his report of 11 March 1988 (A/42/915/Add. 2) the Secretary-General annexes a letter dated the same day from the Permament Mission of the United States. We need not elaborate? we need not elaborate further on the position of the Secretary-General as it appears in document A/42/915/Add. 3, issued on 16 March. We strongly support the courageous stand of the Secretary-General in defence of the United Nations, of its dignity and of its integrity.
Somehow, by previous planning, the Attorney General of the United States, on the same day, 11 March, addressed a letter to the Permament Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which is also annexed to the report of the Secretary-General in document A/42/915/Add. 2. We in the Palestine Liberation Organization Permanent Observer Mission thought it would be only polite to send the following to the Attorney General of the United States. I quote from our letter to him dated 14 March, which was hand delivered to the assistant to the Attorney General in Washington D.C. since his letter to us had also been hand delivered. The letter read as follows:
"Dear Mr. Attorney General:
"I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter hand delivered to me on 11 March 1988. I am, at the same time, forwarding copy of same to
His Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The attached copy of your letter indicates that you intended to include 'enclosure', but such 'enclosure' was not enclosed. We received only the original of the attached copy. You may still wish to send me the 'enclosure'."
I really do not know what he was supposed to have put in that letter, but, taking it at face value, I take it that he meant to send me something nice which, at the last minute, he refrained from doing. I continue reading from our letter:
"You are notifying me of Title X of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act of 1988-1989, Public Law No. 100-204 enacted by the Congress of the United States and approved on 22 December 1987, referred to as 'Act'. You further wrote to notify me that the Act prohibits, among other things, 'the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) from establishing or maintaining an office within the jurisdiction of the United States', and you add, 'Accordingly, as of 21 March 1988 maintaining the PLO Observer Mission to the United Nations in the United States will be unlawful.'
"I wish to inform you that the Palestine Liberation Organization has established and is currently maintaining its PIO Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York since 1974.
"The PLO has maintained this arrangement in pursuance of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly of the United Nations (3237 (XXIX), 42/210 and 42/229). The PLO Observer Mission is in no sense accredited to the United States. The United States Government has made clear that PLO Observer Mission personnel are present in the United States solely in their capacity as invitees of the United Nations within the meaning of the Headquarters Agreement."
That statement is derived from a letter by Secretary of State Shultz to Senator Dole in January 1987. My letter continues:
"The General Assembly was guided by the relevant principles of the United Nations Charter, Chapter XVI. I should like, at this point, to remind you that the Government of the United States has agreed to the Charter of the United Nations and to the establishment of an international organization to be known as the United Nations. The Government of the United States, among the other founding fathers, resolved to establish the United Nations to accomplish
aims, amongst which is the aim 'to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained.' it should become clear from the above that the United States Government is obligated to respect the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement and the principles of the Charter.
"In Light of the above, I trust to hear from Your Excellency, informing precisely what requirements of the Act I should comply with."
The letter is signed by the Permament Observer. So far we have not heard from His Excellency the Attorney General the requirements with which we should comply.
Immediately prior to the Letters from the Government of the United States on 11 March 1988 the Registry of the International Court of Justice made available, on 9 March, the following information*.
"On 9 March 1988 the International Court of Justice unanimously adopted an Order accelerating its procedure on the request just submitted by the General Assembly of the United Nations for its advisory opinion on a question concerning the applicability of section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement."
The information also included the following:
"In the present instance, the Court has decided that the United States of America and the United Nations shall receive a direct notification of that kind, and has fixed 25 March 1988 as the time-limit for the receipt of their written statements and those of any other State party to the Statute wishing to participate in the proceedings. The Court has further decided to open a hearing on 11 April 1988 for the purpose of enabling the participants to
comment on each other's written statements."
(Mr. Terzi, Palestine Liberation Organize tion)
In total disregard of all that, the United States Government informed the United Nations that, irrespective of any obligations the United States might have under the Agreement, the United States was determined to close the office of the PLO Mission to the United Nations, and that
"submission of this matter to arbitration would not serve a useful purpose". The letter should also say "irrespective of the opinion of the International Court of Justice", or irrespective of any other opinion.
The letter of the Permanent Mission of the United States to the United Nations announces another determination, namely:
"The United States will not take other actions to close the Observer Mission pending a decision in such litigation".
That litigation is described as
"action to be taken forthwith by the United States Department of Justice, in the United States federal court."
Thus the United States Government is informing the United Nations, the Secretariat and the General Assembly that it will simply take no action and will subject all action by the international community on this matter to United States domestic law. The dispute is of an international nature and can be settled only through the instrument that the host country, the United States, has agreed to, namely, the provisions of section 21 of the Agreement.
The United States cannot simply ignore or disregard the method for settling disputes it agreed to on signing the Agreement. There is a minimum requirement of good faith and respect for such agreements*, otherwise, hew can any international agreement be respected and trusted, unless the parties to that agreement abide by their obligations and maintain good faith? Such negation of responsibilities and obligations will shatter all good faith and hope in international relations. I
(Mr. Terzi, Palestine Liberation Organiza tion)
might add that it is not really becoming for the host country to disregard its obligations.
The United Nations was established to accomplish certain purposes. One specific purpose is
"to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be ma inta ined".
The Charter of the United Nations is a source of international law, and the Headquarters Agreement is premised on Article 105 of the Charter .
The General Assembly has determined that the PLO Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York is covered by the Agreement. On 4 March 1988 a United Nations spokesman, following a check with the United Nations Legal Counsel, said:
"The PIO has entitlements under the Agreement spelled out in sections 11, 12 and 13 in their capacity as invitees of the United Nations. Section 11, in particular, gives them the right to enter and remain in the United States and, therefore, to maintain offices and living accommodations. The United Nations takes the position that Article 105 of the Charter dealing with privileges and immunities applies to the PLO and gives it functional privileges and immunities".
Legal Counsel apparently was asked about some mysterious document dated 1962 which was used in Congress as min informa tion fed to Congressmen. They were told that in 1962 the Secretary-General or Legal Counsel had informed the Government of the United States in a secret document that Observers had no privileges or immunities. Legal Counsel’s reply was as I have just stated it. The misinformation was fed into Congress to encourage the passing of that law. But, naturally, this is not a matter that we have to discuss in the Assembly.
(Mr. Terzi, Palestine Liberation Organization)
Upon signing the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, on 22 December 1987, the President of the United States said;
"Under our constitutional system of separation of powers, the President has special responsibilities in the area of foreign affairs. Certain provisions in HR 1777, however, could be construed so as to interfere with the discharge of these responsibilities."
On 23 December 1987 the Department of State announced that
"... the provisions concerning the PLO Observer Mission may infringe on the President's constitutional authority, and, if implemented, would be contrary to our international legal obligations under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement".
As a sign of good faith and good intentions by the Department of State, why was it not really proper to advise the President of the United States to say, among other things-. "Consistent with my constitutional responsibility, I am signing the Act without prejudice to international legal obligations under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement and the Charter of the United Nations"? Had such a suggestion been made to the President of the United States when he put his signature to the Act, I am sure he would have considered that.
ait, irrespective of the sweet talk of the representatives of the Government of the United States and statements by the Department of State, the true intentions are now pronounced loud and clear. The Government of the United States is frustrating the operation of the provisions of the Agreement; it is attempting to frustrate and undermine the role of the International Court of Justice. The united States is determined to stifle the voice of the Palestinian people and deny us, the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian people, the right to express their aspirations, to defend their rights, to enable them to attain and exercise their
(Mr. Terzi, Palestine Liberation Organiza tion}
inalienable rights in their own country and to contribute towards the achievement of a just and comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the attainment of peace in the region, notwithstanding all the sweet talk we hear about peace in the Middle East.
The prohibition to be imposed by the host country, denying the PLO its Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York, will of necessity create serious problems for the Assembly. For how could the Assembly address issues concerning the Palestinian people in the forced absence of their representative? How could the Assembly permit the representative of the aggressor, the occupying Power, the party to the Arab-Israeli conflict - Israel - to discharge its functions at the United Nations while the PLO is prohibited by the host country from discharging its functions? In fairness and justice, the General Assembly should also address this aspect, which would be one of the results of the determination of the United States to violate its obligations and the Charter.*
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore), Vice-President, took the Chair.
We deem it proper that the General Assembly should ask the Secretary-General, the custodian of this Organization, to take all steps, including legal steps, should that also prove to be needed, in order to ensure that the PLO Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York be enabled to discharge its official functions without hindrance and that that right and those arrangements followed since 1974 should be maintained and continued. Let us hope against hope that the host country will inform us before 21 March that the law is not meant to infringe on and violate the obligations of the United States under the Charter and the Headquarters Agreement.
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to address the General Assembly today on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, over whose fifth session Kuwait has the honour to preside. Today the General Assembly resumes its forty-second session for the second time in less than a month. The reason for doing so, in the unanimous view of the international community, is a compelling one, one which threatens the very fabric of the international system of international relations, the norms and conventions which govern it. I am referring to the decision taken by the United States, as the host country, to close the office of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO) to the United Nations in clear and blatant violation of the Headquarters Agreement, thus posing a direct threat to the foundations of international law and the principles of the United Nations Charter. Two weeks ago at its resumed session, the General Assembly, in resolution 42/229, reaffirmed the applicability of the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement concluded between the United Nations and the United States to the
Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York. At that time we heard some voices from the host country that sought to argue that observer missions were not covered by the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement. Those attempts evolved to the point of declaring the precedence of national legislation and the view that such legislation invalidates any legislation that runs counter to the obligations of the host country under international agreements. The international community has been unanimous in this matter and many public and official circles in the United States have expressed the view that the United States is legally bound, as the host country and under the provisions of the 1947 Agreement, to allow the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO to establish and maintain offices sufficient to discharge its tasks and to enable the staff of the mission to enter and remain in the United States and to carry out its official functions. That is a right guaranteed under Article 105 of the Char ter.
We all know that it was agreed more than 40 years ago to establish the United Nations Headquarters in New York on the basis of certain guarantees included in the 1947 Agreement. Those guarantees are binding and are intended first and foremost to protect the Organization and the principle of its membership from the whims of States and from any violations that could undermine the universality of the United Nations. What is now happening to the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO, which represents a national liberation movement and which is recognized by 140 States in Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America, constitutes a very serious precedent that poses a threat to every State, to every Member and to every observer group in our international Organization and prompts us all to wonder about the fate of international law and the future of international relations and organizations. The concept of the United States which is presented to the international community
today in this case throws the door wide open to single out any State or organization and to level the same accusations against it and thus to close its offices. In view of that, how can anyone take the pains of formulating and concluding international agreements when the United States seeks to impose the concept of the precedence of national legislation over international agreements?
As stated in The New York Times of 16 March 1988 by Michael Reisman, a professor at Yale Law School, there are no precedents in which the executive of the host country has upheld a congressional competence to violate a commitment to the operation of an international organization for which the United States agreed to be host. Professor Reisman affirmed what we have stressed for years, namely, the view that without guaranteeing precedence for international law in an increasingly inter-dependent international political system, any international law would become a purely scholastic exercise.
Since the Secretary-General, who assumes responsibility for the protection of the Charter and international peace and security, has decided that there is a violation in the decision of the Government of the host country, then this must preoccupy us all and the situation must be remedied through a binding collective responsibility assumed by the international community. As we have always known the Secretary-General as a champion of justice, he has taken an honourable stand coimensurate with his position and responsibilities. That stand was recently reflected in his report issued last year and in his subsequent report, A/42/915/Add. 3, dated 16 March 1988. We can only express our full support for the Secretary-General in that position and our great appreciation for it.
We take this opportunity to appeal to him once more to take all the necessary legal and political measures to ensure the discharge by the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO of its official functions and to protect the Headquarters
Agreement.
It is deeply regrettable that the United States not only has violated the Headquarters Agreement but also has rejected that Agreement and refuses to submit this dispute between it and the international Organization to another impartial international body: the International Court of Justice. The United States claims that arbitration will not serve a useful purpose. But that is the mechanism provided for in the Headquarters Agreement itself and, therefore, it is the proper legal framework for settling this dispute. That would be in conformity with section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement, concerning disputes arising in regard to the interpretation or application of the Agreement.
it is all the more regrettable that the host country takes this position vis-à-vis the Headquarters Agreement - in the adoption of which it played a pioneering role - when we realize that its refusal to submit the case to the International Court of Justice in The Hague comes in the very year when we are commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary of that august, impartial legal body.
Before concluding, I should like to refer briefly to a statement issued by the Kuwaiti Government following a meeting of the Council of Ministers at which this question was discussed. The spokesman for the Government stated that the Council considered that the United States decision was contrary to the international legal obligations of the host country and constituted a flagrant challenge to the feelings of the entire Arab nation. The Kuwaiti Council of Ministers deplored the decision and expressed surprise that it had been taken at a time when the overwhelming uprising of the Palestinian people was continuing in the occupied territories, when international solidarity with and support for the inalienable national and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, under the Palestine Liberation Organization, was increasing, and when the international community was condemning ever more strongly the inhuman, oppressive practices of the Zionist occupation forces against defenceless, innocent Palestinians.
The problem before us must be placed in its proper context. It is a problem between the United States as the host country and the United Nations, first and foremost. The international community, through the General Assembly, and the United Nations, through the Secretary-General, have the responsibility to confront this blatant breach of the Headquarters Agreement. The problem is also the reponsibility of the United Nations, through its Secretary-General. We have every confidence that the General Assembly will take a strong decision that will ensure the continued discharge of all its functions by the Palestine Liberation Organization, as guaranteed by the Headquarters Agreement.
We also have full confidence in the Secretary-General, since he has assumed the primary responsibility for the protection of the Charter and the Headquarters Agreement.
Mr. GAR VALOV (Bulgaria): Speaking in my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States for this month, I should like to join in other Member States' expressions of grave concern over the decision of the United States Administration to close the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to the United Nations, as conveyed by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States in his letter dated 11 March 1988 to the Secretary-General.
That decision is contrary to the will of the international community, as set forth explicitly and unequivocally in General Assembly resolutions 42/210 B and 42/229. Two weeks ago, during the first resumption of the forty-second session of the General Assembly, the Member States of the United Nations clearly expressed their position concerning this issue.
We fully share and endorse the conclusion contained in the report of the Secretary-General in document A/42/915/Add.2 which emphasizes that
"the decision taken by the United States Government as outlined in the letter [of 11 March 1988] was a clear violation of the Headquarters Agreement between the United Nations and the United States". (A/42/915/Add. 2, para . 5) There is no doubt that this is a dangerous precedent, which not only constitutes a patent breach of international law and the international obligations of the host country, but above all undermines the authority of the world Organization.
As is well known, the issue now under consideration arose following the adoption by the United States Congress and the subsequent signing into law by the President of the United States, on 22 December 1987, of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, Title X. In anticipation of this Act of the United States Congress, the General Assent)ly adopted resolution 42/210 B, reaffirming its position that the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York was covered by the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement and should be enabled to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional facilities. Therefore, the General Assembly requested the host country to abide by its treaty obligations under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement and, in this connection, to refrain from taking any action that would prevent the discharge of the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO to the United Nations from discharging its official functions.
The PLO has been invited to participate as an observer in the work of the General Assembly by virtue of General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) . That resolution, together with the relevant provisions of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement, constitutes the international legal basis for the
(Mr. Garvalov, Bulgaria) establishment and maintenance by the PLO of a permanent observer mission. Hence, the United States is under an obligation to permit the PLO Observer Mission personnel to enter and remain in the United States to carry exit their official functions at United Nations Headquarters. The legislation in question and the subsequent action are thus in contravention of the provisions of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement.
Since a dispute clearly exists between the United Nations and the United States concerning the implementation of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement, the dispute-settlement procedure set out in section 21 in article VIII of the Agreement is applicable and is the only action to which there can be recourse.
Regrettably, as stated in the letter dated 11 March 1988 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations to the Secretary-General, the United States is of the opinion that •'submission of this matter to arbitration would not serve a useful purpose". (A/42/915/Add . 2,....annex I) We disagree.
We are hopeful that the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, the International Court of Justice, will rule on this matter at the earliest possible da te.
It is clear that this question is not just a Legal one. It is above all a political issue. There can be no doubt that this action makes it difficult for the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the peace process in the Middle East. The Palestine Liberation Organization enjoys enormous, almost unanimous, support and recognition among the Member States of the United Nations as the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. Past experience has unequivocally shown that any decision made without taking into account the position of the Palestine Liberation Organization is inevitably doomed to failure.
It is universally recognized that the unresolved Palestinian problem is at the heart of the explosive situation in the Middle East and that without a solution to this problem and without the restoration of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people there can be no peace in that part of the world. Due to the tireless efforts of the international community there are now, more than ever before, genuine prospects and an extremely broad international consensus concerning ways to reverse the dangerous turn of events in the Middle East and achieve a comprehensive and just settlement of the Middle East conflict.
The overwhelming majority of Member States are convinced that the only possible and practical way of achieving a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East crisis is to convene an international conference under the auspices of the United Nations with the participation on an equal footing of all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, and all permanent members of the Security Council.
We therefore view the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization Permanent Observer Mission in the work of the General Assembly as an indispensable element in the process of seeking and finding just and comprehensive solutions within the United Nations. For that reason it is our belief that any attempt to
(Mr. Garvalov, Bulgaria) restrict or exclude the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization Permanent Observer Mission in that process will have an adverse effect upon the political prospects for resolving the Middle East problem as a whole.
In conclusion, I should like to stress that we support wholeheartedly the sincere and unrelenting efforts of the Secretary-General aimed at arriving at an equitable settlement of this dispute in accordance with international law and the provisions of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement.
Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): I wish first of all to thank Ambassador Florin for having acted immediately to convene this resulted forty-second session of the General Assembly. We hope that under his wise guidance we shall this time also achieve the results for which we all hope.
It gives me pleasure also to convey to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuellar, our gratitude for his tireless efforts to find a solution to the dispute we are still discussing today. I thank him too for his valuable reports (A/42/915/Add.2 and Add. 3) and for his firm and clear position on this dispute.
The General Assembly has been convened once more to continue its consideration of the agenda item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country“. it would have been preferable for this to have been unnecessary, but in the light of recent developments with respect to the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) we are forced once again to reiterate our position and state our fears about this very important issue.
In resolution 42/210 B of 17 December 1987, the General Assembly reiterated that the Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization is covered by the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement and should be enabled to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional facilities and that the personnel of the Mission should be enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out
(Mr. Salah, Jordan) their official functions. The General Assembly requested the host country to abide by its treaty obligations under the United Nations Headquarters Agreement concluded between that country and the United Nations.
Since subsequent contacts between the Secretary-General and the host country did not achieve the results for which we had hoped, and since the host country did not provide guarantees that the Mission would be maintained as is, the General Assembly was obliged to reconvene from 29 February to 2 March and adopted resolutions 42/229 A and 42/229 B. After the voting on those resolutions, the representative of the United States stated that the United States would give careful attention to the views expressed during the resumed session and that it was still determined to arrive at a proper solution to the problem on the basis of the United Nations Charter and the Headquarters Agreement, as well as United States law.
We had hoped that, before the effective date of the Act, the host country would remind the appropriate authorities of the international obligations of the United States, consistent with the wishes of the international community and with the clear position taken by the Secretary of State of the host country, which was in conformity with that taken by the United Nations. But it appeared that those hopes were not vindicated.
On 11 March 1988 the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of America handed a letter to the Secretary-Gen er al informing him that the Attorney General of the United States had determined that he was required by the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1987 to close the office of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York, irrespective of any obligations the United States might have under the Headquarters Agreement, and that if the PLO did not comply with the Act the Attorney General would initiate legal action to close the Mission.
On the same day, the Permanent Observer of the Palestine Liberation Organization received a letter from the Attorney General of the United States to the effect that as of 21 March 1988 the maintenance of a Palestine Liberation Organization Mission in New York would be unlawful and that should the PLO fail to comply with the requirements of the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1987 the Attorney General would take action in the United States federal court to ensure compliance.
This position reveals the host country's determination to take prior action, even before the resumed session of the General Assembly from 29 February to 2 March 1988. In fact, the Government of the host country made no genuine effort to find an appropriate solution to this problem on the basis of accomodation of its domestic legislation and its international obligations, and this apparently, owing to the fact that the host country believes that a local law take precedence over international law.
That has been made clear by the United States Deputy Attorney General, Mr. Charles Cooper in his reply to journalists last Friday evening, 3 March 1988. In answer to a question he pointed out that the position of the Justice Department vis-à-vis this issue is that since the Headquarters Agreement became part of the laws of the host country, it has become equal to any other legislation of domestic law of the host country, therefore a subsequently enacted domestic law may take precedence and abrogate an international obligation as a result.
That is a dangerous situation for the General Assembly to ponder and evaluate. We all know that international organizations base themselves on principles the most important of which is independence vis-à-vis host countries; that the relations between these organizations and the host countries are governed by the respective headquarters agreements; and that relations between a host country and a member or observer of an international organization should have no bearing on the matter. Section 12 of the Headquarters Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America refers to that. The attitude is dangerous to international organizations and is a threat to relations between those organizations and host countries. Imagine the situation that would face international organizations if that attitude became well-established practice.
Let us recall that in his press conference Mr. Cooper stated that the United States Congress had approved that law, irrespective of international law and the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement. That attitude cannot serve the purpose of international law or international relations. It is a threat to international convention, which is a basic source of international law. That applies also to the host country's attitude of rejection of the arbitration tribunal provided for in article 21 of the Headquarters Agreement and its refusal to appear before an international tribunal saying there would be no point to that exercise. We think that the machinery provided in section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement is the appropriate way to resolve this dispute: it would serve the goal of the Headquarters Agreement to resolve any conflict that might arise in this respect.
We are convinced that the International Court of Justice is competent to decide this dispute and that its decision - which we hope will not be too long in coming - will resolve this matter in an appropriate way. We hope that the United States, a Founding Member of this international Organization and a permanent member of the Security Council, will bring to bear all its political weight to shoulder its very important responsibilities to strengthen international law. The United States would do better to set an example for others with regard to compliance with international obligations.
After the adoption by the General Assembly of resolutions 42/229 A and B, of 2 March 1988, the representative of the United States said that his country believed that the resumption of the forty-second session of the General Assembly served no purpose and was premature. Convening the resumed session was very important: it was not premature at all. That is why steps to implement that law have been taking their course, as requested by the host country, and it would be unavoidable for that law to be implemented on 21 March - despite the clear position
(Mr. Salah, Jordan) of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General affirming that the law constituted an explicit violation of the Headquarters Agreement. Thus the General Assembly was obliged to resume its forty—second session today.
Since we cannot hope that the host country will review that law, we deem it necessary to make clear or repeat some facts. The Palestinian people is the primary party in one of the most important causes of great concern to the world today - I am referring to the Palestinian cause. From its inception, the United Nations has constantly assumed responsibility for its consideration so as to find a peaceful solution. The Palestinian people has chosen the Palestine Liberation Organization as its representative. Thus the United Nations, which represents peoples of the world, had to listen to the PLO's view; and for that reason the General Assembly in its resolution 3237 (XXIX), of 22 November 1974, invited that Organization to participate in its work as an Observer. In that invitation the General Assembly based itself on the provisions of the Charter covering in particular the principle of the right of peoples to self-determination, as well as the principle of equality between peoples. In so doing, the Assembly was pursuing
the goal of ensuring friendly co-operation between peoples.
Since then the PLO has been participating in the work of the United Nations; this participation has always been marked by a high level of competence and a deep sense of diplomacy, thereby earning the respect and support of all Missions accredited to the United Nations.
Secondly, this Mission has been accredited to the United Nations and not to the host country. The presence of the PLO in New York is because the Organization is Located here. The host country's national legislation is in violation of the rights of the United Nations as an independent international Organization and not only in violation of the rights of the Mission in question
The United Nations must defend its rights, and we are now seeking the necessary measures to protect the United Nations as an independent international Organization and all Missions accredited to it, including the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO.
We therefore believe that the General Assembly must reaffirm the provisions of resolutions 42/210 B and 42/229 A, and that the Secretary-General must take the necessary steps to guarantee continued representation of the Permanent Observer Mission	of the PLO so that it can	discharge its	official functions.
We	hope	that all Missions	of	Member States	and all Observer Missions	can
continue to attend future sessions of the General Assembly.
In	view	of the importance	of	this matter, the General Assembly could	at its
next session	include this item	on	its agenda to	ensure compliance by host	countries
with their obligations vis-à-vis the members of various organizations under the terms of headquarters agreements.
We believe that the present problem is one of the most acute the Organization has faced since its inception. The General Assembly must take the appropriate measures to face up to this situation and guarantee the independence of the United Nations and other international organizations and to strengthen international law and ensure the stability of current and future international relations.
Mr. GHAREKHAN (India): When the General Assembly met in resumed session three weeks ago, we hoped that the United States Government would not proceed with any action directed at closing the Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to the United Nations. Indeed, the Assembly decided, with near unanimity, that by doing so the United States would be acting contrary to its international legal obligations under the Headquarters Agreement. The Assembly called upon the United States to have recourse to the mechanism for dispute settlement set out in section 21 of that Agreement. The Assembly also referred the matter to the International Court of Justice to seek an advisory opinion as to whether the United States, as a party to the Agreement with the United Nations, was under an obligation to enter into arbitration in accordance with section 21 of the Agreement. We noted in this context the statement of the representative of the United States that his Government would carefully consider the views expressed in the resumed session and that it remained the intention of his Government to find an appropriate resolution of the problem in the light of the Charter of the United Nations, the Headquarters Agreement and the laws of the United States.
Regrettably, however, matters have taken a different and serious turn. On 11 March the Secretary-General was informed by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States that the Attorney General of the United States had determined that he was required by the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1987 to close the office of the PLO Observer Mission to the United Nations in New York
(Mr. Gharekhan, India) "irrespective of any obligations the United States may have under the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations." (A/42/915/Add.2, annex I)
The letter of the United States Mission went on to say that:
"If the PLO does not comply with the Act, the Attorney General will initiate legal action to close the PLO Observer Mission on or about March 21, 1988, the effective date of the Act." (ibid.)
In his reply the Secretary-General gave expression to the deep concern that we all feel regarding the position taken by the United States. The Secretary-General categorically stated that he
"cannot accept the statement contained in the letter that the United States may act irrespective of its obligations under the Headquarters Agreement". (A/42/915/Add.3, annex I)
The Secretary-General urged the United States
"to reconsider the serious implications of this statement given the responsibilities of the United States as the host country." (ibid. ) My delegation entirely agrees with the Secretary-General. We reaffirm our position on this extremely serious and unfortunate episode. Any move to close the PLO Observer Mission would be a clear violation by the United States of its obligations under the Headquarters Agreement.
The present dispute is about the implementation of an international agreement solemly entered into by the Unbited States Government with the United Nations. As such, it is primarily between the United States and the United Nations. It poses a challenge to the capacity of the United Nations to carry out effectively its functions, and to the system of international law and international relations that
(Mr. Gharekhan, India) has been so painstakingly built up. This dispute, unless satisfactorily resolved, can have incalculable consequences which none of us seek, not even perhaps the United States.
Even at this late hour, we once again call upon the United States to desist from its declared course of action which would cause irreparable damage to the United Nations and which would be unworthy of a founding Member of the Organization. Once again we commend to the United states to have recourse to the dispute settlement procedure laid down in the Headquarters Agreement.
My delegation is deeply appreciative of all that our Secretary-Gen er al has done so far. He has been forthright in defending the position of the United Nations on this critical issue. He will have, as always, the full support of my delegation for whatever steps he takes to ensure the full and effective functioning of the Headquarters Agreement.
Mr. AL-SHAK AR (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic): The General Assembly has resumed its forty-second session to consider the law being enforced by the United States, the host country, which provides for the closure of the Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to the United Nations seventeen days after the General Assembly's nearly unanimous decision - in which the negative vote of Israel was the only discordant note. The reason is that the host country has insisted on swimming against the international current embodied in the position adopted by the vast majority of Members of the United Nations in two General Assembly resolutions, 42/229 A and B of 2 March 1988.
In resolution 42/229 A, the General Assembly called upon the United States of America, the host country, to abide by its treaty obligations under the Headquarters Agreement and to take no action that would infringe upon the current arrangements for the official functions of the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO to the United Nations in New York. The General Assembly again requested the Secretary-General to continue in his efforts in pursuance of the provisions of the Agreement, particularly section 21, with a view to reaching a settlement to the dispute that has arisen between the host country and the United Nations. The Assembly did so because it felt that it was important to settle the dispute with the host country and to deal with it in a diplomatic, friendly and calm manner.
On 2 March 1988 many delegations were filled with hope as they listened with keen interest to the statement by the representative of the United States of America, Ambassador Okun, following the voting on the two resolutions. In that statement, he emphasized that the Government of the United States would carefully 'Ga&lte th-e '^t'ews %'A,pi'So‘8&i dit/it-Tzg tb/a i^aiinei sissli».. ELe also, said that it was still the intention of the United States to reach an appropriate resolution of the problem in the light of the Charter of the United Nations, the Headquarters Agreement and the laws of the United States.
The countries that voted in favour of the resolutions hoped that the host country would abide by the unanimous desire of the international community and settle the dispute pursuant to the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement and the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice. Such a course would have enhanced the dignity of both the United Nations and the host country and would have augmented hopes of reaching a satisfactory solution to the dispute.
And what is the reaction of the host country and the solution it has chosen to pursue? The answer to those questions is contained in the report of the Secretary-General (A/42/915/Add. 2). Instead of abiding by the unanimous desire of the international community and instead of following the rules of international law as a means of settling its dispute with the United Nations the United States Government has chosen to give its own domestic legislation supremacy over its international obligations, in violation of the norms of internationally recognized law, according to which the legislature of the host country is bound to give supremacy to the international agreement to which the Government is a party. The host country cannot, unilaterally, give its cwn domestic legislation supremacy over its international obligations. The so-called Anti-Terror ism Act of 1987 does not supersede the obligations undertaken by the United States under the Headquarters Agreement.
In international law the provisions of domestic law cannot have supremacy in application over the provisions of international agreements concluded between the United Nations and the host country. The fact that, notwithstanding its obligations under the Headquarters Agreement, the host country has chosen to do so is a strong blow to the United Nations and an insult to it, as well as an attempt to frustrate the sincere efforts made by States Members to settle the dispute and maintain the independence of the Organization, its dignity and its integrity.
The solution chosen by the host country does not coincide with the letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter and the Headquarters Agreement, nor with General Assembly resolutions 42/210 B and 42/22 9 A and B, all of which ask that the dispute settlement procedure set out in section 21 of the Agreement should be set in operation.
Many disputes between the host country and the United Nations have been settled in some way or other under the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement. The good offices of the Seer etar y-Gener al or of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country have greatly contributed to the solution of many disputes. However, the present dispute is still without any settlement consonant with the principles of the Charter and the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement.
The host country’s failure to abide by General Assembly resolutions 42/229 A and 42/229 B has one particularly noteworthy feature - its unjustified refusal to resort to arbitration under section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement or to reach an international legal settlement, on the pretext that that would serve no useful purpose. Arbitration and an international legal settlement through the International Court of Justice are the ideal means of settling legal disputes. Why does the host country not resort to such means in accordance with its obligations under the Headquarters Agreement, which did not give the host country the choice of how any dispute between it and the United Nations was to be settled? The Agreement says that the course of consultation and negotiation between the United Nations and the host country should be followed in order to settle any dispute and that if these do not succeed in settling it the two countries should resort to arbitration. On the basis of that provision, the Agreement contains no right for the host country to settle the dispute with the United Nations in the way that it deems appropriate.
When the Agreement specified arbitration as a means of settling any dispute between the United Nations and the host country, it did not do so for no reason. That legal means was designed to safeguard and maintain the independence and integrity of the United Nations. We wonder about the wisdom of departing from the customary, agreed means of settling disputes between the host country and the United Nations, so long as arbitration is specified by the Headquarters Agreement as the appropriate means. The means of settling the dispute chosen by the host country not only contradicts the provisions of the Agreement, but also constitutes a big departure from the purposes and principles of the Charter. Its application constitutes an undermining by the host country of the authority, independence and
integrity of the United Nations. Moreover, it violates the essence of the
Headquarters Agreement and frustrates the joint efforts of the member countries and the Secretary-General to settle the dispute amicably.
The Charter established the International Court of Justice as the principal legal instrument of the United Nations and the whole world. Its Statute is an integral part of the Charter, and it is clear that the purpose of establishing the Court was that it should contribute effectively to safeguarding the United Nations its independence and its integrity. Therefore, the Charter has entrusted the Court with the interpretation of the Charter and international conventions and agreements, intending that the Court should contribute greatly to the settlement of legal disputes, especially those relating to interpretation of the Charter and international agreements, including the Headquarters Agreement.
The fact that the host country has not accepted the arbitration provided for by the Headquarters Agreement as the most appropriate way of settling the dispute means that it will not comply with the advisory opinion that the International Court of Justice may give in response to the request in resolution 42/229 B. That negative position by the host country, which serves no useful or friendly purpose, is unacceptable.
It is surprising that the United States should reject the idea that the International Court of Justice may help find a solution to the dispute, when it is a country of democracy, a country in which the law reigns supreme and a country on whose national soil the Charter and the Statute of the International Court of Justice were signed. It is surprising that the host country should choose a way which means rejecting the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in a dispute to which it is a party.
No one can doubt the legal value of an advisory opinion of the Court in solving the dispute, especially as the only reason for our resorting to it is to
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) find an amicable settlement. The purpose behind resorting to the Court was to show the nature of the dispute and facilitate the appropriate solution.
We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, and the Legal Counsel, Mr. Carl-August FLeischhauer. My delegation strongly supports the position taken by the Secretary-General, in document A/42/915/Add.2. We particularly support the position clearly expressed in his letter to the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States (A/42/915/Add. 3) . That is a true expression of the contents of resolutions 42/210 B and 42/229 A and 42/229 B. We join the Secretary—General in his protest, which is very timely, and in not agreeing with the arguments included in the letter from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States.
The dispute between the United Nations and the host country may have negative repercussions and effects on relations between the host country and the United Nations. If it continues, it may also lead to impeding, if not paralysing, the work of the United Nations. The first purpose of the United Nations, as expressed in the preamble to the Charter, is:
"to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
Today the General Assembly faces a more serious problem, that is, saving the Unitei Nations, ensuring that it continues and that it discharges all its functions in an independent, integral and unbiased way.
If interference in the affairs of the United Nations by any member or non-member country is prohibited, it becomes self-evident that in the case of a dispute between the United Nations and the host country, it should be settled in accordance with the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement.
We cannot agree that the PLO should go to the courts of the United States, according to the solution proposed by the host country. The PLO did not come to us at the invitation of the Government of the host country. It has come here in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974. That resolution gave the PLO the status of Permanent Observer to the United Nations, with a right to establish an office. Its members are invited to the United Nations in that capacity. Therefore, the mission and its members are covered by sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Headquarters Agreement, which provide that the members of the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO may enter and remain in the United States in order to discharge their official functions at the Headquarters of the United Nations. The so-called Anti-Terrorism Act, which the United States insists on applying to the Permanent Observer Mission of the PLO, does not include any charge that the Mission or any of its members have violated any of the regulations of the host country, something which might necessitate its going to court. Therefore, we deem it important that the member countries should adhere to their unanimous position with respect to this question in view of the fact that this is a dispute between the United Nations and the host country. This position should be the corner-stone of any solution that may be reached through the United Nations, represented by the Secretary-General, as being the body to negotiate in order to solve this dispute and to take all legal remedies to reach a settlement.
We should like to warn against the danger of keeping this dispute unresolved, since it may lead to the deterioration of the situation and an aggravation of the
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) problem. It could become something that would go beyond the original dispute in a way that might impair the existence and legitimacy of our Organization. Hence the need to reach a satisfactory solution.
In his report to the General Assembly the Secretary-General has emphasized the need to revive the provisions of the Headquarters Agreement, particularly section 21, in order to settle any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of the Agreement. However, the instrument provided for by the Agreement which could lead to an amicable solution has, regrettably, not been resorted to. In our opinion, the Headquarters Agreement recognizes the importance of settling any dispute and it makes it the duty of the two parties to any dispute, when they fail to reach an agreement under section 21, to go to the International Court of Justice. Here we may wonder to what extent the host country has followed this correct path since the beginning of the dispute, which has been a source of concern to the majority of the States Members of our Organization.
The Government of my country, Bahrain, has denounced the United States Act and decision. Bahrain has objected to the way chosen by the United States Government to settle this dispute. At its twenty-sixth session held at Riyad from 5 to 16 March 1988, the Ministerial Council of the Gulf Corporation Council of which Bahrain is a member, carefully studied the United States Act and its decision to close the office of the PLO Mission in New York. In their statement on 16 March 1988, the Foreign Ministers of the six member countries of the Gulf Council denounced the American decision. The Council also expressed its support for the actions taken by the United Nations in this respect. It called upon the United States to reconsider its decision. Hence, we deem it appropriate for the Secretary-General, who represents the United Nations and who is the depositary and custodian of the Headquarters Agreement, to exercise his good offices with the host
(Mr. Al-Shakar, Bahrain) country to settle the present dispute, which is unique and unprecedented. This is important if we are to ward off any threat to our Organization, to promote its principles and to save it from paralysis and collapse. If we allow the host country to dictate the means of settlement of disputes concerning the representation of Member States and Observer countries and organizations in the United Nations, it would impede the progress of the United Nations and undermine its independence. The host country may not choose the ways and means of settling the dispute. To accept the solution and position taken by the United States would give the host country a veto, which would enable it to control the United Nations in case of any future dispute. This cannot be accepted in the diplomacy of international organizations.
My delegation believes that it is in the general interest and within the competence of the United Nations, represented by the Secretary-General, to protect the representatives and Observers invited to discharge their duties within the framework of the United Nations. Members of the PLO mission have for more than 15 years promoted the principles and objectives of the United Nations and its activities and role in reaching a just and durable settlement of the Palestinian question, which has been before the United Nations for more than four decades. No fair person can doubt the important role played by the PLO within the framework of this international Organization and its deliberations to reach a just, durable and comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East.
In the light of the aforementioned conclusion, it is important - indeed absolutely necessary - to settle this unique dispute without prejudice to the competence of the International Court of Justice, which is now considering the issue, or to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations under the Headquarters Agreement.
This is an urgent task that brooks no delay. The United Nations, represented in its Secretary-General, should be the body to undertake all the legal procedures, steps and remedies to settle this dispute with the host country.
The popular uprising of the Palestinian people, which has gone on for four months now, is a true expression of their categorical rejection of occupation and their unshakeable belief in their legitimate right to restore their usurped land and exercise all their rights.
Despite the blackout imposed by the racist Zionist occupying authorities on the developments in the occupied territories, despite the repressive measures and brutal force used to suppress the uprising, despite the increasing, unprecedented, inhuman crimes of the racist Zionist occupying authorities, the Palestinian resistance is gaining momentum. The world has come to know the truth very well. The world is now an eye-witness to the crimes of mass murder committed by the occupying Zionist authorities against the Palestinian people, who use no weapons other than chants and stones. Needless to say, neither women nor children nor the elderly have been spared in these acts.
This popular uprising has made the world aware of the truth of the just resistance waged by the Palestinian people. Israel can no longer distort the struggle of the Palestinians as being a struggle by terrorists. Developments in the occupied territories have confirmed the true nature of racist Israel and its terrorist and oppressive policies against the resistance of the defenceless Palestinian people. The ugly, racist, terrorist face of Israel has been exposed.
as well as the fact that its image as an oasis of democracy and civilization is a false image.
The heroic uprising in the occupied territories has deepened the conviction of the international community that it is important to maintain the presence of the Palestine Liberation Organization within the United Nations as the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, because of the significant role it plays in the establishment of a just, durable and comprehensive peace in the Middle East region.
True peace can be based only on justice and on granting the Palestinian people their just and inalienable rights, undiminished in any way. The historical lesson of this uprising confirms the uncontested historical fact that father lands cannot be usurped indefinitely and that peoples cannot surrender to occupation forever, whatever sacrifices they must make. Oppression must one day come to an end.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.110 11 May 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-second session
general assembly
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 11 May 1988, at 3.30 p.m.
President:
Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
-	Resumption of the forty-second session
-	Programme of work
-	The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives [34] (continued)
-	Special programmes of economic assistance [86] (continued)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
88-64086/A 4236V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
RESUMPTION OF THE FORTY-SECOND SESSION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I declare the forty-second session of the General Assembly resumed.
The Assembly is being reconvened to consider agenda items 86, "Special programmes of economic assistance" and 34, "The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives", pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 42/204 of 11 December 1987 and 42/1 of 7 October 1987, as well as decision 42/460 of 21 December 1987 retaining item 34 on the agenda of this session.	.
In connection with agenda item 86, on special programmes of economic assistance, I would point out that by paragraph 3 of resolution 42/204 the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to formulate a special plan of co-operation for Central America to be submitted, in view of the immediate needs, no later than 30 April 1988 for consideration by the General Assembly at its current session. PROGRAMME OF WORK
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before turning to the substantive items before us, I wish to draw the attention of members to the Assembly's programme of work.
Following consultations, it is my intention to devote three meetings to the consideration of agenda items 86 and 34 - that is, this meeting and the meetings tomorrow morning and afternoon.
Furthermore I should like to inform members that I have received a letter dated 10 May 1988 from the Permanent Representative of Somalia which reads as follows*.
"Bearing in mind that the General Assembly is still seized of item 136, 'Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country: report of the Secretary-General', and in the light of the advisory opinion of 26 April 1988
(The President)
of the International Court of Justice on the applicability of the obligation to arbitrate under section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement of 26 June 1947, I would like, in niy capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group for this month, to request that the Assembly resume its consideration of agenda item 136 at the resumed session scheduled to start tomorrow, 11 May 1988."
Upon receipt of that letter I informed the Chairmen of the regional groups of that request. If the Assembly now concurs, I should like to propose to the Assembly that after completion of our consideration of items 86 and 34 we immediately resume consideration of item 136 as requested in the letter of the Permanent Representative of Somalia. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided. It was so decided.
.	AGENDA ITEMS 34 AND 86 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA: THREATS TO INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY AND KAOS INITIATIVES
SPECIAL PROGRAMMES OF ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian)*. At this session the Assembly has adopted resolution 42/204 of 11 December 1987 under item 86 and resolution 42/1 of 7 October 1987 under item 34. In addition the Assembly has before it a note by the Secretary-General issued as document A/42/949.
I should like to inform members that on 18 April 1988 I received a letter from the Permanent Representatives of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua requesting the resumption of the forty-seoond session in order further to consider agenda items 86 and 34. Following consultations with the Chairmen of the regional groups, who conveyed to me the concurrence of Member States, I decided to
RH/3
(The President)
resume the forty-second session of the General Assembly today. Furthermore, in the light of consultations held prior to this resumption, it is my understanding that the Assembly wishes to proceed with the consideration of these items in plenary meeting. I hear no objection.
It was so decided.
6
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In accordance with resolutions 42/1 and 42/204 adopted by the General Assembly at its forty-second session, this resumed session of the Assembly now has before it for consideration and adoption the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America. This special plan, for the timely preparation of which our thanks go to the Secretary-General, at the same time expresses the support of the international community for the Central American peace efforts. Today's meeting of the General Assembly offers another opportunity to reaffirm that the countries of Central America deserve every possible support in their efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict situation and economic recovery. At the same time, we must welcome the fact that the five countries of the region have taken steps to promote bilateral co-operation as well as co-operation throughout the region. It is my fervent wish that the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America and the draft resolution on the subject now before us may contribute towards strengthening regional security and stability, towards implementing the right to self-determination, and international peace.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish) : In accordance with the mandate given by the General Assembly, in resolutions 42/1 and 42/204 of October and November 1987, I am pleased to submit for your consideration the "Special Plan of Economic Co-operation for Central America", which is the result of joint efforts by the United Nations and the Governments of the region.
As you are aware, the General Assembly requested me, in close co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme, to send a technical mission to the Central American countries for the purpose of determining, in consultation with each of the Governments, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and other competent entities, the economic and social priorities of the
countries of the region, and to formulate, on those bases, a special plan of assistance for Central America.
I accordingly appointed Mr. Augusto Ramirez-Ocampo, UNDP Regional Director for Latin America and the Caribbean, as co-ordinator of the Organization’s activities, and requested him, together with Mr. Gert Rosenthal, Executive Secretary of ECLAC, to implement the mandates of the General Assembly in consultation with all the parties concerned. I made a special point of requesting all agencies of the United Nations system to collaborate in the drafting of the Plan. I am very pleased to inform you that the input of the various agencies made an important contribution to that work.
The process of consulting the Governments of the region was carried out rigorously and at the highest level. The subregional integration agencies and bodies were likewise consulted, as were other international organizations within and outside the region that do not form part of the United Nations system.
I wish to emphasize the interest taken by the Heads of Government themselves in the process of formulating the Special Plan, which is reflected in the fact that they appointed their Vice-Presidents to take charge of co-ordinating the work with the United Nations. I am highly gratified that the Vice-Presidents have been present at this resumed session.
The Assembly will recall that the adoption of resolution 42/1 was prompted by the signing, on 7 August 1987 - exactly two months before - of the "Procedure for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central America" by the Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. The Procedure was the outcome of an unprecedented regional effort, to which the Contadora Group and its Support Group made a decisive contribution. In that resolution, the Assembly expressed its firmest support for the Agreement and urged the international

community to increase its economic and financial assistance. The document now before the Assembly reflects the context in which the General Assembly resolutions were adopted, namely the desire to contribute to the attainment of a firm and lasting peace in Central America. The Plan therefore concentrates on those economic and social aspects which are closely linked to the preservation and consolidation of peace, and this is what makes it "special". Furthermore, it is intended that the international co-operation obtained should be additional to that already being mobilized by the countries concerned, and should be furnished on more favourable terms. Lastly, the Plan constitutes a major effort to keep the process orderly, in that it seeks to ensure that its actions and programmes are consistent with the priorities identified by the Governments themselves and supplement their national development efforts, bearing in mind the common difficulties, the community of interests and the historic aspiration to integration that exists in the subregion.
The Plan, with its projects and actions, comprises four main categories: those which meet emergency needs; others which require immediate action; those relating to economic reactivation and the strengthening of interdependence among the countries; and those relating to urgent social problems affecting the poorest sectors of the population.
The basic premises of the Plan are that the Governments bear the primary responsibility for the implementation of actions required by their own social and economic realities and that external co-operation will play a supplementary but essential role, with a view to ensuring the consolidation of peace and the development of the region.
The United Nations, with its various specialized agencies and bodies, could act as a catalyst, not only with regard to its own activities but also by convoking
and co-ordinating the action of countries and non-governmental organizations interested in co-operating with Central America.
The conflict in Central America has created an immense flow of refugees. Population displacements have extended beyond the boundaries of the countries which signed the Esquipulas II Agreement and have penetrated other countries of the subregion, such as Belize. In order to explore ways of solving this problem, the organizations of the system are sponsoring a regional meeting which will be held soon.
The Governments and peoples of Central America have taken a first step in the direction of peace and development. In Central America social problems, particularly conditions of poverty, have become a primary cause of aggravated political tensions. Hence, as stated in the Plan, peace requires a development that will guarantee decent living conditions for the population and respect for human rights. While peace is a necessary condition for development, it is not sufficient in itself. Consequently, a prolonged and systematic effort on the part of Governments and civilian societies will be necessary, To that end, both political support and the materialization of international co-operation will be required.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before calling on the next speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate be closed today at 5 p.m.
If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I therefore request representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names as soon as possible.
ADDRESS BY MR. ROBERTO CARPIO NICOLLE, VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly will now hear a statement by the Vice-President of the Republic of Guatemala.
Mr. Roberto Carpio Nicolle, Vice-President of the Republic of Guatemala, was escorted to the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I have great pleasure in welcoming the Vice-President of the Republic of Guatemala, His Exellency Mr. Roberto Carpio Nicolle, and inviting him to address the General Assembly.
Mr. CARPIO NICOLLE (Guatemala) (interpretation from Spanish) s It is a great honour for me to address the General Assembly on the occasion of its resumed forty-second session, as spokesman for the Vice-Presidents of Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala who are present and who as high-level representatives are complying with the agreements reached by the Central American Presidents at Esquipulas I and II, to express on behalf of the peoples and Governments of our region our joy at the expectations aroused within Central American society by the holding of this resumed session whose task it is to discuss the item on the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America.
This affords me an opportunity to thank the President of the General Assembly for opening this resumed session, which is of vital importance for Central America and, unquestionably, for the world. I am sure that under his skilful leadership the debate on this special plan will be a positive one.
The peoples of Central America have pinned their hopes on the ability of this session to achieve understanding of their situation and the actual results in solving their most pressing problems.
The resumption of the forty-second session of the General Assembly increases our hopes, because we view the proposal for a plan of co-operation as something which may be the most impressive show of international solidarity that could have been vouchsafed to our region.
This meeting demonstrates that peace in Central America is a necessity and that the solidarity of the whole world is essential if we are to achieve it. The international community must be deeply concerned at any situation which undermines this peace.
We countries of the third world have felt keenly the serious effects of the world political, economic and financial crisis, which has caused unemployment, hunger, poverty, misery and despair. In Central America this crisis has triggered explosive situations which have turned the region into one of the world's worst hotbeds of tension.
At the beginning of the 1970s as a result of this phenomenon, the region began to witness the breakdown of its integration system - a situation which weakened its already fragile economy and had a tremendous impact on the very structures of our society. In recent years the situation has become worse, restricting our political space.
Central America reaffirms its determination to solve its problems by itself and demands recognition of its right to forge its own destiny, without foreign interference or intervention. However, we realize that we need international support in order to shoulder the huge challenges of the future while carrying the burdens of the past.
As soon as the situation in Central America began to assume the dimensions of a major conflict, the Latin American countries began to take action to halt any further escalation of the crisis and to promote a peace process in the region.
The countries of the Cantadora Group and its Support Group made it possible for a fruitful process of negotiation to be launched to solve the problems facing our region through dialogue. We thank them for intensifying their actions of solidarity which, together with the actions of other countries, will help to strengthen this negotiating process designed to achieve peace.
The Central American nations achieved independence together and have shared a rich cultural and historical past, and it is those ties, not confrontation, that have marked our history. We have a clear-cut Latin American awareness and identify ourselves with the genuine interests of the developing countries within the context of peaceful coexistence. We have made it our task thus to find a Central American solution to our common problems and to make efforts to fulfil our aspirations for comprehensive economic and social development, in a climate of political stability.
The Central American countries have moved forward towards peace and, thanks to the process initiated by the Presidents in the Esquipulas Agreements and the adoption of the "Procedure for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in Central America". It was thus that the idea was born of setting up a parliament as a permanent forum for dialogue and political negotiation in the region.
The Presidents have reaffirmed that there are Central American approaches to peace and development, that our society must be democratized politically and economically and that elections to the Central American Parliament will help to strengthen the democratization process of our peoples.
The treaty setting up the Parliament establishes two political bodies, which are based on existing regional co-ordination structures: the meeting of Vice-Presidents as a mechanism responsible for promoting the process of economic co-operation and support for regional bodies; and the meeting of Presidents, responsible for political decision-making at the highest level.
The treaty also affirms that peace in Central America can result only from an authentic democratic, pluralistic and participatory process, which entails the promotion of social justice, respect for human rights, the sovereignty and integrity of States, the right of every nation to choose, freely and without outside interference of any kind, its own economic, political and social system, and respect for national and international law. This is in keeping with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and with the aspirations and fundamental rights of our peoples, highlighting the close interrelationship that exists between peace and development.
We realize that we have no chance of success in Central America if we stand divided and that our desire for integration is not only an ideal but a necessity.
We welcomed the mandate contained in General Assembly resolutions 42/1, 42/110 and 42/204, which reflects the full extent of the world’s awareness of the Central American problem.
Accordingly, in my present capacity, I wish to place on record before the General Assembly our gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the co-ordinator and the members of the commission appointed to prepare the draft special plan of economic co-operation for Central America, for the efforts they devoted to it. The commission took into account the priorities which the Central American countries had set in the plan of immediate action for the region.
As a complement to the peace plan, the plan of immediate action pursues the goal of establishing a sustained process of economic and social development. The priorities set by the Central American Governments as a result of a joint effort, and which the plan of immediate action defines as an emergency, are the following: first, assistance to refugees and displaced and repatriated persons; secondly, food aid; thirdly, emergency fund for the economic recovery of Central America; fourthly, energy security; and, fifthly, external debt.
Taken together, these priorities require nearly SUS 1.4 billion to deal with the emergency, out of a total of $US 4 billion needed to promote a process of reactivation and regional development.
We are fully determined to solve, immediately and as a matter of urgency, the problem of refugees and displaced and repatriated persons, which is a key factor in restoring stability and social peace. The forced migration of approximately 10 per cent of the population of Central America has permanently changed our region, seriously undermining the coexistence and development of many communities.
Food aid is a pressing need because of the serious, recurrent drought that we have been experiencing, which has drastically reduced the availability of food staples for the people of Central America. The effects of the drought have been exacerbated by political and military conflicts, which have damaged the productive base, and by the shortage of foreign exchange for purchasing the necessary inputs. Grain producers have had to use up reserves for sowing for the next harvest and the region needs to import more than a quarter of a million tons of basic grains.
With regard to the establishment of the emergency fund for the economic reactivation of Central America, it should be pointed out that the crisis affecting the Central American economies has brought about a serious decline in intraregional
(Mr. Carpio Nicolle, Guatemala) trade and has seriously affected the capacity to pay of the Central American countries. This, together with a situation of negative balances of payments, has affected all economic activity connected with the integration process, making it urgent to set up such a fund.
Energy security is one of the most acute problems facing the region, particularly because of difficulties with the supply of oil and oil by-products and the obsolescence of generating equipment and distribution systems, which have had an adverse effect on productive activities. The drought has also drastically reduced our hydroelectric generating capacity.
External debt has called for extraordinary efforts from all of us, forcing us to devote to it resources needed for stabilization and economic reactivation plans and thus creating a tremendous obstacle to regional development. More than half our export earnings go to service this debt.
The co-operation and support which Central America needs in order to meet these priorities must be additional and supplementary to that which our countries have already received from the international community, and we need it to be extended on highly concessional, non-discriminatory and non-exclusionary terms.
With regard to the special plan, we consider it essential that it function efficiently and that we are able to participate genuinely and effectively in defining its institutional mechanisms and in its implementation, which we hope will result from direct negotiation between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the five Central American Governments, in consultation with the donors.
Now, in this Assembly, when the problems of the people of Central America have the chance of capturing the attention of all the countries represented here, is an appropriate time to repeat to members, on behalf of Costa Rica, Nicaragua,
(Mr. Carpio Nicolle, Guatemala) Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala, our thanks for their support, and to urge the Assembly to adopt a resolution immediately setting in motion the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America and to undertake a world-wide campaign to give effect to the resolutions for peace adopted in this noble Organization, thus committing ourselves to eradicating from the face of the earth violence and social injustice and the threat and use of force as a means of solving problems among nations, since for mankind no future is possible without peace and there can be no peace without dialogue. Dialogue must be sincere, understanding and respectful and must never be used as a means of confrontation.
We, the Vice-Presidents of Central America, have learned to live with each other, and to take the political decisions needed to take other decisions, and today, more than ever, we remain united, fighting for our own region of Central America. This is a commitment which we Central Americans have already assumed.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I thank the Vice-President of the Republic of Guatemala for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. Carpio Nlcolle, Vice-President of the Republic of Guatemala, was escorted from the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the representative of Venezuela, who will present the draft resolution contained in document A/42/L. 49.
Mr. AGUILAR (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, before introducing the draft resolution to which you have just referred, I should like to make a brief statement on behalf of Venezuela. It is our privilege today to address this Assembly on an occasion which is certainly very special, that is, the consideration of the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America.
Just a few months ago, Venezuela had the opportunity to participate actively in the preparation of resolution 42/204, which was drawn up bearing in mind the need:
"to contribute effectively to peace, co-operation and respect for human rights, the implementation of genuine democratic and pluralist processes and economic and social development, which are indispensable for ensuring the well-being of the peoples of the Central American region".
The eloquent document submitted by the Secretary-General in connection with the special plan called for in that resolution makes a serious diagnosis of the economic and social ills afflicting the region of Central America and presents a series of recommendations on the different mechanisms that could lead to the recovery for which those people yearn.
My Government wishes to congratulate the Secretary-General on the promptness and sense of responsibility with which he discharged the task assigned to him by
the General Assembly. We wish also to express our appreciation to
Mr. Ramirez-Ocampo, United Nations Development Programme Regional Director for Latin America and the Caribbean, and to Mr. Rosenthal, Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, for the efficient work they did in preparing the principles contained in the aforementlned document.
In spite of the economic vicissitudes that have affected my own country, like the other countries of the Latin American region, Venezuela has endeavoured to implement a policy of effective co-operation on the continent.
On the basis of a conceptual approach which views co-operation as a way of deepening and strengthening ties among peoples in the economic, cultural, scientific, technical, social and political spheres, Venezuela affirms the need for, and the importance of, co-operation among the countries of the region as one of the most important elements in the global development strategy. Bearing in mind the fact that the possibilities for co-operation among countries are based on interdependence and on the complementary aspects of their economies, an attempt is being made to change the relationship of dependence of the developing countries vis-à-vis the developed countries without setting aside the valuable possibilities of receiving needed assistance from the industrialized countries.
Venezuela's international co-operation policy is based, inter alia, on the following principles; first, the imperative constitutional need for the Republic to promote freedom, democratic pluralism and respect for human rights on a permanent basis in Venezuela's international relations; secondly, the goal of co-operation designed to meet the priorities set by the countries with which Venezuela is co-ordinating its action of co-operation; and thirdly, the action of the co-operation programmes to be carried out by Venezuela, aimed at strengthening the identity and the integration processes of Latin America and the Caribbean.
23
(Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela)
Because of economic and social requirements, the use of the socio-economic instruments and resources in any country needs to be planned and this includes the planning of technical and scientific assistance as a primary factor in national development plans.
As part of that process, the Venezuelan Government has maintained its co-operation with Central America and has evaluated the assistance requested by the countries of the region. In this respect, the Venezuelan Government has drawn up a programme that covers a whole series of goals and technical and economic procedures whose specific objectives are the following: (a) to develop an awareness of the problems of the region and the way the region must take in the quest for its own solutions, ones that make it possible to reduce the technological and economic dependence of Central America; (b) to point out that the training and updating of human resources must be a development priority of the countries of the region; (c) to exchange experiences in connection with human resources, which presupposes an enormous potential to implement shared strategies in the region; (d) to highlight the need to study internal resources in order to plan for the introduction of technology that would enable national programmes in the different sectors of Central America to be carried out; (e) to strengthen the basis for horizontal co-operation and, on the basis of that structure, to provide a critical .diagnosis so that technical and economic assistance can contribute to establishing a sound economy in the region.
Venezuela is aware that Central America is confronting a serious crisis with characteristics of its own. We have seen that, together with an economic depression, the area is suffering from political upheaval. Our country certainly could not disregard the problems of Central America and turn its back on them, and that is why, together with other friendly countries, we have attempted to implement the principles of our Latin American political philosophy designed to achieve social, economic and political development.
Consistent with that philosophy, Venezuela has done what it could to implement initiatives aimed at providing real financial resources for Central America. This action has been taken simultaneously through multilateral, regional and bilateral agencies in order to meet the priorities defined by the countries of the region themselves.
Aware of the commercial and financial difficulties of Central America, we have attempted to redirect trade flows in order to expand the presence of Central American goods on the Venezuelan market. At the same time, a large part of our trade transactions have been financed through lines of credit to cover basic imports, such as hydrocarbons and capital goods. At the same time, our country has granted loans to finance the implementation of projects in the infrastructure and production sectors. Most of these resources have been granted on concessionary terms as far as interest rates and payment deadlines are concerned.
The Central Bank of Venezuela has contributed to alleviating temporary instability in the balance of payments by transferring funds to banks in the region. Together with this bilateral action our country has attempted to strengthen the financial capacity of the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
We have placed our trust in various multilateral organizations and implemented bilateral action over the course of many years in order to try to meet the enormous needs of the Central American peoples. It should be pointed out that in the area °f trade the Fund for the Promotion of Venezuelan Exports has maintained a flow of financial resources to meet the growing need for credit in Central America, furthermore, our country has signed agreements of partial scope with the Central ^erican countries, of which agreements are now being evaluated in joint commissions.
In the social sphere, the Venezuelan Government has spared no effort to implement programmes of co-operation for the training of human resources. The Central American Bank of Economic Integration has become a relevant financial mechanism recognized by all. Therefore, we have given it, through the Venezuelan Investment Fund, our own support, and we recently signed a trust contract amounting to 145 million bolivares, and $10 million for development projects and plans in Central America.
The implementation of the Emergency Plan requires not only the political readiness of Governments but also a thorough evaluation of our own national capacities in order to ensure the Plan's complete implementation.
Venezuela is deeply concerned at the situation of refugees and repatriates in Central America, who undoubtedly require immediate attention. The actions outlined in the Emergency Plan seem to respond to existing problems.
According to information supplied by the Action Committee in Support of the Economic and Social Development of Central America (CADESCA), a total of approximately $200 million in food aid and agricultural production assistance has already been allocated. This alarming figure is indicative of the gravity of the problem, which required co-ordinated action on the part of the international community.
The Immediate Action Plan is closely related to the subregion's insufficient financial resources. Therefore, Venezuela is prepared to examine initiatives aimed at reversing the present trend as far as the foreign debt is concerned and the unstable balance of payments facing the countries of the subregion.
In this respect, we should like to point out that Venezuela has made available to the Central American countries considerable financial resources which, by
(Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela) meeting the priorities set by each nation, have helped to ease the financial burden represented by the immense drain of capital abroad.
Noteworthy in that connection are our programmes of financial co-operation begun in 1974 under the Puerto Ordaz Agreement - which in 1980 became the San Jose Agreement, and financing programmes established as the "third window" for the stabilization of balance of payments, the SWAP agreements between the Central Bank of Venezuela and the Central Banks of Central America, amounting to over $50 million, and the financial operations between the Venezuelan Investment Fund and the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
In response to the energy needs of the subregion, Venezuela and Mexico have renewed the San Jose Agreement, whose disbursements for Venezuela alone amount to over $500 million. Furthermore, efforts have been made to reschedule short-term payments payable under the San Jose Agreement by new deposits in the central banks that have been committed under the long-term financial programme.
The programme for economic and social development has been prepared precisely and with well-defined parameters. Venezuela is aware that the subregion is confronting the most serious economic and social crisis in its history. In reviewing the present situation, we see that many of its aspects are related to policies that have not provided the expected results because of the basic fact that the subregion has been subjected to the vicissitudes of the international order which some developed countries still wish to preserve.
Within this frame of reference, it is important to reiterate that Venezuela, in spite of the difficult circumstances with which it is confronted in its own economy, has never been - and will never be - indifferent to the fate of Central America, since our destiny is inextricably linked to that of the Central American peoples.
Since 1983 the Contadora Group has been contributing to the search for a pluralist democracy in the subregion by making strenuous efforts to maintain peace and understanding among its peoples.
As far as institutional aspects are concerned, undoubtedly the strengthening of the institutions for integration in Central America is an important step, as well as the strengthening of the institutional capacity of each of the countries of the subregion.
The future implementation of a Plan such as the one outlined in the document now before us requires an improvement in the operational and administrative capacity of the Central American countries in order properly to implement the contents of the programme. In connection with arrangements for the implementation and follow-up of the Plan, it is interesting to note the already existing informal forum for consultation and co-ordination among the Central American countries. In this respect, I should like to point out that during the fifth meeting of CADESCA, which was held in Caracas on 24 and 25 March, where the Central American Governments presented the special plan for food assistance, the Venezuelan delegation emphasized the importance of achieving the greatest possible co-ordination between the programme to be developed by CADESCA and the special plan to be implemented by the United Nations. In fact, we need to avoid any duplication of effort, be it human, material or financial.
J
On the occasion of the meeting of Presidents of the Group of 8, which was held in November of 1987 in Acapulco, the Acapulco Commitment to Peace, Development and Democracy was adopted. In that Commitment, the Heads of State, in referring to the Central American economic situation, stated, inter alia:
"The process of negotiation now under way should be accompanied by an improvement in the economic and social situation of the countries of the region. Therefore, we have agreed to support the implementation of an International Emergency Programme for Economic Co-operation for the Central American countries, including measures for the reconstruction of their economies."
We are convinced that only through their own efforts will it be possible for the Central American countries to achieve the results that they desire. In this respect, it is important to highlight the efforts already being made in order to determine the priority areas and to provide guidelines for the different sources of International co-operation on the basis of the procedures contained in the Esquipulas II agreement and endorsed in the Joint Declaration of the Central American Presidents at San José, Costa Rica, on 15 and 16 January 1988.
We are on the threshold of a lasting peace, which cannot be maintained without a situation of justice and well-being for people, and for that purpose the co-operation of the international community is essential.
This is my statement on behalf of Venezuela. I would like now to take this opportunity, since I do have the rostrum, to introduce briefly the draft resolution »hich is contained in document A/42/L.49, which has just been distributed in the lall. It is a draft which is entitled: "The situation in Central America: hreats to international peace and security and peace initiatives. Special Programmes of economic assistance".
This draft resolution, as can be seen from the list in the text, has 35 co-sponsors, and two more have joined the list. Therefore, the total number of co-sponsors thus far is 37 States from different geographical regions. The draft is really very simple. It does not require a lengthy explanation. Like all United Nations draft resolutions, it contains a preambular section and an operative section. There are nine preambular paragraphs and nine operative paragraphs. The preambular paragraphs refer, of course, to background documentation on the subject we are now considering. I do not believe I need to make too many comments on this, though I would like to draw the Assembly's attention to the last three preambular paragraphs, in which we reiterate appreciation to the Contadora Group and the Support Group for their contribution to the peace process in Central America.
The next paragraph notes with satisfaction the Joint Political Declaration and the Joint Economic Communique issued by the European Community and the States Party to the General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration and Panama, resulting from the Hamburg Ministerial Conference on Political Dialogue and Economic Co-operation between the European Community and its member States, the States of Central America and of the Contadora Group, held on 29 February and 1 March 1988.
Then there is another preambular paragraph that refers to compliance with the Esquipulas II agreements and the implementation of a special plan of economic co-operation for Central America. As this preambular paragraph says, this requires the political will and determination of States so that peace and development can be consolidated in the region.
As far as the operative section of the draft resolution is concerned, in the first two paragraphs, we have rightly recognized the efforts made by the
ÄW/pC
(Mr. Aguilar, Venezuela) Secretary-General and we thank him for formulating and presenting the plan which we are new considering.
There is also a well-deserved appreciation expressed for the important support given by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) , the Economic Commission for Latin American and the Caribbean, and the various regional integration and co-operation bodies in the preparation of the special plan. The next operative paragraph requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme and in close co-ordination with the Governments of Central America, and in consultation with donors, to use his best efforts in the promotion, co-ordination, monitoring and follow-up of the special plan, and to make, as soon as possible, institutional arrangements in order to facilitate the fulfillment of the commitments of the international community.
Operative paragraph 4 emphasizes the urgent need to provide the Central American countries with financial resources on concessional and favourable terms, in addition to those they are already receiving from the international community.
Then, in operative paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, the organs, agencies and organizations of the United Nations system, and especially the specialized agencies mentioned in paragraph 6, and the international community, are all requested to co-operate fully for the implementation of this plan.
Operative paragraph 5 says specifically that, taking into account the emergency situation faced by the Central American countries, the organs, agencies and organizations of the United Nations system are requested to take immediate steps to mobilize additional financial resources and to participate actively in the implementation of the activities supporting the goals and objectives of the special )lan. Then, in operative paragraph 6, there is a list of agencies that are »articularly important in this field, such as the United Nations Development
M^c
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) , the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. All of these agencies and organs are asked to continue and expand, to the extent possible, their assistance programmes on a priority basis, and to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of the activities supporting the goals and objectives of the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America.
Then, paragraph 7 - still along the same lines - urges the international community and international organizations to increase their technical, economic and financial co-operation with the Central American countries.
Operative paragraph 8 is extremely important. It recognizes the vital importance of the Central American economic integration process as a fundamental element for the economic and social development of the region, and it urges all governments and international organizations to contribute to strengthen this process.
Lastly, operative paragraph 9 is a purely procedural paragraph providing for a review procedure. It decided to review and evaluate the progress in the implementation of the special plan and it requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of this draft resolution, with whatever recommendations are deemed appropriate.
I would like, on behalf of the co-sponsors, to invite all the countries represented here, in particular those countries which are in a position to offer the assistance that is requested in this draft resolution, and which is necessary
for the proper implementation of the plan prepared by the Secretary-General, to heed these appeals and to provide all the co-operation that is needed in order to achieve the goals of this plan: that is, the establishment of peace and security in the region, a region which has for so many years suffered the consequences of a critical social and economic as well as political situation.
Mr. DELPECH (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like first of all to stress the importance of this resumed session of the General Assembly to obtain concerted action on the part of the United Nations and the international community on a problem of utmost importance to all Latin Americans: the critical economic situation of Central America.
The Republic of Argentina believes that, as the Contadora and Support Groups have always insisted, one of the causes of the Central American crisis is the persistence, until the recent past, of socio-economic structures that historically have not adequately responded to the just expectations of the peoples of the region, nor have there been enough changes to ensure an economic growth that can support stable democratic regimes.
We have insisted on the need to change this situation and to foster the growth of the region so that the political will of the five Central American Presidents, as expressed in Esquipulas II, can be given the support that is essential.
The very important steps that are being taken by the Central Americans in the peace process that began in Guatemala require that support from the international community.
The attainment of a definitive peace in the region and the strengthening of democratic systems in Central America are profoundly related to the reconstruction of the productive apparatus and to the dynamic growth of their economies.
This will make possible an effective participation of the Central American peoples in the democratic institutions that the five Governments of the region have determined to strengthen. We must commend and applaud the efforts of the Central Americans to resolve their differences through dialogue and negotiation. The best way of participating in those efforts is to give our support so that they can continue to make progress towards the peace they have resolved to attain.
It is worthwhile to point out certain aspects of the diagnosis presented to us by the Secretary-General, since they illustrate the tragic situation confronting the region. The economic situation in Central America has deteriorated progressively since the end of the 1970s, affecting all areas of economic activity in the region.
As a result of the worsening of that economic crisis, there has been a sharp decline in the per capita gross national product (GNP) of the region, which is equivalent today to that of the Central American countries as a whole 20 years ago. This deterioration is in contrast with the sustained economic growth that they experienced in the decades of the 1950s and 1960s, and even at the beginning of the 1970s. Furthermore, that situation has been worsened by the effects of the armed conflict, one of whose negative aspects is the existence of over 800,000 refugees, repatriates, and displaced persons in the countries of the region.
The tragedy of the refugees and displaced persons is one of the roost painful side effects of the Central American crisis. The Contadora and Support Groups have been insisting that the international community must be fully aware of the seriousness of this problem and co-ordinate its efforts to support measures aimed at resolving it.
Natural disasters have also contributed to a worsening of the situation. A severe drought reduced the energy-producing capacity of certain areas and affected agricultural production which has stagnated in this decade, obliging States to resort to imports that in some cases represent 20 per cent to 30 per cent of the internal supply of those countries. Other facets of the Central American crisis have been the decline in intraregional trade, which has been reduced to half its 1980 volume, and the decrease of the participation of the industrial sector in the GNP of the subregion.
(Me. Delpech, Argentina)
As a result of growing internal economic difficulties and adverse international conditions, the external indebtedness of the subregion increased spectacularly by 123 per cent between 1980 and 1986. One direct effect of this indebtedness was a continued increase in debt servicing which rose to a level from 25 per cent to 40 per cent of the region's exports.
Lastly, social indicators, as could be expected, have also been negatively affected by the crisis. In absolute terms the number of illiterates increased from 3.7 to 4.2 million between 1970 and 1985.
Available data point to the integral nature of the Central American crisis and the need for urgent comprehensive solutions, as well as in the short-, medium- and long-term. That is why we support the approach of the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America submitted to us by the Secretary-General, because it provides for action at various levels aimed at an integral and structural solution to the Central American economic crisis.
We also share the objective of the special plan, which aims at a mobilization of additional support on more favourable terms to complement the assistance already being given to the Central American countries by the international community. In this respect, we should like to congratulate the Secretary-General and Mr. Ramirez-Ocampo and Mr. Rosenthal for the very serious and technically expert work that they did in preparing this important plan.
On 29 November 1987 the eight Presidents of the countries of the permanent political co-operation and consultation mechanism signed the "Acapulco Commitment to Peace, Development and Democracy". That document expresses their will to support the implementation of an international emergency programme for economic co-operation for the Central American countries.
Today that programme for emergency action and reconstruction Is reflected in this special plan of co-operation for Central America submitted to us by the Secretary-General to which, as I have already said, we give our full support. At the same time, we urge the international community at large to give the same support to the plan by participating actively in the measures contained in it.
In line with what was stated by our Presidents in Acapulco, we reiterate our commitment to facilitate trade with the Central American region; to strengthen its financial institutions; to revitalize its plan of integration; and to co-operate in specific projects in the areas of emergency food assistance, scientific and technical co-operation, and assistance to refugees and displaced persons.
The Republic of Argentina has been making enormous efforts to support the region, in keeping with the commitment assumed in Acapulco. In this connection, our country recently made a large contribution to the Fund for the Economic and Social Development of Central America. We have also been contributing to the food security of the region with contributions in kind, amounting to 30,000 tons of grains. In this context, I should like to mention the recent signing of the treaty of regional assistance for food emergencies, which provides the appropriate framework to continue to channel our co-operation in this field.
Finally, the constitutional Government of my country has, in co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), begun an important programme of technical co-operation which includes activities in the fields of foreign trade, the training of business people, the preparation of trade documentation, the construction of low-cost housing, the development of a leather industry, research in the agro-industrial sector, aid to the agricultural and livestock sector, the management of foreign debt, geological mining research, the transportation of hydro-carbons, computerization of the pharmaceutical sector and support for the health-care sector.
Peace, freedom, democracy and growth, and therefore the spiritual and material well-being of the Central American peoples, are all primary and constant interests of Latin Americans. We are all committed to the attainment of the noble objectives the Central Americans themselves set in the Esquipulas II agreements.
That political will of the Central Americans, a free expression of their sovereignty, deserves the broadest, most resolute support from the international community. That is the purpose of the plan submitted to us by the Secretary-Gen er al.
The time has come for us to reflect in deeds our encouragement and appreciation of the efforts the Central Americans are making for peace in their region.
Mr. BARNETT (Jamaica): My delegation welcomes the convening of this resumed session as part of the continuing process to achieve firm and lasting peace in Central America.
The signing of the Esquipulas II agreements in Costa Rica last August provided the impetus not only for countries of that region but also for the international community as a whole to tackle the resolution of the political and security crisis
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
(Mr. Barnett, Jamaica) facing the Central American region. The efforts of five Governments of that region, as well as those of the Contadora and support groups, must again be commended.
Political turbulence aggravates economic problems, reinforcing the inextricable linkage between peace and development. Having paved the way for the resolution of the political and security problems through the acceptance by the five Governments of the Central American region of these recent agreements, the social and economic rehabilitation of the countries of that region must now be addressed.
Efforts at rehabilitation require the assistance of the international community. We are therefore heartened that through General Assembly resolutions 42/1 and 42/204 the United Nations is involved in this initiative, and we generally support the special plan of economic co-operation for Central America contained in document A/42/949.
The grave economic crisis facing the entire region today has been exacerbated in the Central American subregion by the political tensions and hostilities there. The problems are manifold, affecting both national development and regional , integration efforts. The special plan, which we note is based on national priorities, correctly gives a detailed and extensive consideration of the economic and social problems, addressing both immediate and long-term needs, while tackling central problems such as external indebtedness.
One would have thought, however, that in a plan as comprehensive as this one is, all States of Central America which are affected in some way by the conflicts : would have been given appropriate attention and assistance. Unfortunately paragraph 35 of the document under consideration makes only a passing reference to the influx of refugees from neighbouring countries into Belize and the social and economic problems it creates.
(Mr. Barnett, Jamaica)
Happily, Belize has not been directly involved in these conflicts, which have stirred international attention. But, in addition to the problems caused by population displacement, Belize has been affected by the existence of a dispute with another country of the region which, although bilateral in nature, has exposed its economy to grave consequences and threatens its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The situation of Belize cannot, therefore, be ignored, and appropriate assistance must be channelled in that direction. For too long has Belize been the forgotten State of Central America, as though it does not or ought not exist. But Belize is there and will remain a sovereign State. It is somewhat surprising that the United Nations, in preparing this plan, even given its origins, did not from the outset take account of this geographical fact, even if the other Central American countries were disinclined to do so.
The evolution of the Esquipulas II agreements involved five countries of the Central American region. However, it is now time to recognize that Belize is a sovereign member State of Central America, notwithstanding its other ties with the wider region. Due recognition should properly be given to this in the text of the draft resolution (A/42/L. 49) before the Assembly for adoption at this resumed session.	•
We are hopeful that, with the cessation of hostilities in the region and the implementation of this new plan of economic co-operation for all Central American countries, the firm and lasting peace and development that is envisaged in the various agreements and United Nations resolutions will be finally achieved.
•	The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
AtiC A A A '-a
PROVISIONAL
A/42/PV.114
17 August 1988
ENGLISH
Forty-second session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 16 August 1988, at 10 a.m.
President;	Mr. FLORIN	(German Democratic Republic)
-	Resumption of the forty-second session of the General Assembly
-	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations (Article 19 of the Charter) (A/42/92 5/Add. 3) [121] (continued)
-	Adoption of the agenda and organization of work; request for the inclusion of an additional item in the agenda of the forty-second session: [8] (continued)
(a)	Note by the Secretary-General
(b)	Report of the Secretary-General
Statement by the President
Statement by the Seeretary-General
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English an interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
8 8-64110/A 6181V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
RESUMPTION OF THE FORTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I declare the forty-second session of the General Assembly resumed for the purpose of considering the request of the Secretary-General, contained in document A/42/244, for the inclusion of an additional item on the agenda of the forty-second session, entitled "Financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group".
I should also inform the General Assembly that the question whether, in the present urgent circumstances, a special session of the General Assembly should be convened or, alternatively, whether a resumed session of the General Assembly should be convened, was considered. After careful consideration and consultations it was concluded that a resumed session would be the most effective and expeditious manner for considering the request of the Secretary-General.
May I take it that this is acceptable to the Assembly?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 121 (continued)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (ARTICLE 19 OF THE CHARTER) (A/42/ 925/Add. 3)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Before turning to the item on our agenda for this morning, I should like, in keeping with the established practice, to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/42/925/Add.3, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he informs me that since the publication of his note dated 18 March 1988, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Romania and Sao Tome and Principe have made the necessary payments to reduce their arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes due note of that information?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK*. REQUEST FOR THE INCLUSION OF AN ADDITIONAL ITEM IN THE AGENDA OF THE FORTY-SECOND SESSION (a) Note by the Secretary-General (a/42/244)
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (A/42/244/Add.l and Add.l/Corr.l)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In connection with this item a note by and a report of the Secretary-General have been circulated in documents A/42/24 4/Add . 1 and Add .1/Corr .1. In his note the Secretary-General, pursuant to rule 15 of the rules of procedure, requests that an additional item of an important and urgent character be placed on the agenda entitled, "Financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group". Owing to the nature of the item, he also requests that the item be allocated to the Fifth Committee for consideration.
Under the circumstances of the present case, may I take it that the General Assembly agrees that the provision of rule 40 of the rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of the General Committee on the question of the inclusion of an additional item on the agenda, could be waived? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): May I also take it that the Assembly wishes to include an additional item to read as follows: "145. Financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group" and to allocate that item to the Fifth Committee for consideration?
It was so decided.
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): It was with relief and satisfaction that the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq conflict announced by the Seer etary—Gen er al, Javier Perez de Cuellar, and the unanimous adoption of the pertinent resolution 619 (1988) by the Security Council were noted world wide.
(The President)
I welcome and support these accords. They represent a significant step forward towards a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement of the conflict, as called for earlier in Security Council resolution 598 (1987). Now there exists a real chance to settle the eight-year long conflict, which has caused immense human suffering and enormous material damage, by political means.
This is - and on this point the reactions of States concur - an essential contribution towards strengthening security in the region and peace in the world at large. It has again become evident that given good will, a readiness for compromise, and due regard for each other's interests, it is possible to find rational solutions even to difficult disputes. It is a hopeful sign that the emerging change for the better in international relations is yielding positive effects for the exclusively political settlement of regional conflicts. Special credit and appreciation are due to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in peacefully resolving conflicts. The accords reached furnish fresh proof of the great possibilities and potential of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of international conflicts. I am convinced that the present session will take decisions which, serve the practical implementation of peace efforts.
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I now call on the Jecretary-Gener al.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Mr. President, allow me, first of all, to thank you for your very kind words.
The General Assembly has before it, in document A/42/244/Add.l and Corr.l, a report containing my recommendations for the financing of the newly-established United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG) . A decision on the financing of this new peace-keeping operation is urgently required.
The cease-fire between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq is due to become effective at 0300 hours GMT on 20 August. That is less than four days away. It is essential that by that time United Nations military observers should be on the ground to perform the functions entrusted to them in operative paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), namely to verify, confirm and supervise the cease-fire and withdrawal.
That is why I hope that the Assembly will be able to take a very quick decision to approve the recommendations in my report.
Ever since Security Council resolution 598 (1987) was adopted, contingency planning has been under way in the Secretariat for the deployment of an observer group to Iran and Iraq. Towards the end of last month, when there seemed to be a marked improvement in the prospects for implementation of resolution 598 (1987),
decided to send to Iran and Iraq a technical team, led by the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), Lt. General Martin Vads, to work out on an urgent basis, with the authorities of the two countries, the modalities for the despatch of the team of United Nations observers required under operative paragraph 2 of resolution 598 (1987). General Vadset's report, which I
received on 4 August, enabled me to refine the contingency planning already undertaken in the Secretariat and to present to the Security Council on 7 August a report containing my recommendations for the establishment of the Observer Group.
The next day I was able to announce that the cease-fire would take place on 20 August. On the following day, 9 August, the Security Council adopted its resolution 619 (1988) , in which it approved my report and decided to set up the Observer Group on that basis. Within hours of the adoption of the resolution, two advance parties were on their way to Baghdad and Tehran to establish liaison with the authorities of Iran and Iraq and to organize the reception of the main body of military observers. Since then there has been a steady build-up of the advance parties, and most of the main body, both of observers and of signals personnel, are due to reach the mission area today or tomorrow.
The setting up of this Observer Group comes at a time when there is a most welcome renewal of interest in the peace-making and peace-keeping functions of the United Nations and at a time when several other new peace-keeping operations are under active discussion. It is thus of the greatest importance that this new operation should be a success.
There has also, however, been increased concern in recent years about the financial arrangements for peace-keeping and about the unfair burden which, for various reasons, has sometimes fallen on those Member States which so generously contribute troops and thus make these operations possible. This is why I said in my report of 7 August to the Security Council that one of the essential conditions for UNIIMOG to be effective is that adequate financing arrangements be made to cover its costs.

The decision which the General Assembly is now asked to take is thus of very great importance, not only for peace between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq, which is so ardently desired by the Members of this Organization, but also for the wider standing of the United Nations itself.
It is in this spirit that I express the strong hope that the recommendations contained in my report will be favourably received and that they will be approved by an early resolution of the General Assembly.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Given the urgency of the matter before us, which has just been stressed so forcefully by the Secretary-General, I shall now adjourn this meeting and reconvene tomorrow afternoon at 3 p.m. to consider the report of the Fifth Committee with a view to approving it as expeditiously as possible. I am confident that the Fifth Committee will similarly complete its work as speedily as possible in view of the overriding urgency of the situation that we face with the cease-fire between Iran and Iraq scheduled to come into effect at 0300 GMT on 20 August: less than four days from now.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVIS IONAL
A/42/PV.115
18 August 1988
'	>	-	ENGLISH
Forty-second session
GENERAL ^'S’SMBiY' i ' '
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 17 August 1988 , at 3 p.m.
Pres ident;
Mr . FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic)
- Tribute to the memory of His Excellency General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, President
of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
- Financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group: report of the Fifth Committee (A/42/963) [145]
- Suspension of the forty-second session
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
88-64116/A	6214V (E)
BG/4
The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL MOHAMMAD ZIA-UL-HAQ, PRESIDENT OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN
The PRESIDENT (interpretation	from Russian) : Before we take up	the item
on	the	agenda for this afternoon, it is	my sad duty to inform the General	Assembly
of	the	untimely and tragic death of the	President of the Islamic Republic	of
Pakistan, His Excellency General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq. It is with deep sorrow that I learned a few hours ago of the death of President Zia-ul-Haq, who was known for his support for the cause of peace and international understanding and who had deep faith in the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the representative of Pakistan to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of Pakistan and to the bereaved family. I wish also to express deep sympathy to the families of the persons accompanying him who lost their lives in these tragic circumstances.
I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His Excellency General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the Secretary-Gener al.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It was with a sense of deep shock and sorrow that I learned of the tragic death today of President zia-ul-Haq.
President Zia was a statesman and a far-sighted leader who commanded wide respect throughout the international community. I had the privilege of working closely with him on a number of issues over the years, most recently on the situation relating to Afghanistan. I also had the pleasure of receiving him on several occasions at United Nations Headquarters, and was looking forward to his visit to New York again in the near future.
President Zia's deep convictions and directness, his high intelligence and profound grasp of international affairs made of him a most valued and trusted partner in our endeavours to confront common problems. His unwavering faith in the United Nations and his unfailing courtesy were equally a source of constant encouragement to me.
As we face this immense loss today, I am sure I voice the feelings of the entire international community in expressing the hope that peace and stability will prevail at a critical time for that sensitive region.
In this hour of mourning, I should like to express my most sincere condolences to the Government and people of Pakistan and to the bereaved family of President Zia-ul-Haq, as well as to the families of those who so tragically lost their lives with him.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Tunisia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) (interpretation from French): The African Group has learned with great sorrow of the tragic death of President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq of Pak is tan.
President Zia-ul-Haq, who was a man of faith, a devout man, throughout his life, was born on 12 August 1924. In his youth he gave his support to the movement for the establishment of a sovereign, Muslim State of Pakistan. He entered the army in 1945 and had a brilliant career, rising to the highest ranks and to the highest levels of military responsibility in his country.
He had presided over the destiny of Pakistan since 1977, and in so doing confirmed his country's distinguished role on the international scene and in particular at the United Nations, in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and in the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
President Zia-ul-Haq played an important and active role in the international effort to restore peace and stability to his region, and in the cause of world peace.
On behalf of the African Group, I extend our sincere condolences to the delegation of Pakistan and to Pakistan's Government and people.
We express our condolences also to the families of the other Pakistani victims of the tragic accident and to the families and countries of the persons of other nationalities who lost their lives in the same accident.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Japan, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. KAGAMI (Japan); On behalf of the Group of Asian States, I wish to offer our most sincere condolences and deepest sympathy to the Government and people of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and to the bereaved family of
(Mr. Kagami, Japan) President Zia—ul—Haq, of whose sudden death we learned with profound shock this morning. We mourn the loss of this leader of a fellow Asian State and pay tribute to h is memory .
I also wish to express our heartfelt sorrow and condolences to the families of all the other passengers who were on the plane with President Zia and are feared to have perished.	’
It was only in May this year that the international community rejoiced at the news of the entering into force of the Geneva Accords. These Accords, the culmination of the lengthy and difficult negotiations conducted through the good offices of the United Nations, signaled what’ all hoped would be the beginning of the end of the tragic conflict that had visited such misery on Afghanistan.
A large share of the credit for the success of this international effort to date must go to President Zia and Pakistan, which became one of the principal parties to the Accords. Faced with this tragic conflict in a neighbouring State, it was essential to Pakistan to help bring about peace. President Zia, pursuing this goal with strength and determination, helped to make it a reality, and for this the whole world will remember him. It is our hope that his untimely death will not endanger the great progress that has been made, and that a comprehensive peace - surely the most fitting memorial to President Zia - will soon take hold in the region.
Finally, allow me to express, in the capacity of the representative of Japan, the sincere condolences of my own delegation on the demise of President Zia—ul—Haq, a great statesman of Pakistan, who contributed greatly to the strengthening of the friendly relations between Pakistan and Japan.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Poland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr . NOWORYTA (Poland): On behalf of the Group of Eastern European States, I wish to express our deep sorrow at the tragic accident today which has taken the life of the outstanding statesman of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq. The accident brought death also to many other people. We fully associate ourselves with the feelings expressed by the preceding speakers.
We wish to convey our most sincere condolences to the delegation of Pakistan to the United Nations, to the Government and people of Pakistan and to the bereaved families of all the victims of this tragic accident.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of Cuba, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group.
Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): In my capacity as Chairman of the Latin American and Caribbean States, I am here to express our profound condolences at the tragic passing of General Mohammad Zia-ul—Haa, President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. We express our profound sorrow to our colleague Ambassador Shah Nawaz, the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan to the United Nations, at the event that occurred so briefly after the take-off of the transport plane that was carrying President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haa and some of his colleagues, and the Ambassador of the United States of America to Pakistan, Mr. Arnold L. Raphel.
As we stand here, we remember the occasions on which we heard President Zia-ul-Haa express the position of Pakistan on major international problems, and we know that peoples are always able to transcend painful events and to build for the future. We extend our condolences to Pakistan, and know the Pakistani people have the strength to continue their country's struggle for peace and development.
On behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States, we extend our most profound condolences to the relatives of President Mohammad Zia-ul-Hao, to the Pakistani people, and to the relatives of all those others who lost their lives.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Count YORK von Wartenburg (Federal Republic of Germany} : We were deeply moved and indeed shocked when we heard only this morning of the tragic news of the accident that took the life of the Head of State of Pakistan. On behalf of the members of the Group of Western European and Other States, I express to the people and the Government of Pakistan, as well as to our colleagues in the delegation of Pakistan, our sincere sympathy.
President Zia-ul-Haa was a national leader of great stature. His dedication and his incessant work for the well-being and the development of Pakistan will never be forgotten, and neither will his tireless efforts for peace in the region and the help and assistance he gave to refugees. Specifically at this moment, when our hopes were strengthend and all the endeavours for the restoration of peace in the area in which he so greatly participated are close to being realized, his loss is felt with pain not only in his own country but far beyond.
We share the grief of the people of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, of their Government and, above all, of his bereaved family. Others have died in the same accident with the President - high officials and officers and also our colleague, the Ambassador of the United States to Pakistan. We wish to extend to all of their families our heartfelt condolences for their sudden and so painful losses.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Mauritania, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. PULP - BOYE (Mauritania) (interpretation from Arabic) : The Koran says: . "Every soul shall have
A taste of death:
And only on the Day
Of Judgment shall you
Be paid your full recompense.
Only he who is saved
Far from the Fire
And admitted to the Garden
Will have attained
The object (of Life):
For the life of this world
Is but goods and chattels
Of deception." (The Holy Koran, 111:185)
Today the world is shocked and deeply grieved to learn of the death of President Zia-ul-Haq. It is indeed a great Loss for the fraternal people of Pakistan, who have enjoyed considerable stability under the Government and leadership of President Zia-ul-Haq. His sudden passing is a major loss to the Islamic world, as well as to the Non-Aligned Movement.
On behalf of the Group of Arab States, over which I have the honour to preside, I must say that I cannot find the appropriate words to express the genuine feelings of the Arab peoples and leaders, including the Arab Ambassadors here at the United Nations, in connection with the passing of this great Islamic leader.
(Mr. Quid Boye, Mauritania)
I should also like, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, to extend our sincere condolences to all the families of those who have died in this tragic accident and particularly the family of the United States Ambassador to Pakistan. I reaffirm here the sincere condolences of the Arab Group and extend them to the delegation of Pakistan at the United Nations, as well as to the great people of Pakistan.
The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representive of Jordan, who will speak on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
16
Mr, SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic) : "Among the Believers are men who have been true to their Covenant with God: of them some have completed their vow to the extreme, and some wtill wait: But they have never changed their determination in the least." (The Holy Koran, XXXIII;23) It was with deep regret that we learned this morning in the press of the death of His Excellency the President of Pakistan, Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, as a result of a tragic aeroplane accident. While this was the will of God, we were none the Less shaken by this tragedy, which was a grave one for the fraternal country of Pakistan. Pakistan has lost a statesman, a man of law and order. It has lost a great man who built the country into a great edifice among the nations of the world. We in the Islamic world have the greatest respect and appreciation for the deceased, for his efforts to advance and defend the cause of the Islamic nation. Those efforts found expression in his work to find solutions to so many of the regional and international conflicts of the Islamic world.
His soul is now in the hands of God and enjoys eternal life, but before his martyrdom the deceased saw a glimmer of hope for peace and security in the Islamic nation. This was the fruit of his efforts. The world can testify to his contributions to international peace and security. He worked tirelessly towards that goal, a goal we all want to reach without delay.
Permit me to share my personal acquaintance with the deceased, when he was on a personal mission to Jordan following the 1967 war. I knew him well as a distinguished officer, deserving of the greatest respect and appreciation in my country. I respected him highly.
On behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and on behalf of my i* country, I should like to convey to the family of the deceased our deep regrets and condolences. Our condolences go also to the people and Government of fraternal
(Mr, Salah, Jordan)
Pakistan. May his family find strength and his country recompense in his efforts. His memory, his work and his endeavours to serve his country are immortal.
I extend our condolences to the fraternal delegation of Pakistan and to the families of all the victims of this tragic incident. May God bear all the victims to heaven.	,
We are confident that fraternal Pakistan will overcome this tragedy with the patience and faith for which it has always been known. We pray God will endow Pakistan with peace, security and stability.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the United States, Mr. Herbert S. Okun, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. OKUN (United States of America) : As representative of the host country, it is with deep sadness that I express the profound condolences of the Government and people of the United States of America, and the personal sympathy of Ambassador Walters, to the people and Government of Pakistan for the tragic plane crash which took the lives of President Zia-ul-Haq and others earlier today. Our hearts go out to the bereaved families of all the victims.
We grieve also at the untimely loss of our colleagues, the United States ambassador in Pakistan, Arnold Raphel, and General Wassom of his staff. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all those who have extended condolences to my Government and to their families.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Permanent Representative of Pakistan, Mr. S. Shah Nawaz.
Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): On behalf of the Government and people of Pakistan I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General and to the representatives of the various regional groups our deep appreciation for their kind sentiments and expressions of sympathy and condolences at this moment of great tragedy for my country.
The President of Pakistan, General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, lost his life today in an aeroplane crash which followed an explosion on board shortly after takeoff from an airfield in the vicinity of the city of Bahawalpur. President General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq was no ordinary man. He guided the destiny of Pakistan for 11 fateful years during which Pakistan, under his leadership, faced and overcame formidable challenges, both to its internal stability and to its external security.
The President was a deeply religious person and acted in total conformity with the precepts of Islam, in both his personal and public life. He was a man of profound convictions who felt as strongly committed to the welfare of the people of Pakistan as he did to the welfare and integrity of the Islamic world in particular and of humanity at large. To work for the unity and progress of the Islamic ummah was a passion of his life and a substantive contribution towards the attainment of that objective will remain forever engraved on the palimpsest of history.
The President believed passionately in the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter, and attended and addressed the General Assembly whenever he had an opportunity to do so. It will be recalled that he first came to this Assembly in 1981 in his capacity as Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and came again in 1985 on the occasion of the celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, addressing the General Assembly on both those occasions.
(Mr. Shah Nawaz, Pakistan)
The President believed that the forty-third session of the General Assembly, due to begin in September this year, would be a memorable session, which in his view would be one not so much of promises as of the fulfilment of promises. The President felt particularly gratified that the United Nations had been successful in bringing about peaceful solutions of the conflict in Afghanistan and of the Iran-Iraq war, and that it was on the threshold of similar successes with regard to the situations in southern Africa, Western Sahara, Cyprus and Kampuchea. The President had already made up his mind to address the General Assembly at its forty-third session in order to salute the world body, and the Secretary-General in particular, for those achievements. Alas, he was cut down by the cruel hand of tragedy before he could fulfil his cherished desire.
(Mr. Shah Nawaz, Pakistan)
The President was at once a man of great strength and great humility. He was an upright man who never lost his equanimity and who was always kind and considerate towards his fellow beings. He was a charitable man, ever ready to forgive his opponents, to care for the needy and to comfort the poor. The example he set during his lifetime will no doubt serve as a source of everlasting inspiration and strength to the people of Pakistan.
Before concluding, I should also like to express our deep sympathy and profound condolences on the loss of the life of Ambassador Arnold Raphel, the Ambassador of the United States of America to Pakistan, who also perished in the tragic aeroplane crash which claimed the life of the President and a number of his close associates. Ambassador Arnold Raphel was an outstanding diplomat and a person of great charm and ability, whom I knew personally and whose friendship I greatly cherished.
Mr. President, may I once again say, in conclusion, how deeply moved we are by the expressions of sympathy and the tributes paid to the President, General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, by you and the Secretary-General and by so many other friends and colleagues who have spoken today at this tragic moment.
AGENDA ITEM 145
FINANCING OF THE UNITED NATIONS IRAN-IRAQ MILITARY OBSERVER GROUP; REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/42/963)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee, Mr. Felix Aboly-Bi-Kouassi of Côte d'Ivoire, to present the Committee's report on agenda item 145.
Mr. ABOLY-BI-KOUASSI (Côte d'Ivoire), Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee (interpretation from French): Yesterday the General Assembly decided to include on the agenda of its forty-second session and to allocate to the Fifth Committee for consideration the question entitled "Financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group".
(Mr. Aboly-Bi-Kouassi, Rapporteur, Fifth Committee)
Today I have the honour to inform the General Assembly that the Fifth Committee has discharged its duties responsibly and in as timely a manner as possible, while giving the matter thorough consideration, as is always expected of it.
I have genuine pleasure in this afternoon presenting the report of the Fifth Committee (A/42/963) , which recommends that the General Assembly adopt a draft resolution on the financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG).
In the draft resolution the General Assembly decides to appropriate $35.7 million for the operation of the Group for an initial period of approximately three months of the six-month period authorized by the Security Council, beginning 9 August 1988.
Paragraph 2 of the draft resolution sets out the special arrangements decided upon by the General Assembly for the way in which the cost should be apportioned among Member States. In the draft resolution the General Assembly also invites voluntary contributions to the Military Observer Group both in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General.
Finally, the General Assembly requests the Secretary-General to submit by 1 October 1988 an updated report on the financing of the Group, including the status of voluntary contributions, so that it may consider the financing of the Group beyond the initial period of about three months for which, as I have already said, an appropriation of $35.7 million is requested.
It is my duty to emphasize one point of clarification in connection with paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, concerning the composition of a group of Member States. It is based on the principle for the allocation of expenses followed so far by the General Assembly when financing peace-keeping operations,
(Mr. Aboly-Bi-Kouassi, Rapporteur, .	Fi f th Commi t tee)
since the first financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) , going back to 1978-79.
In any event, the Fifth Committee will in. due course consider in more detail that matter, among others, particularly in the context of the updated report requested of the Secretary-General in paragraph 7.
I have pleasure in recommending on behalf of the Fifth Committee that the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution contained in the report that I have just introduced.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall consider that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth Committee.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the various recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that in paragraph 7 of its decision 34/401, the General Assembly decided that when the same draft resolution is considered in a main Committee and in plenary meeting a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once - that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.	•
The General Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended in paragraph 6 of the report of the Fifth Committe (A/42/963) .
(The President)
The Fifth Committee decided without a vote to recommend to the General Assembly the adoption of that draft resolution. May I take it that the Assembly adopts the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 42/233).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I shall now call on representatives who wish to explain their positions.
Mr. NOWORYTA (Poland) : Poland joined the consensus on the draft resolution concerning the financing of the United Nations Iran-Iraa Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG), as contained in document A/42/963, in spite of reservations concerning the principle of the inclusion of my country in the list of countries in paragraph 3 of the draft resolution. It did so on the understanding that final decisions thereon will be considered and taken at the forty-third session.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call on the Secretary-General. ’
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Mr. President, the dispatch with which the General Assembly under your distinguished leadership has dealt with our urgent task of making financial arrangements for the United Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG) has indeed been impressive. It has swiftly complemented Security Council resolution 619 (1988) and has created a sound basis for the functioning of UNIIMOG.
With this step by the General Assembly the process we have initiated for lasting peace between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq will be further strengthened.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should like to express my special appreciation to Mr. Conrad Mselle, Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and to Mr. Henrik Amneus, Chairman of the Fifth Committee, for the very efficient and speedy manner in which they have conducted their work, thus enabling the General Assembly to deal with this urgent matter. I should also like warmly to thank Mr. Luis Maria Gomez, Assistant Secretary-General for Programme Planning, Budget and Finance, and Controller, for his very effective contribution in facilitating our work through his comprehensive and analytical assistance.
I am sure I speak for the entire General Assembly in wishing the Secretary-General every success in his difficult task of bringing about a just and durable peace between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 145. SUSPENSION OF THE SESSION
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I declare the forty-second session suspended.
The meeting rose at 4. 30
United Nations
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FIFTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records
1st PLENARY MEETING
(Opening meeting) Tuesday, 31 May 1988, at 3.20 p.m.
NEW YORK
President. Mr. Peter FLORIN (German Democratic Republic).
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of the German Democratic Republic
1.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In accordance with rule 30 of the rules of procedure, I declare open the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly, the third special session devoted to disarmament.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
2.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I now invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
3.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The great interest shown by States Members of the United Nations in sending high-level representatives, as well as the presence of representatives of non-governmental organizations, attest to the particular importance the entire world attaches to this session. In the spirit of the target set by the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, namely, to guarantee security through disarmament, the peoples hope that this forum will provide a strong impetus to disarmament negotiations. The most recent positive developments in international relations have given rise to a growing optimism. The Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles constitutes a first effective step of major scope in the field of nuclear disarmament. It is our expectation that progress will be achieved at the current meeting in Moscow between General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev and President Ronald Reagan.
4.	The fact that these two events coincide—the summit meeting and this special session—is of great symbolic significance: it demonstrates that dialogue on a matter of decisive importance for the survival of mankind, disarmament, is being intensified in all
areas, bilaterally and multilaterally, in the interest of all peoples. I wish all success to the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
5.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Before turning to the next item on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with the established practice, to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/S-15/18, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he informs the General Assembly that eight Member States are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter. May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information?
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
6.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly at the beginning of each session shall appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of nine members.
7.	In accordance with precedents, and taking into account the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament as endorsed by the General Assembly at its forty-second session [see resolution 42/40], it is proposed that the Credentials Committee of the special session be the same as that of the forty-second session of the Assembly, namely: Argentina, Barbados, Cape Verde, China, the Federal Republic of Germany, Kenya, Singapore, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. If there is no objection, I shall consider the Credentials Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided (decision S-15/11).
8.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In this connection, may I invite the
attention of members of the Assembly to a note verbale from the Secretary-General, dated 16 March 1988, in which it was stated that credentials should be issued for all representatives to the fifteenth special session in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
9.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I now invite members of the General Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of the fifteenth special session. I call on the representative of Pakistan.
10.	Mr. AHMED (Pakistan): It is a great privilege and honour for me to submit the candidacy of Mr. Peter Florin, Deputy Foreign Minister of the German Democratic Republic, for the presidency of the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly, the third special session devoted to disarmament. In putting forward the candidacy of Mr. Florin, I should note that it v/as unanimously approved by the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament.
11.	Mr. Florin has had a long and distinguished diplomatic career. His outstanding professional and personal qualities were more than amply demonstrated by the competence and skill with which he guided the deliberations of the General Assembly at its forty-second session. I am sure all of you are aware of his exemplary performance as President of the Assembly. Therefore, suffice it for me to say that I am convinced that on this occasion, too, his leadership will greatly assist us all in accomplishing the difficult task that lies before this special session.
12.	I propose that we elect by acclamation Mr. Florin as President of the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly.
13.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The General Assembly has heard the proposal by the representative of Pakistan that the President of the General Assembly at its forty-second session be elected by acclamation as President of the fifteenth special session. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that proposal?
It was so decided (decision S-15/12).
14.	The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I extend my sincere congratulations to my friend Peter Florin and invite him to assume the presidency.
Mr. Florin took the Chair.
Statement by the President
15.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Forty-three years ago, at the San Francisco Conference, the founding fathers of the United Nations set the task of saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war. I believe we are all aware of
the scope of this task today—in our nuclear and space age.
16.	Ten years ago the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly [resolution S-10/2], the first special session devoted to disarmament, was elaborated, and it has become a document of historic importance. As is well known, that document begins with these words: “The attainment of the objective of security, which is an inseparable element of peace, has always been one of the most profound aspirations of humanity.” Disarmament is a decisive way to strengthen security for all. “Security through disarmament”: this concept could, in my view, provide the philosophical basis for our action.
17.	Today the world’s attention is directed to the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, and the world expects clear stipulations about the road leading to a secure future. Millions of people are following this special session with hope and profound sympathy. I am convinced that we are all aware of our responsibility for this vital question facing mankind.
18.	It is a great honour for me to be President of the General Assembly at this third special session devoted to disarmament. I should like to thank representatives for the confidence they have placed in me by electing me to this high office.
19.	My thanks go to the Secretary-General for the trustful and fruitful co-operation which we have enjoyed, especially over the past 10 months. I am looking forward to further constructive co-operation. I wish to congratulate the Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs and Secretariat Services and all staff members for their successful work during the forty-second session of the General Assembly. I am convinced that we shall continue to work together for the benefit of the world Organization. Furthermore, special credit is due to the Department for Disarmament Affairs for the substantive preparations for this session, as well as to the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the session, Mr. Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan, for his untiring efforts.
20.	The international situation has begun to move. With the signing of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their IntermediateRange and Shorter-Range Missiles—the INF Treaty—and through the implementation of that agreement, nuclear disarmament has been initiated for the first time. The elimination of 4 per cent to 5 per cent of all nuclear weapons could and should be the beginning of the road to a world free from nuclear weapons.
21.	The conflicts that still exist in the world, where cannons still speak, no longer appear as intractable as they seemed in the past. This has been borne out particularly by the agreements which have been reached to settle the conflict around Afghanistan through patient negotiations and bold political steps, and with the active participation of the United Nations, as well as the continuing efforts to solve the conflict in Central America.
22.	Further, it is significant, in my view, that the forty-second session of the General Assembly was characterized by a serious endeavour to maintain and strengthen international peace and security, to overcome underdevelopment and poverty and to ensure the comprehensive implementation of human rights. In my opinion, that session was marked by a growing understanding of global problems that are a challenge to all Governments and peoples and by a broader recognition of the fact that this challenge can be met only through better and more intensive international co-operation. This Organization is the appropriate framework for that purpose. To a greater extent than ever before, it should be used as a place for action-oriented dialogue and negotiations so that the Organization will be able to make an even greater contribution to resolving international problems. This special session offers a unique opportunity to do so.
23.	The outcome of the twelfth special session of the General Assembly, in 1982, which was the second special session devoted to disarmament, led many to adopt a rather pessimistic attitude concerning the future of arms limitation and disarmament. At the same time we experienced an enormous upswing in the world-wide movement for peace and disarmament, involving people of very different political outlooks.
24.	However, the arms race has not yet stopped; nuclear tests are continuing. Efforts to amass conventional weapons continue unabated in many regions of the world. New generations of weapons devour ever-greater resources. The arms race puts an unbearable economic burden on the whole world; detailed studies corroborating this fact have been published. It has become obvious that no country or group of countries can afford to tackle the mounting economic, social and ecological problems while financing an ever-costlier arms race. Disarmament questions concern all States.
25.	I consider it important to note that a certain turn-about has taken place in the thinking about the relationship between disarmament, peace, security and development. It has been recognized world-wide that in view of the state of development of weapons of mass destruction, their actual use would lead to the self-annihilation of mankind; that in view of the current state of development of productive forces and infrastructures even the use of conventional weapons could lead to the destruction of entire regions and continents; that technical and human failure in the modern world could unleash irremediable catastrophe; that superarmament constitutes an enormous waste of resources and, in the last analysis, increases the danger of war; and that, in view of the scope of non-military global challenges, before mankind is the choice: disarmament or catastrophe.
26.	On balance, disarmament can provide an answer to the threat to mankind’s security in two ways. First, the dangers emanating from superarmament and the accumulation of weapons would diminish. Secondly, as a result of disarmament, funds and resources would be released. So disarmament is not an end in itself. It is not a temporary crusade. It has become a matter of life and death for mankind.
27.	The world-famous physicist and humanist Albert Einstein wrote in 1932, just before the beginning of the League of Nations Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of Armaments:
“Disarmament and security can only be reached in conjunction with each other. Security will only be achieved when all nations undertake the obligation to implement international decisions.”
28.	There can be no doubt that the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, held in 1978, made a substantial contribution to the necessary turn-about in thinking in our nuclear and space age. The consensus reached through hard work 10 years ago deserves to be reaffirmed today. The Final Document of that session contains a thorough analysis of the causes and consequences of the arms race, especially in the nuclear field. Its Programme of Action [ibid., sect. Ill] still awaits implementation. The measures contained in the Final Document for strengthening the disarmament machinery of the United Nations have led to an enhancement of the role of multilateral disarmament negotiations.
29.	The statement of the highest representatives of the Soviet Union and the United States that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought, and that neither side must strive for military superiority, is fully in harmony with the spirit of the first special session of the Assembly devoted to disarmament.
30.	The present summit meeting between the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev, and the President of the United States, Ronald Reagan, in Moscow offers new proof of the possibilities of reaching agreements that have a positive impact on questions which the Organization is dealing with. Although many hopes will probably remain unfulfilled, it can none the less be said that it has been a significant meeting, which will give a fresh impetus to further negotiations. As political realists, we are aware of the importance of mutual understanding between the Soviet Union and the United States for the international situation. Therefore, we welcome every joint constructive statement and action.
31.	It is encouraging to note that bilateral and multilateral disarmament negotiations stimulate each other to a growing extent. The conclusion of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga) and the consolidation of the status of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America have contributed to strengthening regional and global security. In this context let me refer to the international meeting on nuclear-weapon-free zones to be held in the capital of the German Democratic Republic at the end of June.
32.	Likewise, the process of implementing the steps laid down in the Document of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe and the negotiations that are envisaged on conventional disarmament in Europe are of great political and practical significance.
33.		Thus, building on good and bad experiences gathered in the past and on first disarmament steps taken in the present, this special session is faced with the task of striking a balance and of pointing the way to a more secure world, ultimately free of weapons of mass destruction and the threat or use of force. On this road there can be no breathing space, no slowing down. The decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its forty-second session in the field of arms limitation and disarmament form a good basis for this. 
34.		The question of ending the nuclear-arms race and of nuclear disarmament is, without doubt, of the highest priority. A treaty between the USSR and the United States on reducing their strategic offensive weapons by one half, as is now being sought, would throw wide open the gate to that end. The prevention of a nuclear war is no longer merely a moral and ethical concern, but a task that requires immediate measures. This year we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water,  and we should redouble our efforts to conclude a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. The prevention of an arms race in outer space, as is stated in Assembly resolution 42/33, is a sine qua non for security and disarmament. The advanced state of work on a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons makes further delay in the elaboration of the convention unjustified. Negotiations on the reduction of conventional weapons constitute a new challenge and are gaining importance. Questions of naval security, the elimination of foreign military presence and military bases on foreign territories are under discussion. Furthermore, according to a widely shared view, verification and confidence-building create the required environment for the process of arms limitation and disarmament. 
35.		An essential prerequisite for the continuing dialogue at this special session and for fruitful disarmament negotiations is the wide range of substantive proposals submitted in this field by all groups of States. The comprehensive and priority setting proposals of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the proposals of the Six-Nation Initia-tive to establish an international verification body within the framework of the United Nations testify to the commitment of those States to peace, disarmament and development. The comprehensive disarmament programme of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty at the global and regional levels and their proposals to ensure the defensive character of military doctrines and to promote new thinking on security matters have already left their mark on negotiations and talks at various levels. The States of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have, for their part, submitted manifold proposals concerning nuclear and conventional disarmament and Confidence-building . 
36.		Bringing together all these ideas and concepts is certainly not an easy task, but I am sure that the special session will be equal to it. The disarmament mechanism created within the framework of the Organization, while its effectiveness can certainly be
enhanced, offers the basis for developing and giving substance to a comprehensive disarmament process at all levels. What is imperative is to make use of that mechanism. 
37.		We are now witnessing a powerful world disarmament campaign under the auspices of the United Nations. The activities of many non-governmental organizations before the convening of this session deserve special appreciation. We are looking forward to hearing the statements of their representatives at the special session and hope they will make substantive contributions to its work. 
38.		The session will give each member State of the international community the opportunity to make its contribution to the mission and to shoulder its share of the responsibility for the destiny of mankind. The dialogue on political and military aspects of a comprehensive system of international peace and security will be continued. I am confident that we will have a business-like, non-confrontational exchange of views on the entire range of disarmament problems with a view to searching jointly for ways and means to ensure general security based on a balance of interests between all groups of States Members of the Organization. Thus, we will work on the basis of general agreement, in other words, of consensus. 
39.		I trust that the session will become a forum for constructive and action-oriented efforts on the part of the world Organization to curb the arms race, to look for common ground in the positions of all groups of States and to adopt bold, generally acceptable decisions. 
40.		The Secretary-General wishes to address the General Assembly at this time. I tl -e call on him. 
Statement by the Secretary-General
41.		The SECRETARY-GENERAL: This special session of the General Assembly is opening at a most opportune time. By a striking coincidence President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev are engaged in a dialogue in Moscow, partly in the context of the reduction of strategic nuclear weapons That historic endeavour adds to the timeliness of this special session. It also underscores the global responsibility of national leaders and representatives gathered here to set the course of concerted, World-Wide action towards disarmament. 
42.		The dynamics of human affairs have brought us to a stage where we need no longer view the prospects of credible measures towards disarmament as remote. For many long years the world seemed to be settled in a fatalistic stance about the arms race. In a global climate of suspicion and fears, at times exaggerated, the arms race appeared inevitable and the goals of halting and reversing it utopian. A sense of futility haunted negotiations in this field. 
43.		Recently, however, significant shifts have occurred in perception and attitude. A refreshing change was signified by the joint expressions by the two major military Powers of their shared recognition that a nuclear war cannot be won and must
never be fought. That led to a renewal of constructive dialogue between them. The tangible result was the signing on 8 December 1987 of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles. The Treaty, of course, covers only a small percentage of the world’s arsenal of nuclear weapons, yet it clearly shows that with political will agreements to reverse the nuclear-arms race are possible and compliance with them can be duly verified. Agree-ment on a 50 per cent reduction in strategic nuclear weapons would undoubtedly be a major achieve-ment. It would take previously unsuccessful arms-reduction negotiations onto a new plateau of confi-dent and practical endeavour.
44.	We have thus had encouraging developments, opening new possibilities, but they must be seen as only the beginnings of disarmament in the nuclear field. They undoubtedly provide a vital impetus to the disarmament effort, but they do not, by themselves, end that condition of over-armament that has aggravated fear and insecurity throughout the world and involved a gigantic waste of human and material resources.
45.	The transformation of the present arms situation can result only from a joint undertaking by all States. Progress in bilateral co-operation in this field cannot be sustained indefinitely in an environment of tension and conflicts in the world. Similarly, significant multilateral agreements cannot be evolved in conditions of mistrust and confrontation between the two great military Powers. Indeed, all major questions of security and disarmament have bilateral, regional and global dimensions. Negotiating processes at each of those levels represent different aspects of the pursuit of the common goal of achieving greater security at progressively lower levels of armaments. Advances in one area would certainly stimulate progress in another. Those efforts rightly support and complement each other.
46.	There are two respects in which we can take advantage of the historic opportunity provided to us. First, the international community should strongly encourage the two major military Powers to sustain and develop the momentum in their mutual relationship, to broaden their understanding and to make progress on issues that have global implications. Secondly, their bilateral actions to halt and reverse the arms race should generate a corresponding multilateral response. Thus, the objective of the special session has been clearly defined by the challenge of events. The occasion calls for a combination of imagination and realism and for a readiness to accommodate the legitimate concerns of all Member States. We need to identify practical and innovative ways of moving ahead, recognizing that security and disarmament demand bilateral, regional and global action in harness together.
47.	Let me share with you my view of the tasks ahead. The Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, held in 1978, set out the broad and comprehensive framework for priorities and programmes in arms limitation and disarmament on the basis of the concept of security through disarmament. That gives us a foundation to build upon in the light of new
developments. At this session we must agree on a common agenda that will serve us in the years ahead. There should be consensus on the main direction of our effort. It seems to me that the highest importance in the field of disarmament should be given to the reduction of nuclear weapons, of armed forces and of conventional weapons, to the conclusion of the international convention on the complete prohibition and elimination of chemical weapons, to prevention of an arms race in outer space and to the cessation of nuclear tests.
48.	Survival and security are basic to human existence, and Governments have a duty to assure their citizens of both. Nuclear issues, however, go far beyond national security and impinge directly on human survival. A rational military policy is incompatible with the danger of annihilation of the human race. It is indisputable that a major nuclear exchange would have catastrophic effects on the peoples of both combatant and non-combatant countries. Nuclear issues will, therefore, rightly remain a major concern of all States and central to global security. It is imperative that the international community continue to press for the sharp reduction and ultimate elimination of such weapons.
49.	We must also evince an unmistakable determination to deal effectively and expeditiously with other weapons of mass destruction, in particular with chemical weapons. The international community has been dismayed to learn that chemical weapons have recently been used. Security Council resolution 612 (1988), adopted on 9 May, left no doubt in this regard by condemning vigorously the continued use of chemical weapons, which is contrary to the obligations under the 1925 Geneva Protocol.2 That a humanitarian restraint on the conduct of war that was universally observed for six decades has been cast off constitutes a strong warning to all of us that we stand on the edge of catastrophe. No ambiguity is permissible on a matter of this kind.
50.	The time has also come for us to recognize the need to deal squarely with the mounting toll of death, destruction and human suffering inflicted by the use of conventional weapons in conflicts around the world. We are witnessing not only the spread of highly sophisticated weaponry but also the growing use of such weapons in conflict areas. The term “conventional” should not hide or render banal the vast destructive powers of some of those weapons, nor should the innocuous-sounding phrase “arms transfers” make us forget the devastating effect of the supply of weapons in local conflicts. To my mind, the fact that the arms component is a growing factor in the export figures of many countries, including developing countries, is a very sad commentary on the present state of affairs. With modern technology not only nuclear war but, increasingly, conventional war as well, has acquired a dimension of destructiveness that it did not have in any earlier age. It is therefore necessary to restrict the spread of the most dangerous types of conventional weapons and, ultimately, to eliminate them altogether.
51.	I would appeal to arms-exporting countries to adopt a policy, based on principle, not to supply those weapons to developing countries which, on objective grounds, are not needed for their security
from likely aggression. This could act as a restraint on the proliferation of sophisticated and costly weapons which, apart from the fear and insecurity it has caused, is a heavy and unwarranted burden on the economy of those countries.
52.	I should like to digress for a moment. It is estimated that by 1987 world military spending had grown to $ 1,000 billion a year. While some might not consider it germane to the matters before us, I feel it may be appropriate, at this juncture in the history of the United Nations, to contrast that astronomic figure with the comparatively modest sum of $721 million which is the total annual net budget of this Organization dedicated to peace, and indeed, the even smaller amount of $698 million, which is the total of outstanding contributions of Member States at 30 April 1988. I would not mention it in this context were it not that, as we gather here today, we find ourselves quite simply facing insolvency, unless Member States honour their obligations deriving from the Charter.
[The speaker continued in French.]
53.	Disarmament cannot continue with success if it is not placed within the context of the global international environment. It is part of international security and must be encouraged along with other measures aimed at strengthening international peace and confidence. There are many ways to increase confidence which might accelerate the conclusion of disarmament agreements and strengthen security. Military questions must be the subject of the greatest transparency, at both the world-wide level and the regional level. The Document of the Stockholm Conference on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures and Disarmament in Europe has set a useful precedent and makes it possible to pursue exploratory exchanges concerning stability in the area of conventional weapons in that part of the world.
54.	The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, held at Geneva in September 1986, also developed ways of exchanging information. Similarly, by making greater use of United Nations instruments for the preparation of reports on military expenditures in order to obtain an objective evaluation of military capacities, one might avoid reacting to a presumed threat based on erroneous perceptions. I note with satisfaction that it is being recognized more and more that we must make better use of existing machinery for conflict-prevention and resolution and the peaceful settlement of disputes so as to make it possible to adopt significant measures on arms limitation and disarmament.
55.	Quite obviously we cannot expect progress in the limitation and reduction of conventional weapons if a corresponding effort is not made to settle the local and regional conflicts which continue to ravage numerous areas of the world. The need for multilateral action in this area is emphasized by the fact that bilateral efforts to resolve a number of regional conflicts have not borne fruit. We are here confronted by a problem of great scope. One of the
imperatives flowing from this is that there must be a greater awareness on the part of the international community of the incalculable dangers of the conventional arms race and of arms transfers. Once again this presupposes that an urgent appeal will be made for Member States to act.
56.	In the field of armaments, the technological revolution has made it possible thus far to invent and accumulate ever-more-sophisticated weapons at an unbridled pace and at an exorbitant cost. However, with international co-operation, the same revolution can be made available for peaceful objectives. Among the areas where we might make good use of modern technology, one might mention the verification of arms limitation and disarmament agreements. One notes a renewed interest in this question, because significant changes in attitude have made this a subject of great relevance over the past two or three years. Thus it has been possible to adopt the remarkable and unprecedented measures set forth in the INF Treaty. It is clear, however, that in order to ensure the reliability of verification measures, a number of problems must be the subject of negotiations. Although certain aspects of verification will continue to be taken up in a bilateral framework, multilateral agreements on the limitation and reduction of armaments will require multilateral verification.
57.	This is an area in which the United Nations might be able to make an important contribution. It might be able to help apply, by all the means accepted by the parties concerned, the verification measures provided for in multilateral treaties. The United Nations might be able to co-ordinate international debates on questions related to verification, to provide technical advice and to carry out research. Generally speaking, the participation of the Organization in the search for generally acceptable and effective verification measures for observance of the agreements and the expansion of the functions of information and advice might make it possible in the future to create, under its auspices, verification machinery. In addition, United Nations military observers and United Nations peace-keeping forces might be very useful in controlling and verifying the implementation of the agreements. It might also be useful in this task, and in other related activities, to call on the creative faculties of intellectuals and experts who are devoted to the cause of disarmament.
58.	We must also give attention to the question of how to improve the functioning and to increase the effectiveness of multilateral bodies. The General Assembly quite obviously must remain the focus for debates on disarmament and the principal source of initiatives and recommendations of the international community concerning the broad range of questions relating to disarmament. In this connection, it has been proposed that the work of the First Committee and the Disarmament Commission be made more efficient so that those bodies could continue to focus their efforts on concrete ways to make progress and to reach agreement on the decisions to be taken. These proposals deserve attention.
59.	The Conference on Disarmament has the broad knowledge and long experience necessary in consid-
ering the vital questions of disarmament. The world community hopes that its members will contribute to promoting multilateral action in this area. I urge them to mobilize all their resources to respond to this legitimate expectation. The early conclusion of a convention on chemical weapons would show strik-ingly and irrefutably that the multilateral process of disarmament is capable of eliminating an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. There is hardly any need to stress the profound impact that it would have on other aspects of the work of the Conference, which also require examination and urgent solution. The preparation of a treaty on the total prohibition of nuclear tests would indicate that Member States are prepared to protect the world from nuclear weapons. It is of the utmost importance that progress be made along these lines. Furthermore, the prevention of the arms race in outer space quite rightly is a source of universal concern, in view of its world-wide implications for international peace and security.
60.	Like all other complex international questions, disarmament does not lend itself to simple solutions. Yet its difficulties do not diminish its urgency. The outcome of disarmament debates and negotiations directly concerns the survival of mankind and the economic and social development of the world community. To make progress at the multilateral level, Member States must manifest complete under-standing of the security interests and legitimate priorities of all. Acceptable solutions must be found through constructive, serious-minded dialogue. The disenchantment of today must be replaced by a common awareness of the imperative need to dimin-ish radically the present level of arms and armed forces and to evaluate realistically the possibilities before us.
61.	We must aim high: that is the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. At the same time we must take account of the realities as we seek means to obtain concrete results. On the basis of the Final Document, we must—and we can—carry on the quest for disarmament by co-ordinating bilateral, regional and world-wide initiatives. For the sake of survival, of peace, of progress: we have no other option.
62.	I welcome the presence among us of a great many non-governmental organizations and outstanding individuals. This is a good opportunity to tell them how grateful we are for their heightened devotion to the cause of disarmament. For years they have championed initiatives to alert the public to the urgency of this cause. They have often adopted a bold and innovative approach in seeking to develop the co-operation that is indispensable to the disarmament process. But if public opinion is to have the impact it should, we must find more effective ways of reaching educators, scientists, the media, the world of the arts and other circles in order to encourage them to participate in this vital undertaking. The World Disarmament Campaign conducted by the United Nations must contribute to achieving that purpose.
63.	I urge the Assembly to consider all the ideas and proposals that have been put forward and to reconcile various intellectual approaches to reach decisions that will have real impact. In that way it will be able
to fulfil its mission in this period of fruitful change, in this demanding period. I repeat: the events of today could have incalculable consequences for international peace and security. If their positive effect is magnified and strengthened by multilateral action, a promising horizon will open in the realm of international affairs. A unique combination of circumstances provides us with an opportunity that has long eluded us; let us take that opportunity.
AGENDA ITEMS 5 AND 6
Organization of the session
Report of the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament
64.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I call upon the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament, Mr. Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan.
65.	Mr. AHMED (Pakistan), Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament: Before presenting the report of the Preparatory Committee, let me avail myself of this opportunity to extend to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations on your election as President.
66.	In my capacity as Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament, I have the honour to submit today for the Assembly’s consideration the report of the Preparatory Committee, contained in document A/S-15/1. The report gives an account of the work carried out by the Preparatory Committee pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 41/60 G of 3 December 1986 and 42/40 of 30 November 1987. The report is self-explanatory, and I shall therefore confine myself to highlighting some points.
67.	The Preparatory Committee began its work with an organizational session on 5 December 1986. After that, the Committee held two substantive sessions, one in 1987, from 26 May to 5 June, and another in 1988, from 25 January to 5 February. In accordance with its terms of reference, as set out in the above-mentioned resolutions, the Preparatory Committee in the course of its work made a number of recommendations on various organizational questions relating to the special session, which appear in paragraphs 16 to 26 and 34 to 43 of the Committee’s report. A provisional agenda for the special session is contained in paragraph 34.
68/ The report also includes a recommendation on procedure reflecting the practice followed at the first and second special sessions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Thus, in paragraph 23 it is stated that the rules of procedure of the General Assembly should apply in the special session without amendments, on the understanding that, regarding the adoption of decisions by the Assembly at the special session, every effort should be made to ensure that, in so far as possible, decisions on matters of substance will be adopted by consensus. Beyond that,
10
the report includes recommendations on such procedural matters as the date and duration of the general debate, the establishment of a committee of the whole and the allocation of the agenda items between the plenary Assembly and the committee of the whole. The Preparatory Committee also recommended that the committee of the whole begin its work on 6 June to elect its Vice-Chairmen and Rapporteur as well as to organize its work, including the establishment of subsidiary bodies as necessary.
69.	In that connection, and following appropriate consultations, I should like to propose that the date for the beginning of the work of the committee of the whole be advanced from 6 June to 3 June in order to permit an earlier commencement of work by the subsidiary bodies that may be established by the committee.
70.	Recognizing the important role played by nongovernmental organizations and peace and disarmament research institutes, the Preparatory Committee recommended that appropriate time be allocated in the framework of the committee of the whole to hearing statements from representatives of such organizations and institutes.
71.	Pursuant to its mandate, the Preparatory Committee, in addition : making recommendations on organizational and procedural questions, dealt with substantive issues related to the special session. In that connection, the Committee at its session in 1988 had a general exchange of views on substantive aspects of the work to be carried out at the special session, which was followed by a consideration of specific elements to be dealt with in the substantive items of the provisional agenda of the session. On the basis of the views expressed during these discussions, I, as Chairman of the Committee, prepared an informal paper, which was considered by the Committee at a series of informal meetings. A wide range of views were expressed and a number of proposals were made with respect to that paper. As indicated in paragraph 30 of the report, the Committee agreed to transmit the Chairman’s paper to the General Asn-bly at its third special session devoted to disarm ament, without prejudice to the position of any delegation. That paper appears in the annex to the Committee’s report.
72.	Having presented the report of the Preparatory Committee, albeit in summary fashion, I have only to express the hope that the work accomplished by the Committee will provide a good point of departure on the road to a successful outcome at the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
73.	In conclusion, I should like to place on record my appreciation of the spirit of co-operation and flexibility shown by all delegations in the Preparatory Committee, which made it possible to overcome difficulties and reach the result achieved. In particular, I want to express my gratitude to all the officers of the Committee for the assistance, support and encouragement they provided me at all times.
74.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The General Assembly is grateful to the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and to
those who participated in the Committee’s work for their efforts to promote our work and, in particular, to ensure that this special session devoted to disarmament would get off to a successful start.
75.	May I tike it that the General Assembly endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Third Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament [A/S-15/1] and the recommendations contained therein as a whole, as well as the proposal of the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee that the work of the committee of the whole be advanced from 6 June to 3 June?
It was so decided (decisions S-15/21 and S-15/22).
76.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): On the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly and the practice of previous special sessions, the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the forty-second session would continue in the same posts for the fifteenth special session. Accordingly, I should like to inform the Assembly that the following Chairmen are present at this special session: the Chairman of the First Committee, Mr. Bagbeni Adeito Nzengaya of Zaire; the Chairman of the Special Political Committee, Mr. Hamad Abdelaziz Al-Kawa ri of Qatar; the Chairman of the Second Committee, Mr. Guennadi Oudovenko of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic; the Chairman of the Fourth Committee, Mr. Constantine Moushoutas of Cyprus; and the Chairman of the Fifth Committee, Mr. Henrik Amneus of Sweden.
77.	In paragraph 22 of the report of the Preparatory Committee, which has been endorsed by the Assembly, it was recommended that the Chairmen of the Main Committees might be replaced by members of their delegations or members of delegations of States belonging to the same regional group. Accordingly, the following replacements have been communicated to the Secretariat: for the Chairman of the Third Committee, Mr. Leonardo Kam of Panama; and for the Chairman of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Ali Sunni Muntasser of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
It was so decided (decision S-15/13).
78= The Vice-Presidents of the forty=second session, who will serve in the same capacity at the fifteenth special session, are the representatives of the following Member States: Botswana, Cameroon, China, Comoros, France, Jordan, Mauritania, Mongolia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Portugal, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
It was so decided (decision S-I5/14).
79.	In endorsing the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, the Assembly has established an ad hoc committee of the whole which will be designated “Committee of the Whole of the Fifteenth Special Session”. Concerning the election of the chairman of the Committee of the Whole of the Fifteenth Special Session, who will also be a member
of the General Committee, I call on the representative of Zimbabwe.
80.	Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): Mr. President, on behalf of the Zimbabwe delegation I wish to congratulate you on your election as President of this special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. It is a richly deserved election. The skill with which you have handled the forty-second session of the General Assembly more than amply attests to that. We are therefore confident that with your wise and able guidance the special session will be a great success.
81.	My delegation has asked to speak at this time in its capacity as Chairman of the Movement of NonAligned Countries in order to perform the very pleasant and privileged duty of nominating Mr. Mansur Ahmed, the Ambassador of Pakistan at Geneva, as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole of this special session.
82.	Mr. Ahmed has extensive diplomatic experience, dating back to October 1955 when he joined the Pakistan Foreign Service. He has served in Tokyo, Jakarta, London, Ankara, Moscow and Bangkok and, since 1981, has been Pakistan’s Ambassador at Geneva. Mr. Ahmed has vast knowledge in the field of disarmament, which makes him well qualified to guide the work of the Committee of the Whole of this special session. As Chairman of the Conference on Disarmament in 1983 and 1985, he displayed outstanding negotiating skills, great political sensitivity, and deep understanding of the issues currently confronting the Conference.
83.	Mr. Ahmed’s work as Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for this special session needs no introduction. Suffice it to say that his insight into the issues of the agenda before us today gives us every reason to believe that he will guide the work of the Committee of the Whole to a successful conclusion.
84.	Mr. Ahmed’s experience extends to many other fields besides disarmament. He made a valuable contribution in the economic sphere as President of the Trade and Development Board of UNCTAD in 1984 and as Chairman of the GATT Contracting Parties in 1987.
85.	In nominating Mr. Ahmed for the Chairmanship of the Committee of the Whole I believe I am voicing a very widely held sentiment when I say that with him in the chair the work of the Committee will be in the best possible hands. Therefore, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, I have the honour and indeed the privilege of proposing Mr. Ahmed as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole.
86.	Mr. ADAM (Sudan): Allow me, Mr. President, at the outset to congratulate you on behalf of the Group of African States and of my own country on your election as President of the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Our congratulations go also to the other officers of the session.
87.	On behalf of the African Group I should like also to voice the support of the Group for the election by acclamation of Mr. Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan to
the chairmanship of the Committee of the Whole of this session. It is no extravagance in this context to acknowledge the exceptional abilities demonstrated by Mr. Ahmed, who so ably chaired the Preparatory Committee for this important session during its three consecutive sessions. A diplomat of his country and an acknowledged expert in the field of disarmament negotiations, he has shown during those preparatory sessions exceptional statesmanship and unique diplomatic faculties, which I am confident will enable him to guide the deliberations of the Committee of the Whole to guaranteed success.
88.	Speaking in the name of the African Group, I am confident that this body will elect Mr. Ahmed Chairman of the Committee of the Whole by acclamation.
89.	Mr. GHAREKHAN (India): May I, Sir, as the current Chairman of the Group of Asian States, express our warmest congratulations to you on your election to preside over this important third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. The leaders of the delegations of Asian States, including my own, will have the opportunity to extend to you their felicitations in the coming days. I need hardly dwell on your personal qualities of diplomacy and leadership, which stood the General Assembly in such good stead during its forty-second session. We are confident that those qualities, infused with your personal skill and dedication to the vital issues before us, will provide the special session with effective guidance and leadership.
90.	On behalf of the Group of Asian States it is my privilege to endorse the nomination of Mr. Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole of this special session. One of the most distinguished diplomats of Pakistan, he has presided with diligence over the deliberations of the Preparatory Committee for the special session. In his long and varied career he has achieved particular eminence in the field of disarmament and has all the necessary skill and experience for this important post. The representative of Zimbabwe has already proposed his name on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. It is Asia’s privilege to second that nomination.
91.	Mr. ZAPOTOCKY (Czechoslovakia): In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States I wish to extend to you, Sir, most cordial congratulations on your election to the office of President of the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. We are convinced that under your able chairmanship this special session will accomplish its functions as a highly important world forum which must live up to the demands and aspirations of all nations for peace and disarmament. Today, as never before, the nations place their hopes and expectations in the role and mission of the United Nations. They undoubtedly expect this session, under your experienced guidance, to agree above all on measures to prevent nuclear war, to halt the arms race and for the reduction and gradual abolition of nuclear weapons and other means of mass destruction.
92.	I feel both greatly honoured and pleased to support the proposal submitted by the representative
of Zimbabwe on the candidacy of Mr. Ahmed of Pakistan as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. That proposal, which has been made on behalf of the non-aligned countries, is a high tribute to Mr. Ahmed’s outstanding merits in his commitment to the noble goal of halting the anas race and achieving disarmament. At the same time the proposal reflects the important role of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in the efforts to ensure peace and disarmament.
93.	The candidacy has been most persuasively supported by the representatives of other regional groups who have already spoken. I should like to join them and at the same time to highlight one specific point. Under the chairmanship of Mr. Ahmed the Preparatory Committee for the special session has done constructive work and dealt with important issues. He himself has shown great diplomatic skills and a high sense of responsibility as well as an energetic approach to the seeking of compromise solutions. The third special session is being held at a time imbued with new hopes, especially in the field of disarmament. Mr. Ahmed’s candidature promises the kind of chairmanship required to match this promising but still very demanding period of time. It should certainly help to crown this special session with concrete positive results.
94.	Mr. PENALOSA (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of all the delegations of Latin America and the Caribbean, may I first congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of this special session. We are sure that under your wise and intelligent leadership this special session of the Assembly will be successful.
95.	On behalf of all the delegations making up the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, it is my honour to endorse the nomination by acclamation of the candidate whose name was put forward by the representative of Zimbabwe, on behalf of the Non-Aligned States, to preside over the work of the Committee of the Whole at this third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. We wish also to associate ourselves with what was said by the representatives of the other regional groups. The outstanding background of Mr. Ahmed of Pakistan should be added to the high opinion which all of us who have taken part in disarmament discussions in the Organization have formed of him. We know that he has great experience in the management of these matters, which has been amply demonstrated throughout the work of the Preparatory Committee.
96.	Miss SOLESBY (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Western European and Other States, I should like to join those who have spoken before me in expressing our congratulations to you, Sir, upon your election to the presidency of the third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. The outcome of the special session will influence multilateral disarmament for some years to come. The qualities you have shown as President of the forty-second session of the General Assembly make us confident that you will guide us to a successful conclusion. May I add my satisfaction at seeing in the presidency the representative of the
German Democratic Republic, a country where I myself spent three years.
97.	It is with particular pleasure that I second the nomination by the representative of Zimbabwe of Mr. Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. That Committee will play a key role in the success of this special session. It is not surprising, therefore, that we should select as its Chairman one of the most experienced diplomats working in the field of multilateral disarmament. Mr. Ahmed played a major part in the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament and has become a leading figure in the United Nations in Geneva, where he has demonstrated his negotiating skills not only in disarmament but in a wide range of issues. Most recently he has played an important part in achieving the successful outcome of the negotiations on Afghanistan, which has been welcomed throughout the world. The links between Pakistan and my own country are of the most friendly and close nature. I know that my predecessors have valued their close co-operation with Mr. Ahmed, and as a newcomer I have much benefited from his wisdom. We all already owe him a debt of gratitude for his valuable work as Chairman of the Preparatory Committee in guiding us in the difficult task of preparation for this special session. We have the utmost confidence in his leadership and believe that the direction of the work of the Committee of the Whole could not be in better hands.
98.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Members have heard the nomination of Mr. Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. In the absence of any objection, I declare Mr. Ahmed elected by acclamation Chairman of the Committee of the Whole of the Fifteenth Special Session.
It was so decided (decision S-15/15).*
99.	I congratulate Mr. Ahmed on behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf, and I wish him well in the important and onerous responsibilities he has just assumed.
100.	The General Committee of the fifteenth special session of the General Assembly has now been fully constituted.
101.	By paragraph 42 of its report, the Preparatory Committee referred to the General Assembly for action at this special session the question of inviting executive heads of organizations to address the Assembly.
102.	In light of consultations carried out prior to this session, as well as of the practice of previous special sessions, it is proposed that the Assembly invite the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency to address the General Assembly. May I take it that the Assembly adopts this proposal?
It was so decided.
*For the election of the other officers of the Committee of the Whole, see also A/S-15/AC.1/PV.1.
103.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should also like to inform Members that I have received a letter dated 17 May 1988 from the representative of Chile, who, on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States, requested that the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America [OPANAL], a regional organization, be invited to participate and intervene in plenary meeting at this special session.
104.	In light of consultations carried out and of past practice, it is proposed that OPANAL be invited to participate in this special session and to make a statement in the Committee of the Whole. May I take it that the Assembly approves this proposal?
It was so decided.
105.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I should like to inform Members that I have received requests from a number of Member States that the General Assembly hear in plenary meeting statements by certain observer non-member States.
106.	It may be recalled that, in accordance with established practice of the General Assembly, observer non-member States may normally make statements in the Main Committees and accordingly, by implication, in the Committee of the Whole at a special session. However, following consultations and taking into account the great importance attached to issues related to disarmament, it is proposed that the General Assembly take a decision, without setting a precedent for the future, to hear observer non-member States in the course of the general debate in plenary meeting during the fifteenth special session. If 1 hear no objection it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 7
Adoption of the agenda
107.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The provisional agenda of the fifteenth special
13
session of the General Assembly can be found in document A/S-15/10. In order to expedite our work, the Assembly may wish to adopt the provisional agenda without referring it to the General Committee. May 1 take it that the General Assembly agrees to this procedure?
It was so decided.
108.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): By adopting the report of the Preparatory Committee, the Assembly endorsed the provisional agenda contained therein. May I take it therefore that the Assembly adopts the provisional agenda as it appears in document A/S-15/10?
It was so decided (decision S-15/23).
109.	The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Regarding the allocation of items, the Preparatory Committee recommends in paragraph 38 of its report that, while items 1 to 9 and 16 would be dealt with by the General Assembly in plenary meetings, the Assembly should allocate items 10 to 15 to the Committee of the Whole, which would be entrusted with the task of considering all the proposals submitted during the special session and reporting to the Assembly. May I take it that the General Assembly approves these proposals?
It was so decided (decision S-15/23).
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.
Notes
'United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964.
2Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925 (League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XC'V (1929), No. 2138).