UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.95 20 July 1900
ENGLISH
«■»■■■■»ui
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REOORD OF THE NINETY-FIFTH MEETING
•	Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Friday,, 20 July 1990, at 10 a.m. Presidents	Mr. GARBA	(Nigeria)
-	Earthquake in the Ph illipines - Scale of assessments for the apibor tionment of the expenses of the United Nations (1291 (continued)
-	Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa: report by the Secretary-General (281 (continued)
-	Adoption of the agenda and organization of work*, letter from the Bahamas, Colombia and Haiti (81 (continued)
-	Tentative programme of work
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room OC2-75O, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-64039/A 8342V (E)
RM/4	AZ44/?V.95	'
2
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
EARTHQUAKE IN THE PHILIPPINES
The PRESIDENT: Before turning to the items on the agenda for this morning I» on behalf of all the members of the Assembly» wish to extend profound sympathy to the Government and the people of the Philippines for the tragic loss of life and extensive material damage that have resulted from the recent earthquake.
May I also express the hope that the international community will shew its solidarity and respond promptly and generously to any request for help.
I now call unon the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. MENDEZ (Philippines): Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, the Assembly and individual members for the magnanimous and heart-warming expressions of sympathy you have shown the Philippines at its trying hour. Your kind words will qo a long way to comfort the victims of the earthquake, their families and, indeed, the entire nation.
International response to the plight of the Philippines has been truly generous. Aside from financial assistance, relief goods, suoplies and services are winging their way to the disaster areas even as I speak. With your support, material and moral, the indomitable Filipino people wil surmount their vicissitudes.
I hold forth once again to you. Sir, and to the Assembly and its members, the gratitude of an entire nation.
AGENDA ITEM 129 (continued)
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FDR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (A/44/926/Add .3)
The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the Assembly^ attention to document A/44/926/Add.3, which contains a letter addressed to me by t)»e Secretary-General informing me that since the issuance of his communications dated 12 and 26 March and 17 May 1990 Nicaragua has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
RM/4	A/44/PV.95
3
(The President)
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note cf this information? It was so decided*
AGENDA ITEM 28 (continued) POLICIES OF APARTHEID OF THS GOVERNMENT OF SOOTH AFRICA» REPORT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/44/960 and Add.l)
The PRESIDENT» This morning the Assembly will first resume consideration of agenda item 28, "Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa".
Members will recall that at its sixteenth special session the Assembly, by decision S-16/24, decided that agenda item 28 should be reopened in order for the Assembly at its forty-fourth session to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made in the implementation of the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa.
In this connection the Assembly has before it the report of the Secretary-General, which has been circulated as document A/44/960 and Add.l.
I now call upon the Secretary-General, who will introduce his report.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Aware of the importance attached by all Member States to the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa, adopted by consensus last December, I would like to introduce personally for consideration by the Assembly my report on the progress made in the implementation of that Declaration. That report, contained in document A/44/960 of 1 July 1990, is being submitted in response to the request addressed to me by the Assembly at its sixteenth special session on 14 December 1989.
In preparing the report it has been my endeavour to provide the General Assembly with a detailed and comprehensive picture of developments that are taking place in South Africa in regard to the question of apartheid and its dismantlement.

I might at the outset say a few words about the arrangements I made to obtain as much factual information as I could under existing circumstances. I felt from the outset that it would be necessary for a Secretariat team to visit South Africa to hold on-the-spot discussions with a wide cross-section of political parties, movements and organisations, as well as with the Government.

I am glad to say that when I discussed this with State President F. W. de Klerk in Windhoek on 20 March of this year he raised no objections. The Team, which visited South Africa from 9 to 19 June 1990, was able to gather a great deal of information touching on many aspects covered by the Declaration. I am informed that no restrictions were placed on the Team’s meetings with persons and organizations and the Team was able to consult with whomsoever it wished.
Many of the organizations concerned have been very active in the campaign against apartheid. The information gathered by the Team is included in annex I of the report before the Assembly.
I have also provided a separate annex which contains communications from a number of Member States on measures which they have taken in response to the Programme of Action set out in the General Assembly’s Declaration. These communications suggest that the Programme of Action has been, on the whole, adhered to and that Member States consider the Declaration and the international consensus achieved around it as an important element in promoting changes in South Africa.
The present report covers all major developments that have taken place over the seven months since the adoption of the Declaration. It shows that a process towards dismantling apartheid through negotiations has started. But it is still at an early stage. In this connection, it is clear that political parties and movements are in the first phases of developing their response to the emerging negotiating process. This explains why the report does not comment in detail on some important issues covered by the Declaration, particularly the question of drafting a constitution and the principles it would contain. That stage has yet to come.

I requested the Team to concentrate its attention on four specific areas. These were the creation of a climate conducive to negotiations, the introduction of an atmosphere free of violence, the process of negotiation towards a new constitutional order and the question of specific measures which enhanced or obstructed the process of ending apartheid. The report of the Team addresses these issues in detail.
The Team was instructed to keep its report entirely factual and not to make value judgements on the issues raised. Moreover, it was not the purpose or intention of the Team to undertake any independent research of data or to attempt to reconcile any apparently conflicting information it received.
From the views expressed by the various organizations, as well as from the information provided by the Government, it would appear that progress is being made in creating a climate for free negotiations. Of particular significance is the action taken by the Government to lift the ban on political parties and movements. However, other essential measures remain to be fulfilled in their entirety. These include the release of all political prisoners and detainees, the end of the state of emergency throughout the country, the repeal of all legislation designed to circumscribe political activities, the removal of all troops from the townships and the cessation of all political trials and political executions. It is hoped that further progress in the implementation of some of these measures will be made in the near future as a result of ongoing contacts between the Government and the African National Congress. 
The Declaration of the General Assembly recognizes the direct relationship between an atmosphere free from violence and the process of negotiation. It should be noted in this regard that many organizations in South Africa expressed concern that violent activities by the extreme right and the ongoing conflict in Natal may
negatively affect this process. Beyond these concerns, there is a widespread belief that continuing resistance to change on the part of the entrenched structures of the system, particularly at the local level, as well as existing security legislation, serve as Damoclean swords over free political activity.
It is apparent from the report that a wide cross-section of the South Afrcan community believes that confidence-building measures, emerging from both the Government and the people, could help to reduce politically related violence and further the progress to a united and non-racial society to which they jointly stand committed.
Very little can be said at this stage on the negotiations for a new constitution. However, there seems to be a near consensus that the mechanism in this regard should be the product of extensive consultations covering a wide spectrum of organizations.
Perhaps the most encouraging feature of the report is the declared intention of the State President to embark on a policy which would dismantle the apartheid system and allow a democratic process to develop a new constitution for South Africa. However, it was the clearly discernible view of all political movements and organizations with whom the Team spoke that, until the pillars of apartheid were removed, racial discrimination would continue to divide the nation and the cause of human rights and social justice would not be served. The initial actions taken by the Government to repeal - or to initiate the process of repeal - specific discriminatory instajents holds the promise of an early removal of some of the major institutional bases of the apartheid system. Equally, however, the evident wish of an overwhelming majority of the South African people will not be fully met until the process is accelerated and the entire array of such legislation is completely removed from the books.

I am convinced also that, unless concomitant progress is made to address the conspicuous socio-economic inequalities deriving from the apartheid system, the process of building a new South Africa will not be realized. It is evident - and this is a point I particularly appreciate and stress - that these inequalities are most apparent in areas such as education, health and housing, as well as in employment and training opportunities for the black population. These factors cannot be wished away. Their redress would infuse public confidence in democratic change and in institutions that support it. They would, at the same time, contribute to the basis of stability essential to the normalized political process.

What has begun to happen in South Africa is a process of so fundamental a character that further bold and imaginative measures will be required to ensure its fulfilment. Statesmanship and goodwill on the part of all its leaders are needed to give it momentum. The long years of injustice have not diminished the essential reservoir of goodwill that characterizes the South African people. It is that goodwill above all else, that offers the real possibility of a just solution that would vindicate the national and international commitments to dismantling apartheid made by the present Government of South Africa, and the forbearance and vision of the black leadership.
It is my earnest hope that developments in South Africa will confirm the historic truth that a determined process of negotiations can resolve the most intractable of problems. The international community, for its part, has been understandably seized of this most serious issue over decades and is determined to assist the process. That determination is eloquently expressed in the Declaration, which specifically recognizes that it is up to the people of South Africa to join together and negotiate an end to the apartheid system and agree on all the measures that are necessary to transform their country into a non-racial democracy.
Needless to say, I shall continue to follow the situation closely and shall inform the Assembly of any major developments in the period ahead.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the Assembly, I thank the Secretary-General for taking the time personally to introduce this important report. It will, I am sure, receive prompt, careful and detailed consideration. We also note with appreciation his offer to keep the Assembly informed of any major developments on this important situation.
(The President)
Pursuant to the consultations I have held with the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid and representatives of the national liberation movements, I should like to propose that, in order to allow time for delegations to study the report of the Secretary-General and to carry out the necessary consultations, the Assembly reconvene at a later date to consider his report.
The dates proposed for substantive discussion of the report are 12 to 14 September 1990, in the week before the opening of the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to resume the session on those dates?
It was so decided.
AGENDA HEM 8 (continued)
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ORGANIZATION OF WORK: IETTER FROM THE BAHAMAS, COLOMBIA AND HAITI (A/44/ 965 and Corr.l and Add.l)	.
The PRESIDENT: Document A/44/965 contains a request addressed to me by the representatives of the Bahamas, Colombia and Haiti to reopen agenda item 114, entitled "Enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections", in order to consider "technical assistance for the Haitian electoral process in the context of human rights".
It will accordingly be necessary to seek the approval of the Assembly to reopen agenda item 114.
May I take it that the General Assembly has no objection to reopening agenda item 114 and to considering it directly in plenary?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: Following consultations with the representatives of the Bahamas, Colombia and Haiti, I should like to propose that the item be taken up at a later date, to be announced in the Journal.
TENTATIVE PROGRAMME OF WORK
The PRESIDENTS Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to inform members of the tentative programme of work of the Assenfcly at its forty-fourth session with regard to agenda item 36, entitled "Question of Namibia".
It had been hoped that it would be possible to complete the necessary steps to consider that item on 23 July. It has now been suggested that the item be taken up on 10 or 11 September, immediately before consideration of agenda item 28, "Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa". That would also be advantageous to the members of the Advisory Committee for Administrative and Budgetary Questions, who are absent from Headquarters at this time of the year. When the Committee is not in session, material has to be circulated by mail and the programme budget implications considered through correspondence.
For the information of delegations, the report and the draft resolutions submitted by the United Nations Council for Namibia are contained in document A/44/24 and Add.l.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/44/PV.96
19 September 1990
ENGLISH
Forty-fourth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE NINETY-SIXTH MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 11 September 1990, at 3 p.m.
President;	Mr. GARBA	(Nigeria)
-	Tribute to the memory of Nasim Ahmed, former Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
-	Question of Namibia [36]
(a)	Report of the United Nations Council for Namibia
(b)	Report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
(c)	Draft resolutions
(d)	Report of the Fifth Committee
/...
This record contains uhe original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-64046/A 1130V (E)	.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments [17] (continued)
(1)	Appointment of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [18] (continued)
Tentative programme of work
The meeting was called to order at 3<35 p.m.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF NASIM AHMED, FORMER PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF PAKISTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS
The PRESIDENT: I should like to invite members to join in a tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Nasim Ahmed, who was Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations at the time of his death on 22 July 1990. Ambassador Ahmed had a useful and constructive career, both as an internationally renowned journalist and as a respected civil servant and esteemed diplomat. He will be remembered for the devotion with which he served his country and the cause of the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf I request the representative of Pakistan to convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government of Pakistan and to the bereaved family.
I now invite members of the Assembly to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Nasim Ahmed.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
on behalf of the African States.
Mr. GAMBARI (Nigeria)s On behalf of the Group of African States at the United Nations, let me congratulate you once again, Sir, on the way in which you are steering the deliberations of the General Assembly. We in Africa are grateful to the international community for the opportunity given to you, one of our most able sons, to continue to serve the world in your present capacity.
It was with deep sorrow and a heavy heart that the African Group received the news of the sudden transition of a great son of Pakistan and a sincere friend of Africa, the late Ambassador Nasim Ahmed. Until his passing, Ambassador Ahmed was his great country's Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations, an assignment he took with utmost seriousness and single-minded dedication.
(Mr, Gembari, Nigeria)
He was an indomitable fighter not only for his country's cause but also, and with equal dedication, for any just and righteous cause of oppressed peoples all over the world. We recall vividly the emotional speech made by our late colleague the Ambassador of Pakistan on 22 June 1990 in this very Hall at the special meeting of the Special Committee against Apartheid in honour of Mr. Nelson Mandela. He promised to walk the last mile with Nelson Mandela and all others struggling for their freedom.
Although he is personally unable to walk that last mile, we shall remember those words, which will be a source of encouragement to those fighting for their self-determination in South Africa. Africa will miss this great friend and astute internationalist. It is with sincerity and a deep sense of loss that we convey our condolences to the people and the Government of Pakistan as well as to the family of the late Ambassador Ahmed on this irreparable loss. May his soul rest in peace.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Sri Lanka, who will speak on behalf of the Asian States.
‘ Mr. JAxASINGnE (Sri Lanka); On behalf of the States members of the Asian Group, it is my sad duty to express our sincere and heartfelt condolences on the sorrowful and untimely demise of His Excellency Mr. Nasim Ahmed, the late Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations. Ambassador Nasim Ahmed had a distinguished career in the public service of Pakistan and was a renowned journalist.
Born in New Delhi in October 1927, Mr. Ahmed, after his graduation at home, continued his studies at the London School of Economics. He was a member of the Royal Institute of International Affairs and the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London. In 1950 he founded the Pakistan Society in Britain. He was the first Asian to be elected as President of the Commonwealth Association
(Mr, Jayasinghe, Sri Lanka)
and the Foreign Press Association in London. He also served as chief overseas correspondent for the Pakistan newspaper Dawn, and was managing director of a publishing company in London from 1978 to 1981. From 1972 to 1976 he held the post of Secretary of Pakistan's Federal Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as well as that of Chairman of the Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation and the Pakistan Television Corporation. From 1976 to 1978 he served as Pakistan's Ambassador to Denmark. In 1982 he served as adviser to the Director-General of the Intergovernmental Bureau for Informatics in Rome. In June 1989 Ambassador Ahmed was appointed as the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations.
During his stay in New York as Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations we had the honour and privilege of working closely with Ambassador Ahmed in all forums of the United Nations. On such occasions many of us had the good fortune of benfiting from the wisdom, diplomatic skill and experience of Ambassador Ahmed. In working together we very often looked to his advice and guidance in our common endeavour to promote international peace and co-operation.
To my recollection, the last occasion on which we listened to Ambassador Ahmed was when he spoke on behalf of the members of the Asian Group during the visit of Nelson Mandela. The oratory he displayed and the sincere manner and tone of his speech on that occasion were a sincere testimony to his commitment to the promotion of international justice and peace.
.	(Mr, Jayasinghe, Sri Lanka)
In the Asian Group, Ambassador Ahmed always provided the necessary leadership and made available his friendly and valuable advice to members. The pleasing and unassuming manner in which Ambassador Ahmed conducted his affairs won the hearts of all who knew him. Although Ambassador Ahmed is with us no more, the memorable association from which we benefited immensely will always be treasured by us.
On behalf of the States members of the Asian Group, I kindly request you, Sir, ' to convey to the family of His Excellency the late Mr. Nasim Ahmed and the delegation of Pakistan our heartfelt and deep condolences on this irreparable loss.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Hungary, who will speak on behalf of the Eastern European States.
Mr. ERDQS (Hungary): In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States for the month of September and on behalf of all the members of our Group I wish to express to the Government of Pakistan and its Permanent Mission to the United Nations and to the bereaved family of our departed colleague our deep condolences on Ambassador Nasim Ahmed's passing.
Ambassador Ahmed, Permanent Representative of Pakistan, was a skilful diplomat who represented his country at the United Nations in times of difficulties and hopes in the region to which Pakistan belongs. We all recall the significant contribution he made to the noble work of our Organization. It was only about a year ago that our Pakistani colleague presented his credentials to the Secretary-General. All too soon fate put an end to his work. The late Ambassador Nasim Ahmed was a distinguished member of our diplomatic community and we will all remember and miss him.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Belize, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr, ROGERS (Belize): Today we pay a tribute to the late Ambassador of the Republic of Pakistan to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Nasim Ahmed. Mr. Ahmed regrettably passed away on 21 July 1990, in Tokyo. The untimely passing of Mr. Ahmed, whom I had the opportunity ''O meet and confer with on several occasions, leaves with us a vacuum. The late Ambassador not only distinguished himself in the diplomatic world, representing his Government and people, but he was rightfully considered one of the most accomplished and outstanding journalists in his country, in Asia and, indeed, throughout the world. He is known for his contribution to the free press in Asia and his untiring efforts towards its devlopment. Testimony to that was his election to high offices in numerous press associations in the Commonwealth of Nations.
Our distinguished colleague will be remembered too for his skilful ability to deal with issues affecting his country, his region and the world at the United Nations. He was committed to peace and development and he advocated them. His country can be proud of him. The death of Ambassador Ahmed is a loss to the international community.
On behalf of the Latin America and Caribbean Group, I extend to his family and friends, his people and Government our deepest and profound sympathy.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Belgium, who will speak on behalf of the Western European and Ocher States.
Mr. NOTERDAEME (Belgium) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States it is my honour to join with you, Sir, and the representatives of other groups in conveying our most sincere condolences to the Permanent Mission of Pakistan and the Government of Pakistan on the occasion of the death of His Excellency Mr. Nasim Ahmed, Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan to the United Nations.
(Mr, Noterdaeme, Belgium)
Mr. Ahmed spent only one year at the United Nations, but we retain a warm memory of esteem for him because of the quality of his contributions and his general accomplishments. Mr. Ahmed showed himself particularly sensitive to international problems and was able to analyse them in a very thorough manner that always earned him an attentive audience. His sudden loss greatly saddens us, both personally and professionally.
I should like to take this opportunity to convey to the bereaved family our most sincere condolences at this painful time.	'
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Observer of Palestine.	'
Mr, TERZI (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of my colleagues, members of the Group of Arab States, and especially on behalf of the delegation of Palestine, I should like to express our deep sorrow at the loss of our brother and friend Ambassador Nasim Ahmed, former Permanent Representative of Pakistan. I should like also to convey our condolences to the delegation of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and to its people and Government, mv	-__.—. -   •.	_ r- • . j_	 .	___,
■*■•**- .&WWW «TAi*WM,,MMvai WmM ex ¿OQiU MtjMXAMMl. Mt J «40 U VCLUOeO / MCKIMMtaijy/ international co-operation and the welfare of oppressed peoples throughout the world. He was a close friend to the Arab cause, at the core of which is the question of Palestine, with respect to which he was an active representative of his country in the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, where I had the honour to work closely with him.
We, like the Government and the people of Pakistan, have lost a great man. We pray to God Almighty that the soul of the late Ambassador may rest in peace.
Once again, we extend to the bereaved family and to the delegation, the Government and the people of Pakistan our heartfelt condolences.
The PRESIDENT; I now call on the representative of the United States of America, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr, M0Q5E (United States of America): As the representative of the host country, and on behalf of the President and the people of the United States, I would like to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have spoken in tribute to our departed colleague, Ambassador Nasim Ahmed of Pakistan.
Ambassador Ahmed's tenure at the United Nations was regrettably brief, but in that short time he won the warm friendship and the genuine respect of those of us in New York who had the good fortune to work with him. He brought to his assignment as Pakistan's Permanent Representative to the United Nations a broad spectrum of experience, including distinguished journalism, a vigorous and engaging personality, and an outstanding analytic mind.
Nasim Ahmed died as he lived - on the move, and in the service of his country, a diplomat pursuing the cause of world peace, order and democracy. He will be missed by us all. On behalf of the United States of America, I extend my heartfelt condolences to the people of Pakistan and most especially to his family.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the Permanent Representative of Pakistan,
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan): On behalf of the Government of Pakistan and the Pakistan delegation, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, the Chairmen of the regional groups, and the representative of the host country for the kind expressions of sympathy and condolence on the sad and tragic demise of Ambassador Nasim Ahmed. X would also like to thank all the other representatives who have condoled with me on this tragic loss.
Ambassador Nasim Ahmed was both a patriot and a committed and dedicated citizen of the world. He firmly believed in democracy, in promoting the cause of international co-operation for strengthening peace and security, and in alleviating the plight of the poorer members of the international community. His commitment to
(Mr, Marker, Pakistan) the call of duty was matched by his deep humility and compassion. With his sad and untimely demise, Pakistan has lost not only an able diplomat but a man of great courage and integrity, and, may I add, I have lost a personal friend.
Let me thank you all once again for your kind words, which will be of immense consolation both to the bereaved family and to Ambassador Nasim Ahmed's friends and admirers in Pakistan.
AGENDA ITEM 36
QUESTION OF NAMIBIA
(a)	REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS COUNCIL FOR NAMIBIA (A/44/24 and Add.l and Add.l/Corr.l/Rev.l)
(b)	REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE SITUATION WITH REGARD TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION ON THE GRANTING OF INDEPENDENCE TO COLONIAL COUNTRIES AND PEOPLES (A/44/23 (Part V) and (Part V)/Add.l)
(c)	DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/44/24/Add.1 and Add.l/Corr.l/Rev.l)
(d)	REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/44/975)
The PRESIDENT: I now call on to the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia to introduce the report of the Council and the draft resolutions contained therein.
Mr, ZUZE (Zambia), President of the United Nations Council for Namibia: Mr. President, it is a profound source of satisfaction for the United Nations Council for Namibia to see you presiding over this meeting. So often have we in these chambers spoken of "historic occasions" that the word "history" has itself been trivialized. And yet there are episodes, moments in time, invested with a quality and dimension that distinguish them so palpably from the commonplace and ordinary. Today's meeting is such a moment. We are proud that it occurs under your guidance.
(Mr, Zuze, President* United
.•	Nations Council for Namibia)
Twenty-three summers ago we were born. And yet, to paraphrase the man for all seasons, Thomas More, we had hoped that even at our birth death does but stand aside a little. At the last meeting of the United Nations Council for Namibia, my friend and colleague Ambassador Gharekhan of India, who had been present at its very first meeting in 1967, remarked that it was rare that a moment of demise should have been so eagerly anticipated and welcomed. Certainly, we would have willed it far sooner.
I have thought long and hard about what to say on this occasion. It is not often that the deceased is given an opportunity to deliver his own eulogy. I could, I suppose, speak as a chronicler, even pretend to be a historian. I could tell you of what we did and what we could not do. I could recite the names of persons, of places and of things with which the history of the Council has been inextricably linked. I could catalogue the dates and times that so vividly punctuate our memory. I could speak of figures and numbers that say much but by no means all.
But I need not. For those who are interested, our current report and the many before that will tell it all. It is not only that I fear I shall only repeat that which is so easily accessible. It is that I fear I shall unwittingly compel members to conclude that the contours of our achievements, formidable as they are, define the boundaries of our worth and our relevance. That, of course, is not true.
When I was very young, we children were fond of reciting a rhyme that suddenly comes to mind now:
"Piggy on the rail track, picking up stones.
Along came an engine and broke Piggy's bones.
'Hey,' said Piggy, 'that's not fair', 'Hey,' said the driver, 'I don't care.’"
And so we have the rhymes "stones** and "bones", "fair" and "care**. We were young then, too young perhaps to savour fully the metaphors of this childlike rhyme, but as we grew up we found it a strangely apposite parable for the many facets of our being: for our growth as persons, for the trials and yearnings of our own space of life as indeed for our larger, more composite '’persons" as societies and nations.
There would always b® those concerned simply and unobstrusively with their mission and their work at hand. There would always be those who, with intent or inadvertently, came in the way of those mightier and more powerful. There would always be the denied and the trodden upon whose only recourse would be an appeal to fairness and reason. And there would always be those who simply chose not to care.
It was in the mid-1960s that the idea of a coherent definition of international responsibility for Namibia assumed practical shape. It was an evocative moment in international relations. A brutal war raged in Viet Nam which the United Nations was powerless to limit or control. The great-Power quintet which had defined the score for this Organization 20 years earlier was broken and divided within itself. The Non—Aligned Movement, the first collective assertion of international conscience in the post-war world, had only just begun to be heard, even to be listened to. The world's most populous nation was denied presence in these chambers, and so too were many smaller nations whose individual identities remained obscured in the overwhelming maternal cling of their colonial occupants.
And yet, strangely, at that time of international fracture and disorganization, the individual suddenly began to matter. It was the time when Joan Baez sang of "passionate strangers who rescued each other from a lifetime of cares". It was a wholly personal metaphor, and yet it seemed to define the increasing articulation and vehemence of a thinking world. Domestic disenchantments fused with perceptions of international inequities. The vigour of protest was introduced into the fabric of post-war society, and what spurred and lent fire to that protest was not simply the grievance of an individual about his own denial of rights. It was a concern far wider, where those powerless to find justice for themselves found strangers passionate in their cause.
(Mr, Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia)
I underline this because I have often wondered whether the United Nations as it stands today would possess the initiative, the imagination, indeed the audacity, to visualize and to create an institution comparable to the Council for Namibia, which it so determinedly launched in what seems another age. Perhaps it is the new civility and decorum in international affairs. There is the memorable line attributed by Robert Bolt to Ambassador Chapuys, the Spanish Envoy to Cromwell, where he remarks delightedly, ’’Even in times like this, even now, it is a pleasure to converse with you". To a non-professional - some of my friends might say unprofessional - diplomat like me, that seems to say it all: no matter what the injustices, the outrages, the violations on another shore, here in these chambers we remain far too busy being nice to each other. And the answer perhaps, aptly enough, lies in what Cromwell said on another occasion: "There are some things that are beyond good manners".	.
All this is known, if not fully appreciated. I have referred to the global context in which the Council was conceived. It was a time when disaffection and protest were given voice in new, fresh and unexpected forms. Sitting in this Hall today there are, I am sure, many mellowed delegates who were, at least spiritually, part of that surge of conscience that sparkled a quarter of a century ago. But soon, as a contemporary composer put it, "the pictures in the Times could no longer be put in rhymes". It was not the articulation that was important; it was the definition of remedy.
It was a difficult moment for the United Nations. It had tried its conventional and accessible forms of redress: resolutions of the General Assembly, the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice, missions of consultation and negotiation. And yet nothing seemed to click. Like Don Giovanni
(Mr, Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia) trapped in the stage setting of Madame Butterfly, we suddenly realized nothing -the rules, the environment, the definitions - nothing was of our choosing or of our acceptance. And so we had to draw up the rules.
.That is what the United Nations realized in 1966. The decisions it took in regard to Namibia - the termination of the South African mandate in 1966 and the direct assumption of responsibility in 1967 - were swift, decisive and articulate. There was no hem, there was no hesitation. It took the word "unique", until then a tired, flaccid and much over-used adjective, and gave it the vitality and vigour of a verb. It did not assign or apportion responsibility, it assumed it. It created what was virtually a new member State, politically and legally competent to represent the interests of its people. It made dynamic the many currents of international indignation and anger over the brutalization of Namibia. It offered itself as a vehicle and a forum for their harmony.
This is not to suggest that our determination and vision made easier the enormity of our responsibility. They were, quite honestly, moments when we wondered what exactly we were doing, and why. How was it that despite every civilized method and appeal, and indeed instruction, nothing had happened? It was not that the more things changed, the more they stayed the same. It was that nothing changed and things just got worse. Perhaps all our endeavours and appeals were pointless and we should simply call it a day and head home.
There is the story of a distinguished delegate who dreamt he was addressing the United Nations and woke up to find that he was. Certainly we have had our moments of complete unreality when the link between the prose of statements we have heard and the known passions of their articulators has seemed completely absent. There have been times when I myself have felt, in the middle of a statement I was
(Mr. Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia) making, like the telephone caller who is suddenly asked after 10 uninterruped minutes of conversation, "Who is this?"
Yes, indeed, who were we? A child born on the day that the United Nations revoked South Africa's mandate over Namibia will be nearly 24 today, as it meets to conclude its own mandate. He could be maimed. He could be a parent who has lost his child. He could be a worker denied a professional commensurate with his ability and his choice. That is true. That is a truth from which we cannot escape. That is a truth all our efforts and intentions could not abridge or deny.
But there is our own side of the truth. We have sought to be a custodian not only of Namibia's present, but its past and its future. We have sought to protect the land and resources inhered within it by history. We have sought to help train and equip a new citizenry with skills and talents essential to the fashioning of nationhood. It is not for me as a scarcely disinterested individual to say whether or not we have succeeded. We have been called frivolous and wasteful - ironically, by those very persons who persisted in believing in the prudence and seriousness of purpose possessed by the occupier.
JSM/edd
But we have no regrets. There are many to be grateful to: the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which insisted upon Namibia's rightful place and position on our agenda of concern; the front-line States, many younger than the Council itself, who gave its programmes not only impetus but the security of physical territory; the member States of the Council, which worked within the constituencies of their larger regional groups to come to terms with the gut issues of Namibia; and, indeed, the Assembly, whose confidence in us has been reaffirmed each year, on occasions far more than we would have wished but made necessary by the denial of our goal.
Above all, our gratitude goes to the Namibian people. The leadership provided to them by the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) has been vindicated amply in their first free but not necessarily fair elections. The grit and heroism Namibians have displayed have made almost petty the trials and difficulties with which the Council was often faced. The grace, the forgiving and the hope with which they have begun their free journey have given the United Nations itself a measure of strength.
Relations between nations possess all too often the qualities and the complexities of those between individuals. There are the moments of zeal and passion, of yearning and regret, of despair and the loneliness of solitude, of the triumph of togetherness. Only a few days ago I chanced upon a poem of Pablo Neruda in its English translation which I should like to share for a moment with you:
"These hands have measured the Earth, Separated minerals and cereals, made peace and war Demolished the distances of seas and rivers.
And yet, when they move over you, they cannot encompass you. And in that territory, from your feet to your brow, Walking, Walking, Walking, I shall spend my life."
Such were the hands that joined to form the United Nations Council for Namibia. It has fulfilled its mission. The end has finally arrived. And yet, as one Little Prince once remarked, that which is essential is invisible to the eye. Some day, we are sure, it shall emerge. For now we are grateful for the opportunity we have been given, for the hope, for the love and for the laughter that infused our efforts, for the reality of this great nation and people we have finally been ennobled to see.
I did refer to the affection and camaraderie between members of the Council throughout its history, which infused and indeed lent enthusiasm to their work. In this effort there was one constant source of support upon which members of the Council, and indeed successive Presidents of the body and Commissioners for Namibia, came to depend upon. That was the Secretariat. It would be easy to speak of their contribution to our work, but that would be superfluous because it could be argued that it was what they were supposed to do in any case. But to do so I feel misses an important point, that the challenge and the mandate before them, no less than that before the Council itself, required imagination and dynamism of an exceptional order, which does not easily conform to the traditionally defined norms and requirements of bureaucracy. These are qualities which the Council is sure can continue to enrich the United Nations system.
Members of the Council have on their own initiative made reference to this in the draft resolutions now before the Assembly and also requested the Secretary-General to consider as a matter of priority the redeployment within the United Nations system of the staff of the Office of the Commissioner for Namibia. •This paragraph, like all paragraphs in resolutions, is cold and precise, but I would wish the Assembly to know that it is one that truly emanates from the heart
of the Council. We have seen good times and bad, but there has never been an occasion when the political body and the staff supporting its activities have been separate or distinct in our own eyes. Just as our mission was one, we too were one, and while we are grateful that the realization of our mandate has made it possible for us to go our different ways, we do so with memories made vivid by their sharing.
It is now my privilege to introduce for consideration by the Assembly the recommendations of the United Nations Council for Namibia contained in document A/44/24/Add.1 and Add.l/Corr.l/Rev.l. These reflect the collective and unanimous views of members of the Council relating to the fulfilment of its responsibility as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia. They reflect also its conviction that there are aspects of its mandate which remain to be completed even though the Council's own structure shall no longer be there to do so. It has made specific recommendations accordingly for the future conduct of such programmes. It has no intention of abandoning them half way and counts on the Assembly for support.
The Council for Namibia came into being as the voice of a voiceless people. The people of Namibia have regained their voice but we shall not go silent on them.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the Assembly, I should like to pay a tribute to the President of the Council for Namibia and indeed thank him for the very important valedictory statement that he has just made.
I call on the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Mr. Tesfaye Tadesse of Ethiopia.
Mr, TADESSE (Ethiopia), Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Special Committee of 24): Mr. President, it is a continued pleasure for us to see you once again presiding over the deliberations of the Assembly.
On this historic occasion, which marks the culmination of one of the United Nations longest and most arduous undertakings, it is an honour, and may I say a distinct personal pleasure, to pay a tribute >o the extraordinary accomplishments of the United Nations Council for Namibia in fulfilling the mandate entrusted to it by the Assembly.
The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Council for Namibia have over the years maintained a close and constructive working relationship in the attainment of our common cause: a free and independent Namibia. Both these United Nations organs created by the Assembly were always united in their tireless and unrelenting quest to bring about a free and united Namibia.
In 1967, the General Assembly established the United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until independence. It entrusted the Council with the role of protecting, representing and promoting the rights and interests of Namibia and its people. Over those long and difficult years, the Council has spared no effort to end South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia in order to enable the people of the Territory to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and genuine independence.
(Mr, Tadesse, Chairman, Special Committee of 24)
The Council was instrumental in successfully galvanizing world public opinion and making it aware of the true conditions then existing in pre-independent Namibia. By exercising its influence, authority and expertise in a myriad of different fields and forums, and in close co-operation with other organs of the United Nations, regional organizations and the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) as well as with the support of the international community, the Council, after relentless and arduous efforts, was able to fulfil its important mandate. The Special Committee, as the focal point for decolonization in the United Nations, has consistently extended its unqualified support for and full co-operation with the work of the Council for Namibia in advancing the cause of the decolonization of that land.
It is therefore with a deep sense of satisfaction and accomplishment that we congratulate the Council for Namibia today on its overwhelming success in bringing to an end one of the world's most pernicious forms of colonialism.
We salute the people of the free and independent Member State of Namibia. We sympathize with these gallant sons and daughters of Africa for the many years of anguish and devastation they suffered during their struggle for independence. Their fortitude in the face of adversity, their endurance despite the overwhelming vicissitudes that confronted them and, led by their national liberation movement, SWAPO, their unswerving devotion to the cause of an independent Namibia, culminated in that nation's taking its rightful place in this assembly of sovereign and independent States.
Similarly, we salute the Organization of African Unity and its Liberation Committee, as well as the Non-Aligned Movement and its Co-ordinating Bureau at the United Nations, for the all-round assistance rendered to the people of Namibia in their arduous struggle for independence. Special gratitude goes to the front-line
(Mr, Tadesse, Chairman, Special Committee of 24)
States that made enormous sacrifices for the principled stand they took regarding Namibia. Indeed, we pay a tribute to all those who have contributed to the enhanced role of the Council, and particularly its last President, Ambassador Peter Zuze of Zambia, for his indefatigable efforts in the fulfilment of the Council's mandate.
Since 1962 the Special Committee has devoted itself to the cause of decolonization. That goal was greatly advanced and enhanced by Namibia's accession to independence. As we mark the successful fulfilment of the mandate of the Council for Namibia, we cannot help but recall that there are still
18 Non-Self-Governing Territories on the Special Committee's list that have not yet exercised their right to self-determination and independence. Those Territories, for the most part small island Territories in the Pacific and the Caribbean, now remain the central focus of the Special Committee's efforts in carrying out the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly. I refer in particular to resolution 43/47, adopted by the Assembly in 1988, in which it proclaimed the years 1990 to 2000 the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
With the co-operation and support of the international community, the Special Committee is firmly committed to that vital task. Its fervent intent is that within the current decade the Special Committee shall be in the same position as the United Nations Council for Namibia - that is, able to present to this international assembly States which have fully exercised their right to self-determination and independence, thereby demonstrating the successful completion of the task entrusted to the Special Committee by the Assembly.
The PRESIDENT: We are happy to welcome the Minister of Local Government and Housing of the Republic of Namibia, Her Excellency The Honourable Libertina hmathila. I now invite her to make her statement.
Ms, AMATHILA (Namibia): The Government and the people of the Republic of Namibia have done me the honour of asking me to represent them on this momentous occasion, set aside for the purpose of paying a deserved tribute to the United Nations Council for Namibia, at the conclusion of its historic mission, for a job well done.
I take this opportunity to express, on behalf of our young Republic, our sincere gratitude to the States Members of the United Nations, and particularly to the General Assembly for the courageous decision it took some 24 years ago, by its adoption of resolution 2145 (XXI) in 1966, to defend the just cause and aspirations of the Namibian people to self-determination and national independence, Under the subsequent General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V), of 1967, the United Nations Council for Namibia was entrusted with the execution of the sacred trust of ensuring the fulfilment of the direct responsibility of the United Nations for Namibia until independence.
As all representatives here know, that task was not a very easy one. The Namibian people had to endure pain and suffering for many years at the hands of apartheid colonialism. We were forced to take up arms in defence of our very existence. Many of our beloved compatriots made supreme sacrifices for the sake of freedom and justice. At no time, however, did our people despair or give up the struggle. We were driven by the burning desire for dignity, justice and peace in our motherland. We drew courage from those who stood with us against all odds.
In that struggle we were joined by the international community, which gave us all-round support and sustenance. The Namibian people will remain for ever indebted to everyone here who stood by us during the darkest hours. We count the Council for Namibia amongst those that were at the forefront of our struggle. Truly the Council was a reliable partner in our quest for national liberation.
(Ms. Amathila, Namibia)
The invaluable contribution made bÿ thé Council for Namibia-will remain for ever in our minds; it will be a chapter in the history of our country and its people.
I take this opportunity to express, on behalf of my Government and people, our sincere thanks to the successive Presidents of the Council who, through their wisdom and dedication, steered it to its final goal - namely, the achievement of national independence. We are grateful to all the members of the Council for Namibia, who often sacrificed their own national interests while championing our cause. Nothing could be more remarkable than that. They became part of the Namibian family. I want to assure them that an independent Namibia is indeed their home.
(Ms._AniaUiU, Namibia)
I salute the Special Committee of 24 and its Chairman for their many years of hard work in support of the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and national independence. We wish them well in continuing their challenging task and their very winnable struggle to ensure that all peoples regain their freedom and human dignity, in keeping with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
We shall not forget the most valuable services rendered our struggle over the years by the United Nations Secretariat. Its members, too, occupy a special place in our hearts.
It is very painful to remember that of those who fought so hard all were not able to be part of the joyous moment when Namibia became an independent and sovereign nation on 21 March 1990. Among the fallen heroes we count not only Namibians but other nationals who made their mark on Namibian history as well. One is immediately reminded of the late Sean McBride, former Commissioner for Namibia and a towering giant whose steadfast dedication, innovation and foresight provided direction to the Council's work for years.
With similar sentiments we remember the late Bernt Carlsson, the last Commissioner for Namibia, who met his tragic death just as the final chapter in the decolonization of Namibia was being concluded. And we shall remember several others who made their selfless contribution to Namibia's independence.
The General Assembly under your stewardship, Mr. President, has made a wise decision to convene this resumed session to pay, in the most appropriate manner, a well-earned homage to the Council for Namibia, not only for its services to Namibia but for having been a shining symbol of dedication to humanity, freedom and justice. We know that to many of its members the dissolution of the Council is like a sad dream. Many of us who have come to work closely with the Council feel
(Ms, Amathila, Namibia) the same, but all of us are united and strengthened by the fact that this very act today will again confirm to the entire world that the international community, in a rather unique way, ,'as fulfilled its sacred trust: that of returning Namibia to its people.
Although the Council, having faithfully and successfully fulfilled its historic mandate, is being dissolved, the Government of the Republic of Namibia is strongly appealing to the international community, and especially to the General Assembly, to see to it that the ongoing programmes and projects under which young Namibians are undergoing training and fellowship should not be sacrificed.
In this way the special responsibility that the United Nutions had assumed over our country and that helped, in more ways than one, to ensure Nambia’s eventual decolonization can be brought to a dignified and worthy conclusion. This is the collective view of the Cabinet of the Republic of Namibia.
To that end the Secretary-General of the United Nations should be given the means and empowered by the General Assembly, with adequate fur 3s and technical resources, to oversee the completion of those outstanding commitments made by the Council, including, in particular, the relocation of the United Nations Institute for Namibia and the satisfactory conclusion of its ongoing activities.
Naturally, we shall count on our friends, former members of the Council and all of you, to join us during the second phase of our struggle, that of national reconstruction and development, which is as challenging and demanding as was the struggle for independence. A combination of hard work by Namibians and international support assure our country of confidence in the future.
I should like to place on record once again our heartfelt appreciation to the Secretary-General for the special care and commitment with which he nobly executed the mandate entrusted to him by the General Assembly and the Security Council,
(Mg, Amathila, Namibia) particularly in the ‘successful implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
I should also like to take a moment to state how proud we feel to have enjoyed the tremendous support of the front-line States, the Organization of African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and countless other friends and supporters of our people. An independent Namibia stands ready, in whatever humble way, to make its contributions towards international peace and security, freedom and justice for all.
Before concluding, allow me to state here that our small children in some of the schools in Namibia have been asking whether the people of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) who went home have arrived safely in their countries. I have been given the task of finding out from Mr. Ahtisaari whether the members of UNTAG have indeed arrived home, because apparently he has not yet written to the children to say that everybody had done so. I am glad to be able to take back the message that all the members of the UNTAG have safely rejoined their families.
The PRESIDENT; Replying on behalf of Mr. Ahtisaari, I can tell Dr. Amathila that all the dedicated members of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) - at least those here in the Secretariat - have all arrived back safely.
The Assembly will now consider the two draft resolutions recommended by the United Nations Council for Namibia. They are contained in Chapter I of Part V of the report of the Council (A/44/24/Add.l and Add.l/Corr.l/Rev.l).
Before proceeding to the vote on these draft resolutions, I should like to draw the Assembly' attention to the provisions of special rule F in annex III to
(The President)
the rules of procedure, which have been applied in the past in the voting on all proposals under the agenda item "Question of Namibia". In accordance with the provisions of special rule F, a two-thirds majority of the representatives present and voting is required for adoption of proposals on the item before the Assembly.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolutions A and B contained in Chapter I of Part V of the report of the Council for Namibia (A/44/24/Add.l and Add.1/Corr.1/Rev.1).
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget implications of the draft resolutons has been issued as document A/44/975.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A, "Dissolution of the United Nations Council for Namibia". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution 44/243 A).
The PRESIDENT: We now come to draft resolution B, "United Nations Fund for Namibia". May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution B?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 44/243 B).
The PRESIDENT: In the light of the resolutions just adopted, the agenda item on the question of Namibia is thereby deleted from the provisional agenda of the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
Before calling upon the first speaker wishing to make a statement in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind delegations that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr, TRAXLER (Italy): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 12 member States of the' European Community. The European Community and its member States have rejoiced that Namibia has at last taken its place in the United Nations as a free, sovereign and independent State. We wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute once more to the central role played by the United Nations in assisting the peaceful transition of Namibia to independence. We also wish to acknowledge the work done by the United Nations Council for Namibia.
The Twelve are pleased to have been able to join in the consensus on the two draft resolutions just adopted by the Assembly. The Twelve take it that all measures and programmes aimed at implementing the resolutions just adopted will be carried out in consultation with and with the agreement of the Government of Namibia. We wish to recall on this occasion that the position of our member States on the legal authority of the United Nations Council for Namibia is well known and has not changed.
As to the administrative and budgetary aspects, the Twelve have been willing to proceed on the basis of the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and they refer in this context to the position expressed in the Fifth Committee. However, they wish to recall that implementation of these resolutions, like all others, must be subject to the financial and staff regulations of the United Nations and, of course, to the United Nations Charter.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Nigeria, who wishes to speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. GAMBARI (Nigeria): I am grateful for this opportunity to speak on behalf of the Group of African States at the United Nations. Today will surely go down in history as yet another milestone in the annals of the United Nations; it is a milestone of which we Africans are particularly proud. Slightly more than 23 years ago, on 19 May 1967, the international community gave concrete expression to
.	■	■	!
(Mr, Gamburi, Nigeria) its collective resolve on the question of Namibia by establishing the United Nations Council for Namibia. The establishment of the Council with a clear mandate to be the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until the latter's independence followed the termination of South Africa's mandate over Namibia the previous year. The extent to which the Council prosecuted that trust and the mandate of the international community is self-evident. Namibia is now a sovereign and independent nation and a full member and active player in the community of nations.
Throughout its 23 years of existence the United Nations Council for Namibia did not waver from its course. It waged war against the illegal occupation of Namibia and the mindless exploitation and despoliation of its resources with single-minded dedication and zeal. It is a testimony to the efficacy of the leadership role the Council played in the fight to free Namibia that today some of its activities and actions in pursuit of that goal have opened new frontiers in the progressive development of international law.
Africa is very grateful indeed to the United Nations Council for Namibia. We are very proud of its achievements. We are inspired by its legacy in one of the most epic struggles that Africa in particular and the international community as a whole has had to wage in the history of mankind. Africa is particularly pround of the fact that for many years Zambia, a front-line African State, provided some of our best and brightest sons to lead the United Nations Council for Namibia. We salute the Republic of Zambia for that solid contribution to international solidarity. We particularly congratulate and commend the outgoing President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, His Excellency retired Lt.-Gen. Peter D. Zuze, whose dedication, quiet resolve and great determination in keeping the Namibian issue on the front burner has been unsurpassed. Mr. Ambassador, great son of Africa, we warmly and heartily congratulate you for fighting the good fight even in the face of seemingly implacable odds.
(Mr, Gambari, Nigeria)
As we ar« to dissolve the Council, it is the nope of Africa that the proper hand-over of all its assets to the Government of independent Namibia will be effected. We also trust that the Secretary-General of our great Organization will apply the necessary rules and regulations to ensure the smooth redeployment of the staff of the Council to other sections within the Secretariat where their experience can be effectively utilized. We commend the staff of the Council and the Office of the Commissioner for Namibia for a job very well done.
Africa sincerely wishes to convey its gratitude to all the States members of the Council for Namibia, who worked so tirelessly and selflessly to realize our collective aspiration to free Namibia from the shackles of colonialism and apartheid. We hope the Council's dissolution will not mean an abandonment of some of its programmes and activities yet to be fully implemented, in particular the training prograrnmes. Ways must be found to complete those programmes properly in order to sustain the credibility of our Organization.
Therefore, on behalf of the African Group and my own country Nigeria, which was a pioneer member of the Council, I wish to congratulate us all on the adoption of the resolutions formally dissolving the United Nations Council for Namibia.
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Belize, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States .
Mr. ROGERS (Belize): The Latin American and Caribbean States would like to endorse all the sentiments expressed by previous speakers.
Indeed this is a moment of celebration, for Namibia is truly a child of the United Nations. A free, sovereign and united Namibia is the result of the work of all of us: the work of the Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Non-Aligned Movement and the front-line States. And it would be remiss of me not to mention the contribution of
(Mr, Rogers, Belize) the Caribbean: the illustrious daughter of Barbados, Her Excellency Dame Nita Barrow, now Governor General of Barbados. They all played a great part in bringing Namibia to independence.
We all celebrate the adoption of these resolutions today and salute all those who have contributed in any way.
The PRESIDENT? We have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote. It is now my pleasant duty to call on the Secretary-General to make a statement.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I should like to place on record my appreciation of the role played by the United Nations Council for Namibia over the past 23 years in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly. With its dissolution, the intimate association of the United Nations with Namibia's quest for independence has concluded. This does not mean that our commitment to Namibia has diminished. The United Nations has already begun to orient its activities and co-operation to the task of helping the Namibian people to consolidate their newly won freedom through social and economic development.
It is perhaps pertinent to recall the unique relationship that developed between the United Nations and the people of Namibia following the General Assembly decision in 1967 to assume responsibility for "the moral and material well-being and security" of the people of Namibia.
The Council for Namibia was created specifically to fulfil this mandate.
At the request of the General Assembly, the Council embarked on a campaign to mobilize international support for the independence of Namibia and to safeguard as well as promote the national interests of the Namibian people. It proved itself a staunch and reliable advocate of Namibia at international and intergovernmental forums and ensured that its national interests were internationally recognized and respected. It exercised legislative authority on behalf of the Namibian people, notably in the context of the Decree for the protection of their national resources. It launched an active and international public information campaign.
In its capacity as Trustee of the United Nations Fund for Namibia, the Council administered a range of activities and programmes designed to assist individual Namibians and to contribute to the emergence of an independent society whose people would be equipped with the necessary skills. It was instrumental in the creation of relevant institutions, including the United Nations Institute for Namibia, the Vocational Training Centre and the Technical Secondary School. The Nationhood Programme, in particular, drew upon the talents of the Namibian people and gave them an opportunity for development.
As President Nujoma of Namibia stated, the Council was a true partner in the process of the decolonization of Namibia, and its programmes.and institutions played a vital role in providing the necessary skills to Namibians essential for the administration of an independent Namibia.
I have frequently had reason to meet with the Council in the context of the specific responsibilities relating to Namibia which were assigned to me by the General Assembly and the Security Council. I have valued my association with its President, Ambassador Zuze, whose country, Zambia, has been among the most notable sources of support to the United Nations efforts for Namibia. I should like to
place on record My deep sense of appreciation to all the members of the Council for their untiring efforts and for the commitment and spirit of endeavour that infused their work.
I pay a tribute also to the generation of international civil servants who worked with almost passionate dedication in Namibia's cause. Two of the most honoured names - Sean McBride and Bernt Carlsson - are now a memory to which we pay hommage.
Mention must also be made of the sterling services provided by other members of the staff and secretariat of the Council and the Office of the Commissioner for Namibia. Together they performed a job well done.
The question of Namibia has demonstrated that when a just cause is at stake and has the sustained support of the international community, it will ultimately triumph.
The PRESIDENT: We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 36.
AGENDA ITEM 17 (continued)
APPOINTMENTS TO FILL VACANCIES IN SUBSIDIARY ORGANS AND OTHER APPOINTMENTS (j) APPOINTMENT OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSIONER FOR NAMIBIA
The PRESIDENT: It will ,e recalled that the General Assembly decided on 22 September 1989 to include sub-item (j) of agenda item 17 on the agenda of its forty-Eourth session.
As there is no further basis for action on this sub-item, may I take it that members agree that it should not be included in the draft agenda of the forty-fifth session?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 17.	'
AGENDA ITEM 18 (continued)
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION ON THE GRANTING OF INDEPENDENCE TO COLONIAL COUNTRIES AND PEOPLES (A/44/974)
The.PRESIDENT: The Assembly has before it-a letter (A/44/974) addressed to me by the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Our attention is drawn to the nomenclature of item 115 of the provisional agenda of the forty-fifth session. In the light of Namibia's independence, that nomenclature should be modified by deleting from the title the words "Namibia and in all other".
May I take it that the Assembly agrees that item 115 of the provisional agenda of the forty-fifth session should read "Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, aartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa"?
It was so decided.	.
The PRESIDENT: In the light of the decision just made, may I take it that the Assembly considers that the discussion of this item at the present session is concluded?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT: This therefore concludes our consideration of agenda item 18.
TENTATIVE PROGRAMME OF WORK
The...PRESIDENT,: I should like to inform members that the General Assembly will consider agenda item 114, "Enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections", as the first item tomorrow morning, before it considers item 28, "Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa".
It is envisaged that the Assembly will take action on draft resolution A/44/L.67, entitled "Assistance to Haiti", under item 114, on Friday, 14 September, in the afternoon.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/45/PV.29
22 October 1990
ENGLISH
Forty-fifth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE TWENTY-NINTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 10 October 1990, at 3 p.m.
President:	Mr. de MARCO	(Malta)
-	General debate [9] (continued)
Statements made by
*	Mr. Van Dunem (Angola)
-	Statement by the President
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: Observance of the Thirtieth Anniversary of the Declaration [18]
Electoral assistance to Haiti (A/45/L.2) (continued) [154]
Programme of work	'
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-64244/A 2165V (E)
33ie„ meetina._was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 9 (continued) GENERAL DEBATE
Mt, VAN DWF.M (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; official English text furnished by the delegation), First I would like to congratulate you. Sir, ou your eleotiou to the presidency of the General Aaaembly at its forty-fifth session and to join those who spoke before ne in wishing you success.
Even though the international co™,unity is more hopeful today about finding the most efficient ways and moans in the guest for justice, peace, understanding and co-operation, we know that the task of leading our proceedings is a hard one. Nevertheless, your wisdom, diplomatic experience and capability, a. „11 ,, yoor personal dedication, are an assurance that the work of this session will be most successful.
Allow me, therefore, to express, on behalf of the Government of the People's Republic of Angola ana on my own behalf, the trust me have in you, and to assure you of the full co-operation of my delegation.
Allow me also to congratulate the outgoing President, His Excellency General Joseph Garba, on the excellent work carried out during the forty-fourth session. The success of the sixteenth special session, devoted to the subject of apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa, and of the eighteenth special session, on international economic co-operation, particularly for the recovery of economic growth and development in the developing countries, is unequivocal proof of the dedication and capability that have always characterised him.
Th. cur«« trend toward, detent. lu International relation, ha. reaulted in Important atop, aimed at solving some of the major problem, of concern to the International community, thank, to the effort, made during th. past f.w year., when
(Mr, Van Dunem, Angola) the cold war has been increasingly replaced by dialogue, and the use of force in relations between States has been losing ground to the settlement of conflicts through negotiation.
In this connection, we salute Namibia's accession to independence, an event that marked the end of the era of traditional colonialism on the African continent.
We also welcome the unification of Germany, a country with which we have always had friendly relations. My Government will spare no effort to maintain and strengthen those ties of co-operation.
These historic events are occurring concurrently with others which have a profound significance for Africa and the world: the freeing of Dr. Nelson Mandela, the legalization of anti-apartheid political organizations and the transformations taking place in South Africa with a view to the abolition of the policy of racial segregation. All these are signs of the new environment in which we are living and of hope for a better future.
However, elements of instability persist in southern Africa. We are referring to the situation of violence which obtains in South Africa, supported and encouraged by the police.
We are also referring to the conflicts in Angola and Mozambique, where peace efforts are being opposed by external interference, whose only reason for being lies in the outmoded policies of bloc confrontation.
In the case of Angolan, the summit meeting held one year ago at Gbadolite had created hopes for peace that quickly disappeared as a result of the continued support given to the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) by the United States and by South African conservative circles.
Throughout this period, the Government of Angola has reaffirmed its dedication to go on with peace efforts through the dialogue aimed at national unity and
(MrVan Punem, Angola reconciliation among all Angolan.. It ™ In that content that conce.aion. wre made in Gbadolite and on other occasions.
The same cannot be said of UNITA, which not only has deliberately violated and later unilaterally denounced the commitments made at Gbadolite but also has intensified its acts of war, particularly against the economic and social infrastructure, and has kidnapped and murdered defenseless civilians.
Nevertheless, the Government of Angola continued to bet on peace and therefore has decided to establish direct contacts with UNITA.
Hoch«lth.tMaiug th« risibility, th. cootiouoa loclgn luterf.r.uc. sa th. position of UKITA yllhiadi th. Angolan Cov.rnm.ne. propel, for aohlslng p.uc. tav. boon th. obstacles that pr«v.n:.a the four rounaa of alrect talks alreaay hela unaer th. auspices of th. Government of Portugal from proauclng the espectea results.	■
The failure of the fourth round of direct talks was due to UNITA’s unjustified demand to be explicitly recognised as an opposition political party. The Angolan Government has already established the principle of constitutional revision and of a multi-party system in Angola under peaceful conditions, proposing a temporary status for UNITA that, once agreed to by that group, would take effect with the signing of the cease-fire. Once a multi-party system has been instituted, all political forces would conduct their activities legally under th. Political Parties Law, to be approved by the competent State authorities.
(Mt. Van Punem. Angola)
Therefore, it is wrong to demand the status of an opposition political party in the present circumstances, not only because it violates the present legal and constitutional order, recognised by UNITA during the second round of negotiations, but also because nowhere in the world does an official opposition party possess an army of its own.
The attempt to blame the Angolan Government for the failure of the fourth round is intended simply to manipulate public opinion and justify additional aid to UNITA for continuing the war in Angola. Unfortunately the political, economic and military might of the United States continues to influence Angola's internal conflict, contrary to the commitments made by United States authorities during the negotiation process that led to the New York agreements on peace in south-western Africa.
It is not inappropriate to emphasise the seriousness demonstrated by the Government of the People's Republic of Angola in the process that facilitated the application of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), making it possible to eliminate the tension point represented by the Namibian conflict. At the same time, it would be unfair not to recognise the important role played by the Cuban Government for peace in south-wastern Africa.
Angola and Cuba continue to abide by their commitments on the phased withdrawal of troops from Angola, in a process that has already resulted in the departure off more than 38,000 soldiers in a shorter period of time than had been agreed upon.
The war situation in the People's Republic of Angola is made worse by natural disasters, particularly the drought that has been afflicting some central and southern regions of the country for about four years, with serious material damage and loss off human life. According to present estimates about 3.5 million people
(Mr. Van Punem. Angola) “’ in ,.d of «.„gooey food old „a 2.2 milUon o£ them ar. a„£fari„9 th, .„ of the drought#
We are grateful for the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in mobilizing emergency aid to Angola, and we thank the international community for alleviating the suffering of the stricken populations.
However, in the face of the difficulties and limitations inherent in the country’s economic underdevelopment, the Angolan Government is unable to cope with that natural disaster by means of its own resources, and for that reason it is renewing its appeal for international aid.
Given the interdependence that exists nowadays in the world, no country can remain indifferent to problems that affect humanity. The People’s Republic of Angola takes a keen interest in the events taking place in various parts of the globe.
The latest developments in Western Sahara show that some positive steps are being taken to break the present stalemate. The Government of the People's Republic of Angola reaffirms the right of the Saharan people to self-determination and encourages the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco and the POLISARIO Front to proceed with negotiations and congratulates the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the efforts he has undertaken, together with the Organization of African Unity (OAU), to organize a referendum that can bring an early settlement of the conflict.
The continued illegal occupation of the Territory of East Timor is unacceptable, unjustifiable and a violation of the norms and principles of international law, especially when it is perpetrated by a country which in the past has itself been a victim of colonialism and which has made an important contribution to the struggle of colonized peoples for their emancipation.
(Mr van Dunwi. ftff0)
My Government advocates the path of dialogue between Portugal and Indonesia, including representatives of the people of East Timor, as the way to find a fair and comprehensive solution that will take account of the legitimate rights of the Maubere people.
Prospects in the Middle East are not encouraging in so far as finding an early resolution of the Israeli-Arab conflict is concerned. We believe that settling Jews in occupied Arab territories will not help in any way to bring an honourable end to that conflict. The Government of the People's Republic of Angola considers it imperative to convene an international conference on the Middle Bast with the participation of all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), the authentic representative off the Palestinian people, which has for decades been struggling for its right to self-determination.
We cannot fail to mention the crisis that recently arose in the Persian Gulf. When everything points to a realisation that resorting to the use off force is not the most efficient way or moans of resolving conflicts, we are surprised by the events in that part of our globe with the invasion off Kuwait by Iraq - something we emphatically condemn, especially since Kuwait is a member off the Non-Aligned Movement which, since its establishment, has defended the principle of refraining from the threat or use of force in international relations.
Therefore the parties involved must honour the resolutions of the Security Council and it is imperative that Iraqi troops should be withdrawn from Kuwait in order to facilitate a peaceful and negotiated resolution of the conflict.
With regard to Central America, we reaffirm that the peoples of the region must freely decide their destiny; there must be no external interference through support given to irregular armed groups, through direct military intervention or through a war of information whose object is to overthrow legitimately constituted Governments.
V45/W.M 9
(Mr. Van Dnn—. Agggja
In Cambodia th, continuation of armed action fro« neighbouring territories will not advance the search for a peace agree«ont. My Gov.rnm.nt believes that a peaceful resolution of the conflict there necessarily require, the cessation of all foreign interference and respect for the country’s independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned status.
On the subject of Korea, my Government supports the stops taken towards the reunification of the two parts off that country and the removal of foreign bases and troops from the peninsula. The recent proposals aimed at the holding of a conference during a first phase constitute a positive sign that deserves the fullest support from the international community, for no matter what manoeuvres are resorted to, a people with a single identity will never remain divided.
At the beginning of the last decade, we declared from this rostrum our firm desire to improve the global economic environment, and we likewise comitted ourselves to strengthening international economic co-operation in order to conquer hunger, poverty, malnutrition and epidemics - that is, to overcome the problems of underdevelopment and give more dignity to man’s existence.
Today, as wo enter the last docade of the twentieth century, wo should reflect on what was our commitment to searching for solutions to the critical international economic situation, which affect, th. developing countries most of all. Therefore, it is only right to raise some concerns! Must wo have images of hunger and poverty continue to appear in th. world of our discussions in ord.r to remind us of th. imbalanc. and injustlc. of th. pr...nt international economic system? Do we need to repeat at every step that four fifths of the world’s population possesses only one fifth of its total wealth, manages only 10 per cent of the world’s industrial output and controls no mor. than 2 to 3 p«r ent of th. total r.s.arch effort, in th. world? What specific joint maasuros did w. take to prevent th. gap
PKB/jl
(HiLZiidtoaMLJa between the developing and the developed countries free reaching today’s proportions?
When the recent social session of the General Assembly devoted to international economic co-operation analysed the results achieved during the past decade, it found that the problem which had already caused concern to the countries of the so-called third world at the start of the decade wore still present.
The target level ©f official development aid to the developing countries, fixed at 0.7 par cent of the industrialised countries* gross national product (GNP), was attained only by a snail group of countries, and the general figure was only 0.35 per cent.
<Mr_Van PunM, Anaoia>
In international trade we continue to witness a resurgence of protectionism practised by the developed countries, a decline in the prices of raw materials, and a deterioration of the terns of trade, whose effects seriously compromise all the efforts made by the developing countries to revive their economies.
To aggravate this picture, the foreign debt off the developing countries has been constantly increasing, reaching the monumental sum off $1,320 billion at the end of last year; that amount cannot be paid without inevitably diminishing the investment capacity off those countries.
In our view, the basic question lies in the need for a political will, both on tho part of the developing countries and on the part of the developed countries, as th. only way to avoid a reproduction of the system that generated the inequalities and injustices.
While it is true that in order to overcome the challenges of the world economic situation, the developing countries have to adopt more appropriate strategies geared to readjusting their economies, it is equally true that the developed countries should adopt more constructive attitudes.
More recently,, with the ongoing transformations in Eastern Europe wo have witnessed what could be called Mconditiosalism" in connection with official development aid from the countries of Western Europe.
For the Government off tha People’s «.public off Angola, th. economic evolution occurring in the countries of Eastern Europe should signify a more active participation by those countries in the world economy, so that they may make a greater contribution to the improvement of North-South relations.
In th. particular cas. of Africa, th. changes taking place in Eastern Europe should serve as an incentive to other industrialised countries to give greater support to African countries, taking account of the ongoing policies off structural adjustment aimed at the recovery off their economies, instead of opting for measures
<Hr* Van Puny- Angola) that would further weaken their participation in the expansion of the world economy.
Moreover, in the face of the inadequate results achieved in implementing the United Mations programme for the economic recovery of Africa, the international community has seen the birth of a new plan that requires greater flexibility on the part of donors.
In southern Africa, with the accession of Namibia to independence and the beginning of the process that will load to negotiations between anti-ApA£&h£.i& organisations and the South African Government, now prospects are opening for the region’s development.
The member countries of the Co-ordination Conference for the Development of Southern Africa, in its tenth year of existence are entering a now phase in the development efforts that will need the growing export off the international community.
Important events have taken place and will take place during the present docade. A ffow days ago the second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries ended at Paris with encouraging - albeit partial - results. Its convening constitutes one more opportunity to seek solutions to the pressing problems faced by that group of countries. The cancellation of their foreign debts by the industrialised creditor countries should bo considered one off the most urgent and necessary measures for achieving that end.
The World Summit ffor Children, held on 29 and 30 September, accurately analysed the problems that besot the world’s children and it recommended appropriate measures ffor their protection. The People’s Republic off Angola reaffffirms its most fir, commitment to such principles and will do its utmost to improve the living conditions off children
JSM/cw
<Mr. Tm ITbm* *1011)1
I.	«MIU«. th. .Ighth MM anlM cwm, „ ftUl  .,T1||r will tat. UM 1. «,1. 1B „„ Mr. .111 h. . m*mm „ Mlro—t M amlotmt. ua 1. mm, . mImm 0. MM.tln. M cm. itant forM m •«fort will b. Mo to ctlM th. mm Dm. « ta. .IghtaMh m««U .«..loo ot th. OMrU *.Mhly,MM« to iMnttlMl MMl. n-Mntln. Ih. .Mita w «Met Cm tbo,« Mtl.gr Aral« Mm • CMtetln tor re-establishing trust among nations.
ZteJBBBIXfiGKs I shall now call on those representatives? who wish to spent in exorcise of the right of reply.
May X rewind nowhere that? in accordance with General Assembly decision “'«“' MtMM 1. Mr.1.. of th. right .1 npl? m li.lt« to U M.M. tor th. tint latamotln M to tin Mast.. Car th. mm. m .hoaM to Md. hr delegations from their seats.
MCamMSU (Turkey)g Ny delegation has asked to speak in exorcise of the right of reply.
The statement made by the Minister for roreign Affairs of Greece on 27 September in the course of the general debate consisted of may page, devoted to the guestion of Cyprus. The Greek statement contained nothing positive. It was not designed to soothe or to conciliate. The only new element was the attempt to equate tbo Gulf crisis with the quasi Jon of Cyprus. That is ludicrous. Evon by grossly distorting well-known facts? it is not possible to draw the kind of parallel between Kuwait and Cyprus that the Greek statement tried to draw.
Kuwait was invaded? occupied and annexed by its neighbour. la essence? that is what Greece tried to do to Cyprus. Greece encouraged and abetted the Greek Cypriots to destroy the partnership State in order to annex Cyprus to Greece.
As wo all know? the Republic of Cyprus was established in 19S0 hr the Turkish and Greek Cypriots in the exorcise of their respective rights of
(MKAiufejbutax) self-determination. Within three years, the Greek Cypriote had precipitated a el' .1 war« upset the constitutional order and brought about the division of Cypres, all in the nano of onion with Greece*
the United Rations had to send forces to Cypres in 1944 to protect the beleaguered Turkish Cypriots from being exterminated or driven oat of their ancestral homos by the Greek Cypriots, if the United Rations peace-keeping force is still in Cyprus after More than 24 years, Greece oust bear a heavy responsibility for that fact. In all those years, wo have not seen any Greek initiative to encourage reconciliation between the two peoples in Cyprus. They have never given their support for the lifting of the embargo against the Turkish Cypriots or for toning down the hostility and the invective directed against the Worth from the Greek Cypriots. On the contrary, Athens has given material and moral support to Greek Cypriot rearmanent efforts. Athens has backed the most chauvinistic elements among the Greek Cypriots in pursuing tbeir relentless campaign against the Turkish Cypriots.
The question of Cyprus will bo resolved when the two peoples in Cyprus overcome their differences. The way to that goal is shown la Security Council resolution 449 (1990), which was adopted unanimously by the Security Council six months ago. That resolution calls for a freely reached and mutually acceptable solution to be arrived at through negotiations on an egual footing. While paying lip service to respect for relevant United Wations resolutions, the Greek statement contained no mention of Security Council resolution 449 (1990), nor any Indication of a desire on Greece's part to encourage the Greek Cypriots to turn over a nsw leaf in their relations with the Turkish Cypriots.
(Mr. Abh. Turkey)
Tho tired rhetoric <. the past 26 years has got us nowhere. My delegation is very sad to note that the message from Athens continues to be in the same vein. This does not augur well for the Secretary-General’s renewed efforts to get the intercoamninal talks resumed at an early date.
M£i_XESAKU2S£ (Cyprus): I would like to reply to what the representative of Turkey said, trying, in this Assembly, to distort the picture and the question of Cyprus and, particularly, trying to present the latest resolution of tho Security Council on Cyprus, resolution 649 (1990), as aiming to create a situation in Cyprus where there will bo division and soparation, whoroas tho resolution, and decisions of tho United Nations, both of tho Security Council and of tho General Assembly, go in the direction of having a united Cyprus. Ho did so ovon on the particular idea of separate self-determination, which has been dealt with in the Security Council by the Secretary-General himself.
The question of Cyprus is a question of efforts by the Secretary-General to find a solution on tho basis of th® unity and tho integration of Cyprus, and not a solution as the representative of Turkey tried to present it in his right of reply.

Turkey, in exorcising his right of reply, launched a slanderous allegation against my country. I would like to ask the distinguished representative of Turkey, Who attacked Cyprus? Whoso occupation forces are still in Cyprus? Who expelled 200,000 refugees from their ancestral home? And who was responsible for the 1,669 missing persons? I would like to point out that the crime of aggression against Cyprus was committed by Turkey. There is no legal or moral principle to justify tills act of aggression committed against Cyprus.
I would also like to ask the distinguished reprosentative of Turkey if he recognises resolution 3212 (XXIX), in favour of which Turkey voted, and I should like also to ask him what Turkey has done so far to implement this resolution.
MEx-MSIH (Turkey): Nothing that the distinguished representative of Greece has said can obscure the fact that Greece must bear the major responsibility for bringing about the question of Cyprus. Greece's ambitions in Cyprus are well documented, and it these ambitions which encouraged the Greek Cypriots to engage in the actions against the Turkish Cypriots which led directly to the present division of Cyprus into two separate States. Unfortunately, we are unable to detect any indication of change in Greece's Cyprus policy which would encourage the Greek Cypriots to abandon their policy of implacable hostility against the Turkish Cypriots.
Mfib-EAES (Greece): With reference to the last remarks made by the distinguished representative of Turkey, I would like to state for the record that Turkey is responsible for all th. violation, of human rights which took place in Cyprus, and which are taking place there now. Hundreds of resolutions of this Organisation, of the Council of Europe and other regional and international organisations remain unimplemented. We would once again ask the distinguished representative of Turkey to respect and to implement the relevant resolutions which provide for the human rights of all the people in Cyprus to be respected.
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
SiW-ZMSXfiMiX, We have just heard the last speaker in the general debate, which began on 24 September and took 29 meetings. In the course of the debate we were privileged to listen to 27 Hoads of State and 15 Prime Ministers. The total number of speakers was 155. This impressive participation, particularly by Heads of State or Government, highlights the importance the international community is attaching to the General Assembly. This in itself also provides a visible renewal of our commitment to the United Hations and the objectives that it stands for based on humanity's aspiration for peace in freedom.
The crisis in the Gulf inevitably dominated the attention of all speakers. Two common themes flowed from the unanimous conviction that the invasion and annexation off Kuwait constitute a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter as well as a most serious threat to international peace and security. On the one hand, a firm demand was voiced by practically every speaker for the restoration of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kuwait in full conformity with the relevant Security Council resolutions. On the other, there was a widely expressed view that efforts for a peaceful outcome to the crisis should continue on a collective basis within the framework provided by the Charter of the United Nations.
In speaking about the situation in the Gulf, participants in the debate also looked at the wider regional framework in which the crisis was unfolding. Here again two common themes emerged. On th. one hand, there was an absolute rejection off any direct linkage between the invasion of Kuwait and other outstanding issues in the Middle East. On the other, it was clearly acknowledged that the firm international reaction to the invasion of Kuwait was setting a new high moral standard of action. Thera was recognition that henceforth this new standard of
(IhLlMaidfint) action must ba scan to be applicable also to efforts towards the solution of the other problems of the region, especially to bring about a just and permanent solution to the question of Palestine through the early convening of the long-awaited peace conference.
The sober, calm and balanced manner in which our debate on this highly delicate and complex subject was conducted brings sharply into focus the unique role off the General Assembly. Indeed, through our Assembly the voice off humanity has been heard loudly and clearly, and the message is one of sanity, of justice, of fairness and of peace.
It has been said that every nation has its pride, and this is perfectly true. It is equally important for us all to understand that there is no loss of face for any State to abide by the Charter. There is no loss of face in devising the means and the structure within which the return of the State of Kuwait to its sovereignty and territorial integrity ,ay be peacefully settled.
The crisis in the Gulf somewhat blunted the Assembly's attention to other issues of major concern. In his rsflections at ths conclusion of last year's general debate, my predecessor, Ambassador Garba, spoke of the hopeful relaxation of tensions and manifestations of mutual respect that had been welcomed and acknowledged by all speakers.
If it had not boon for the invasion of Kuwait the international community would, indeed, this year have had even more cause than last year to express satisfaction and optimism. Even so, most speakers found time to look back upon the momentous events off the last 12 months: the dramatic thrust of Eastern Europe towards liberty and democracy culminating in the unification of Germany as a cogent symbol off a unified Europe; southern Africa's continuing march towards justice ,nd freedom, reflected especially in the achievement of Namibian statehood and the
(21ft_£lMidfiat) of k.i... Mraci., th. „.„„y progr.„ tota, . jMt „„ 1Mtiiig nttlowtt 1, Cratedto, tte c..ti..tog «Mocr.ti.oUoh proc... 1. *,t of Control oca loti, krarto., th. doftoitiv. terad.ra.ct Of oopor-towr oo.fr.ot.ttoo to th. •toroy wot.ro of Molto. rad th. .rargrac. of rapar-Pow.. portwrihlp.
Sprak.ro Kara «IcoMd th, rararaohip of ltocht.rat.to to rar Orgralwtto, rad looted forward to th. day. .tea 09r.ra.0t will te rractea for th. po.pi. .£ KOr„ •130 to toko up their rightful representation among us.
Mray how. r.fl.ct«d opt. th. pr.op.ct. which th... p..£tlra dw.lopo.ot. op., op for ,,rad effort, toward, rwolutto. of then drap.. rad rar. tu.aara.tal prohlra. which .till coafroot th. toterrattoral co-raity, th. powrty cartel., wh.ro diraora rad -teary .till hold, way war a algUflcrat proportion of «rated and throat... to parpatrate 0. aterldgatel. pap tetra., th. tew., and tara-rat. .f thi. world, th. .rar tacrauicg hard., of d.bt. .apralally araag th. tout dwalopad couatrlaa, th. acourga of drag trafficktog, tte daagora of a dat.rtor.ttog phyalcl .wlrooraat, tte plagu. of terroriru, tte ettorad floatiag of human rights; the plight of millions of refugees.
The impressive celebration in our midst of the World Summit for Children brought home to us, in perhaps the most immediate way possible, our grave responsibility to strive relentlessly to tackle and solve these problems, it 18 our duty to work to guarantee for our children and grandchildren that common heritage of dignity, peace and prosperity to which they are entitled. Many ■poster, have stressed that one important step in this direction should be taken in the course of this session of the General Assembly through the adoption of the new international development strategy for the Development Decade that will span the last 10 years of the twentieth century.
A/45/PV.29
13-20
(Hu-£KAildtnt)
I wish to take this opportunity to thank delegations for the co-operation that they have shown again this year in ensuring th. successful conduct of th. general debat.. Mot only in questions of subatanc. but also in natters of procedure, th. general debate provides a window for the world to view the working and effectiveness of our Organisation.
W/7	A/45/FV.29
21-25
(HUR-E£llidftnt)
This year, much ,ore than in previous years, the eyes off the world have been looking through this window with effective interest and attention. I believe that I an right in observing that both what wo have said and the manner in which we have said it have contributed to the future enhancement of the standing of our Organisation. This should bo a cause for satisfaction for all, because in enhancing the standing of the United Nations, we enhance the best means that we have of guaranteeing a future off peace, friendship and co-operation among nations.
In conclusion I wish to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to those speakers who are so warm and generous in their remarks about mo and about my country, Malta. I pledge my full commitment to ensure the success of the continuing work of the Assembly in the coming weeks. This session off the General Assembly has been described as one off historic importance, and I believe that it is so, but it is egually true that the historic circumstances in which wo are meeting roguiro prudence in our actions and courage in our decisions.
Our Organisation is experiencing a credibility tost. Millions around the world are putting their trust in the United Nations. Many are investing high expectations in our leadership. It is our responsibility, and in particular that off tho General Assembly, the most representative body off our Organisation, to find remedies, to formulate solutions, to Instil into the observance off the Charter those guarantees which nations large and small are striving for so that peace and freedom prevail.
We have now concluded agenda item 9.
AGENDA ITEM 18
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COUNTRIES AND PEOPLES;
DK«iTI0S 08 ™ GRANTING OF INDEPENDENCE TO COLONIAL OBSERVANCE OF THE THIRTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE DECLARATION
StMLEttSIDBHIi Thirty years ago the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. As ™ celebrate this anniversary, it is imperative that we remind ourselves of those
,any countries which have attained independence since then. It is equally relevant, however, for us to reflect on the importance that the Declaration attaches to the right of the people to enjoy sovereignty in accordance with "their freely expressed will and desire".
The 1960 Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) is in itself a landmark, for it has, throughout these years, contributed in no small manner to fulfilling the peoples* aspirations to the full enjoyment of freedom and the independence of their homelands. In many instances the path towards independence ha. been difficult. Yet th. thirst for freedom has enabled millions to surmount all obstacles, thus enabling them to reap the benefits of self-determination.
In 1945 the founding fathers of our Organisation had already established principles under Chapter XI of th. Charter of th. Unit.d Nations relative to th. administration of Non-S.lf-Governing Territories. Today, with only 18 Non-S.lf-Gov.rnlng Territories, we may be tempted to say that th. principles embodied in the Charter and later enhanced by the 1960 Declaration arc to a largo extent respected.
Th. process of decolonisation has seen the emergence of 80 new States. Vest territories have attained independence, thus joining the comnunity of nations. Many of us here have lived through and contributed towards this process and hence cherish the memory of the day when our countries became sovereign States.
(The presidani-)
Sow,, hundred .nd fifty .Mu«, p..pl. „„. Uviag „„ colonlal ruU u IMS - population. who,, number. hava grow .lace then. In 1990 only .bout 1 million llv. in ,on-S.lf-Gov.mlng T.rritori.. - . «ignificent .nd rem.rk.ble fe.tur. of th. lnt.m.tlonal community', oow.itm.nt to th. Chart., of th. Unit«! Nations.
Thi. y... ,. h.v. .ltn«...d . hl.to.ie .vent in th. d.colonl..tlon proc... -th. woeful tradition th.t l.d to th. ind.ped.no. of deibi.. Th. .ol. pl.yed by our Organi.atlon in aul.ting the poopl. of Hamlbia to achieve the tight to govern themMlvoa has otr.ngth.md the determination and the commitment of the United Ration, to uphold the ptinciple. of the Chart, and to proclaim the right of all people, to .elf-determination a. embodied in the 19S0 Declaration. They are principle, etch .re worth recalling, for their main throat ... the right of th. paopl. freely to „pr... their .ill and deaire. They ar. principle, .hich er. th..rt.d e.ch «rd every time th. people .re denied th. democratic right to elect a government «rich reflect, th. .ill of th. .majority .nd enaure. th. right, of th. minority.
ho important role in th. decolonization proc... 1. that pl.yed by th. Sp.cl.1 Committee. Batabll.b.d in 1961 to monitor the implementation of the 1960 Declaration on decolonlaatlon, the Special Committee over the year. ha. aa.lduou.ly pur.u.d it. ...lgn.d tank and co,.ld.r.d th. .Ituatlon in no 1... than «6 Hon-S.lf-Cov.ming Terrltorle.. mile th. work of th. Sp.cl.1 Committ.. continu.., muy ,gr.. that, .van though certain bMlc problem, remain to be .olved, Uma ha. proved that, .ith political .ill and nutu.1 co-operation on th. part of all concrned, cation. concerning ,On-Self-Governing Territories can be aettled peacefully.
(Xhfi_££fifildfifiR)
Two years ago the General Assembly declared the 1990s the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. It is important for the international community to give special attention to the fate of peoples living in th® remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories that seek enjoyment of the rights inherent in the principles of equal rights and self-determination.
However, as we look back with deserved pride at the achievements during the past three decades it is imperative that we remind ourselves that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was not drafted and voted for in a vacuum. That Declaration was drafted and approved by an international community which was becoming more and more aware of the importance of ensuring individual human rights and dignity.
In 1948 the same General Assembly over which I now have the honour to preside spelled out a warning:
"disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind", (resolution 217 (III), A, second BxsaiobulMLjMUja
Thus, in acknowledging the great strides achieved by the United Nations in the decolonisation process, let us today, on this the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, renew our efforts and commitments in resolving in harmony and co-operation the colonial vestiges of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories - not disregarding our responsibility, however, towards those people who rightfully feel cheated when the full sovereignty of the State is not matched by full respect for the obligations imposed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations 23 years ago.
(SuLiiMläaat)
Ou «bi. .ole oocMioa I ahoald lib, to eauor. th.« no...g.. he b..a r.c.lvd from th. following Me.« S«.U., Afghaai.taa, Chil., Colombia. Moagolia. Mg.ria, Pe. eh. Philippi..., Sod,, vaauatu «ad Veeia. m. „..ago. win b. circulated aa a document of the General Assembly.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations.


The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from French): I welcome the opportunity to address the General Assembly on this special occasion commemorating the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
When this Declaration was adopted on 14 December 1960, it constituted a landmark in the application of one of the basic principles of our Organisation -that of equal rights and self-determination of peoples. It proclaimed the necessity of bringing a speedy end to colonialism and declared that the subjection of peoples to alien rule was contrary to the principles of the Charter and an impediment to the promotion of world peace and security. Equally important, by identifying colonialism as a major obstacle to international peace and security, 11 committed the Organisation to play a central and active role in the process of decolonisation.
Thus, to colonial peoples everywhere, the adoption of the Declaration by this Assembly convoyed the promise of a now world order based on justice and equal rights for all peoples.
In the years that have elapsed since the Declaration was adopted, the world has witnessed one of the most remarkable developments of our timet 59 Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories, embracing a total population of 140 million people in all regions of the world, have been enabled to exercise their right to self-determination.
The overwhelming majority of the Territories are now playing their part as independent sovereign States in the affairs of our world Organisation. The admission of the now State of Namibia, after so many years of bloodshed and suffering, represents a fitting climax to a year which marks the thirtieth anniversary of the 
Declaration.



The international community has every reason to be proud of the important role that it has played in helping the peoples of former colonial Territories to via their freedom. In this context, we must express our deep appreciation to the Special Committee of 24, which has discharged with great credit its special responsibilities for monitoring the implementation of the Declaration. It has succeeded in mobilising international support for the legitimate aspirations of the colonial peoples. 
As a result of the process of decolonisation. today the United Nations is a far more representative. and stronger body than it was three decades ago. As such, it is better equipped to provide a collective approach to the urgent tasks which still confront the international community.
While we take pride in past achievements. the United Nations continues to uphold its commitment to the political, economic and social advancement of the remaining 18 Non-Self-Governing Territories. Most of them are in the Pacific and Caribbean regions and have unique problem on account of their small size and population, geographical remoteness. isolation and United natural resources. The objectives set forth in the Declaration continue to be as applicable to then today as they were when that historic document was adopted. Their special circumstance will require the continued co-operation and assistance of the United Nations in helping then to overcome the challenges that face then and in charting a future that will meet the wishes and aspirations of their peoples.
The abiding concern that the United Mations has invested in colonial territories is reflected also in the series of specific programmes and measures it has adopted for the welfare and social advancement of their peoples. Since 1954. the General Assembly has each year invited Member States to offer Eon-Self-Governing Territories training in technical and vocational fields and also to enable them to avail themselves of post-primary and university education. The



Organisations of the United Nations system have provided (assistance to dependent Territories in conformity with resolutions of this Assembly. Indeed, their association with these Territories during the decolonisation process has been of inestimable value.
This is an anniversary on which we should take stock of our achievements and the challenges that remain in this important field of human endeavour. In drawing international attention to this anniversary, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has stressed its importance as a moment not only to look back,but to look forward. In our approach to resolving the remaining colonial problems,we must act with dispassionate objectivity, guided solely by the wishes and the well-being of the people directly concerned. It is in this spirit that we must renew and reaffirm our commitment to the principle of self-determination.
The PRESIDENT:  I call on the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Mr, TADESSI (Sthiopia) (Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Special Committee of 24)i It is indeed a groat honour and privilege for me to participate in this special meeting commemorating the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
This day symbolises the solidarity of the States Members of this Organisation in their determination to hasten the unconditional attainment of freedom and independence by all Territories under colonial rule. It is a day for Member States to redadicate themselves to the principles embodied Is the Declarations principles which demand the liberation of colonial Territories from foralan Aaninatlasi
hiHiti7aH Don Mammarckinld lihrai
(MLJMaafijhajjfl fiaml!£fift_flf.„24)
principle, which derive Jr«, th. pepo.., and feet, enahrined 1. th. Charter of th. united Nation,. it i. a day tor leohlag hath at peat achl.vte.at., not in a e.lf-congr.tul.tory tenter hat in enter to lap timer grOuud yor futuI, „ respect to the remaining vestiges of colonialism.
it i. ..lf-.vid.nt that th. naclaratite ha, had a ,«.-ranging .„act on many ..Peeta of international lit. ted. particularly, on th. .volution of thin Orgteiaatiou lta.lt. th. importance of the United Ration, u the ataudard-bearer in this real, of endeavour «a atrengthened by th. .„igntent to it of a central rol. in th. achi.vte.nt of on. oj th. tend«««.! purpotea enunciated in th. Charter. tetely. to uphold th. pri.clpl. of .goal righto ted .elf-dotomin.tion of P«P1.. all ev.r th. vorld. Moreover, th. progrea.lv. lnplm.ataticn of th. Dtelatetlo. tea r..ult.d in th. Matebly. bocomlng a nor. truly tepratetetiv world forte, «opted by th. overwhelming tejority of Member state., the «.deration <te both an «prte.ion of th. determination of th. coteudty of nationo to epev up th. proc... of liberation of colonial people. Md a aignal of a «, hop. tor Jr.««, ted independence to th. million. ,ho were .till living under the colonial yoke.
(Mr._Tadesae. Chairman, Special ficimittee of 24)
During the 30 years that have elapsed since resolution 1514 (XV) came into effect there have been remarkable developments in the struggle of the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination and independence. In these three decades the Declaration has provided the basis for and served as a catalyst in the liberation of more than 50 dependent Territories. The composition of the membership of the United Nations today is eloquent testimony to this outstanding achievement: over on,third of the 159 Members are former colonial Territories which have joined the community of nations as sovereign States since 1960.
In many instances the liberation movements had to pay the ultimate price to break the chains of subjugation and domination. Many of those freedom fighters did not live to see the triumph of the .cause for which they fought. On this solemn occasion I wish, on behalf of the Committee, to pay a special tribute to them, all of them, to the thousands of known and unknown heroes who have sacrificed their lives in the cause of freedom, justice and independence. The valiant deeds and actions of these heroic men and women will, I am convinced, live on for generations, long after the word "colonialism" has become an anachronism in the annals of international relations.
The liberation of Namibia - the most recent decolonization process, in which the United Nations took the most active part ever because of its unique responsibility for that former Territory - is still vivid in our memory. The presence of the delegation of Namibia among us today as the representative of a sovereign Member State of this Organization is a symbol as well as a source of encouragement for us to pursue our determined action until the last remnants of colonialism have been eliminated' from the face off the Earth.
Therefore, while the United Nations takes pride, and rightly so, in its contribution to the historic achievement of the Namibian people, we believe that
(Mr._ Tadgsge, Chairman, Specie) Committee of 24)
this commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration should be an opportunity to renew our commitment to the cause of the 18 remaining Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories.
As members of this Assembly are aware, the large majority of these colonial Territories are small islands scattered in the Caribbean and Pacific regions with relatively small populations and limited resources. Yet the basic provisions of the Declaration remain equally applicable to them all. On behalf of the Special Committee, I wish to reiterate the Committee’s steadfast commitment and determination to continue its search for the most effective ways and means to implement the provisions of the Declaration in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
In this respect, while our actions continue to be guided by a full commitment to the principles contained in resolution 1514 (XV), we have not lost sight of the fact that realism in approach is necessary to chart an effective course of action that will enhance the objectives of decolonisation in the case of these remaining Territories. Thus we maintain that the approach we adopt regarding those Territories should take due account of the specific needs and particular conditions of the Territories concerned. In its annual review of the situation obtaining in the Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories, the Committee has endeavoured to assess the full extent of such peculiarities in an attempt to determine the stage reached by the Territories, in particular in the conduct of their respective affairs and in the broader area of self-government. Hence it is our conviction that any approach to be taken in regard to any Territory must be based on an in-depth appreciation of the realities obtaining in that Territory, in this regard, the obligation of the administering Powers to provide relevant information
(Mr. Tadesse, Chairman. Special Committee of 24)
through regular reports and to facilitate visiting missions cannot be overemphasised.
This solemn meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration is in fact the final act of a series of activities which, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 44/100, were carried out earlier this year. Among these activities ware the two regional seminars which the Committee held at Port Vila, Vanuatu, and at Bridgetown, Barbados, respectively. The reports of these seminars will be before the Assembly when it considers agenda item 18.
One of the main purposes of these seminars was to ascertain at firsthand the wishes of the representatives off the remaining Territories in respect off the future status of their respective countries. The Committee has carefully considered the outcome of the seminars, in particular the views expressed on those occasions by the representatives of the populations concerned. Needless to say, those views, together with the objectives set out in the Declaration, will guide the Committee in the pursuit of its mandate.
Yet, however constructive and appropriate the results of these seminars may be, their implementation would require the full co-operation of th© administering Powers concerned. I wish to take this opportunity to express the appreciation of the Special Committee to the administering Powers, in particular those that actively facilitated the carrying out of the seminars, and appeal to them all for a renewed spirit of co-operation as we move closer to the ultimate goal set by the General Assembly in its resolution 43/47: complete decolonisation by the year 2000.
The success achieved in the field of decolonisation can be attributed mainly to the protracted struggle waged by the inhabitants of the colonial Territories, as well as to the support they have enjoyed from the international connunity, more
particularly th. United nations,  .„ „ .«gione! .„. rtd nongovernmental organisation. throughout th. world. Th. rol. played hy auecaaiv, Secretaries-General of th. United H.tioM in enhancing th. proc... ha. baou monurtutal. Ou this aoi.au occasion we should lit. to pay a particular tribut. to th. current Secretary-General. Mr. Javier P.r.a de Collar, for hi. .u.taiu.d commitment to th. cause of decolouration and .specially for th. Herculean tart h. .«ccafully accomplished in th. proc... that lad to th. independence of Namibia.
It i. ay .ern..t hop. that a. th. Assembly m.et. during th. court, of this final decade of th. twentieth century th. Committee of 1,win o. „g. t0 r.port that no ,or. «on-Sell-Governing Territories remain on it. Hat and that all .«ch Territorla. have „.rolaed their right to self-determination. it i. ala. „y ardent hop. that th. global partn.r.hlp which ha. brought u, thl. far on th. road to frrtdo. and lnd.pend.nc. for all colonised people. ,lu ultimately .„bl. „. to attain our lofty goal.
lta-E«SIBBBI. I now call on Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Chairman of th. Special Committee against Apartheid-
KCSJUBhSI (Big.ria), Chairman of th. Special Committee again.t *““““' On behalf of th. Special Committee against fes. y ,houla „„, to rtart th. Special Ctsnitte. on th. situation with regard to th. Impl.smnt.tio. of th. Declaration on th. Granting of ihdop.ud.no. to Colonial Countries and P.opl.e for ..tending tbi. invitation to me and to th. Special Committee against hpa to participate 1. th. celebration of th. thirti.th enniv.ra.ry of th. adoption, on 14 December 1960, of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
(Mr. Gambarj. Chairman, Special Committee against Apartheid)
this anniversary is an important one. The year 1960 marked a watershed in the liberation struggle which gathered momentum through the concerted efforts made by a vast number of African colonies to secure their freedom and independence. The adoption off resolution 1514 (XV) set the framework and direction for the political, economic and social developments that dominated the agenda off international, and even national, politics in the following thirty years.
The efforts of the United Nations in facilitating decolonisation cannot be denied. The world body resolved that colonialism was an infringement of the principle of self-determination, and called for ianediate steps co be taken in all Territories not yet independent to transfer power to the local people, without any conditions or reservations, in accordance with their freely expressed will to be free and independent.
It was not by accident that only a few years later, the General Assembly went a step further, taking into account the deteriorating situation in southern Africa, marked by South Africa's persistent illegal occupation of Namibia, its defiance of United Nations resolutions, its brutal repression off the South Affrican and Namibian people, and its acts of aggression and destabilisation against neighbouring independent African States. The General Assembly declared that racism and Apartheid were incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations and indeed were a crime against humanity.
Since then, the Committee of 24 and the Special Committee against Apart-held have developed a co-operative relationship aimed at the elimination of the last vestiges of colonialism, apartheid and racism. While, over the years, the Committee on Decolonisation has been extremely successful in accomplishing its important task, tha Special Committee against Apartheid now stands at the beginning of a process that will ultimately end with the complete eradication off apartheid
RC/11
V45/W.28
42
“■IttM-ssaliutfLBa
*• poltiv. doalopout. 1, to inoranti.«! ,... crotO , 011Mt. favour.,!. foir roolvOg «iota, «.flint. by pocoful „„., south Mrlca flMUy r.cognl.0 that it „, mu. . „„d p.iitiolly and .oono.lc.lly too co.tly - to contluu. to r..l.t and „pr... t,lutimi, «Mi Ma to jilting ,plri(; * i-opl. .f ,„I,!., Today, Bml,l. i. a young and «,itoa r of th. f„My ot notion. h.r. 1. thl. «orli body. Th. lnd«.nd.nw of H„i,ia i. . flulp t0 •Mort, of th. Cooitto of 2«, th. unit., nation. Council for Bodhi., th. fourth Corniti., and th. internati«.! «,unity .. . «boi., r.pr..„oa in this important Assembly.
Th. th., In inwrotina! relation. 1,. hod and, I OU«., .ill contino, to havo, a poaltiv. Opact on our «ork. Th. Spalai Co—itt«,. in particular, 1. pratlfltó to ... it. .Morte in building «,«.u on South Africa ,lthi th. uult.a nation, croma with th. adoption, lot OcoOr. of th. Ocloation on teasthlU and it. Dotructlv. Conogu.«.. m South.ru Africa. Th. .aoptlon .gain hy «,.,«. only . „nth ago. of a r.aolutlon on th. progr... „a. .o far in South Africa, 1. y.t anotOr .Moton, in th. intonatiool .«,unity, .ffort. to eradicate fiEaiihftid.
Hhll. th. 00.00 oog MOOr Stat.. ... th. root of a «,pio ehang, i. attitua.0 and joMption., nobody co Sony th. rol. of th. concerted pr...ur. brought to tear on to hnottaid règio by th. International coounlty at large. TO poaltiv. .op. oOn ,y Prola.nt O Kl.rk aloe, lot fobrory Ov. o.n olcooa. sornr. toy fall .Ort of to 4ooa. Of to inorotiool «,unity. Ot all political priaoor. ana aotaiuo. hav. Oo r.l.u.a> to state of en.rg.ney ... only partially Ufod Ma  Iatata.l s,earlty     replied. Vlol.no i, .till . ouo for continua fear that to proo.. toard. negotiatioas could be derailed or delayed.
(Mi-.-Gatnbaci, Chairman,Special S,iMitteo against Apartheid)
Against thin background, this meeting provides another occasion for the rndedication off ourselves to the principles and objectives of rution 1514 (XV), as well as of the Declaration on Apartheid. The international community should continue to bring pressure to bear on apartheid South Africa until it fully complies with our well-known demands and pre-conditions. The Spacial Committee has, on various occasions, expressed strong concern about the efforts being made to relax existing sanctions and restrictive measures, and considers these to be entirely premature. According to the Declaration on Apatíhald, there has to be clear evidence of profound and irreversible change in South Africa before the existing sanctions and restrictive measures can be relaxed.
We know that the Special Committee on Decolonisation will stand at our side in our common endeavour to ffurther the cause off the South African people, in particular, as this relates also to their right to self-determination. By virtue off that right, and we hope this will occur in the not too distant future, they will be able to determine their political future freely and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development unimpeded, as called for in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Uatil there is a freo, non-racial and democratic society established in South Africa, the people in that hapless country need our continued solidarity and unswerving support. Let us be unrelenting in sending a strong signal to the people of South Africa, as well as to the people of Africa as a whole, that we will not abandon their just and legitimate struggle. With courage and optimism, the day will come when we can all celebrate the total eradication of apartheid- I feel sure that this will happen in the not too distant future.
The PRESIDENT: I call on Mr. Tom Obaleh Kargbo of Sierra Leone, who will ■peak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mg* M6W (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, African Group, to express our pleasure at seeing you
incomparable skill and finesse over this forty-fifth
allow me, on behalf of the continue to preside with
session of the General
Assembly. Our appreciation equally goes to your predecessor, Major General Joseph Garba of Nigeria for his deft handling of the forty-fourth session.
Thirty years ago, the Organisation adopted in its resolution 1514 (XV) a body of principles, now unquestionably recognised as a charter of freedom for the inhabitants of the Trust and Non-Selff-Governing Territories. The effect of that Declaration continues to echo down the year, as its assertion by subject people, assume, an urgency of application which is undeniable.
Hh.th.r the.ucc.ful «urola. of th... right, ha, bun paac.ful or bloody. It cannot U al.p«ua that th. Doclaratloa changed for ,v.r th. r.l.tlouhlp .1 d.p.na.ae. and ,nb.,rvl.ac. Utmn countrloa «bleb ao.la.ua lat.ra.tloa.1 lauroonr.. util th. flut b.lt of tfal. uatnry. Th. Mj.t part of UI, ,..Ubly of nation, prent l,r. today 1, Uottaony to th, .adoring validity of this thirtyyear-old prescription.
(Mr.i.Karqbo, Sierra Eeona)
What has transpired over the years since the adoption of the Declaration is an affirmation of the irreversibility of the liberation process. We have come to witness, through the emergence of new States, the progressive attainment of the primary objective of the Organization, and that is its universality. The experience has been a unique one - rich with the variety of cultures and systems that only a world organization can lay claim to.
Unfortunately, the road has not been an easy one: it is strewn with the souls of fallen martyrs like Mahatma Gandhi and Amilcar Cabral and others whose resistance to colonial domination continues to spark the aspirations of freedom lovers all over the world. Their contribution to the emancipation of peoples is a living story of dedication to the finest values in man, etched with patience and unequalled courage. Ko greater tribute can be paid to their memory than to commit ourselves to bringing about the full application of the provisions of General Assembly resolution 43/47 of 1988.
Much has happened since 1988, when the Goneral Assembly declared the period from 1990 to the year 2000 as the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. Kot the least of those happenings has been the spirit of accommodation and understanding which has evolved and continues to pervade international relations. It has arisen from the well-spring of human rationality which finally has been emboldened to accept, a priori, the futility of tension and conflict.
As we approach the end of this century, there is an overwhelming sense of purpose and responsibility which we must now display to those who still carry with them the weight of the colonial experience. We must realize once and for all that the world cannot be at peace if we continue to deny others the opportunity to exercise those rights which we ourselves consider inseparable from our heritage. The choice has never been clearer: to ensure that this thirtieth anniversary is
the last that we shall commemorate, so that we shall twenty-first century, not as our predecessors did on
(Mr... Karcbp, Sierra Leone? stand at the dawn of the that December day in 1960 to
proclaim thos. inalie.abl. principi.., hut to ush.r In a world trae from colonialism.
MSSHW. X .w c.11 on Mr. Dia-Allab Ei.Pattai o£ tha SycUn iMb hofohllo, Who will .peek oa b.haif of th. Group „£ A,ian 
tfa-Btr-rATTAt, (Syria, Arab Republic) (intorpretatio. fro. Arabic): X am privilogod to speak as Chai™, of the Asia, Group for this month before this
Assembly
Granting
place at
Assembly
on the thirtieth anniversary of th. signing of the Declaration on th.
of Independence to Colonial Countri.s and Peoples. This anniversary take, th. ,.ginning of a United Katie,. Decade. 1, implemeatatio, of General raaolutio, 43,,dated 33 Kovember 1333, .blob w hope will conclu.iv.ly
and promptly eradicate colonialism.
, would like to ..Ite this International occasion to «presa th. solidarity
and resolve
of th. *.1.0 Gro,, to accelerate th. unconditional att.lnm.ot of
freedom and national independence by all countries, territories and those which are under foreign rule.
all non-self-governing
On the occasion of this
am>iv.r.ary, „ r.lt.ret. oat „.olv. t0   prlMiplM Declaration which cm for th. llberatio, of colonial territories foreign domination.
of this
from the yoke of
* look at th. membership of th. United ««Ion. will confirm clearly that th. struTOl. .palnst colonialism, a. «.bodied In th. Declaration, has had a great effect on th. relations b.tw«n stat., which ar. now ba..d on co-.gu.llty and mutual respect as envisioned by the Charter.
Th. Aslan Group., .her. In this struggl. has been great, Several Asi., countries have been liberated from foreign rule and ar. participating actively In the building of a better world of justice and freedom.
(Mh-Bl-rrttal, Syrian Arab Bsjffiblis)
The world's peoples look up to this international Organisation as the highest forum of international co-operation and their best hope in granting freedom to those peoples that still live under foreign domination. We can measure the level of successful implementation of the Declaration by noting that the Declaration, since 1962, has made it possible for 46 non-self-governing territories to exercise the right of self-determination. There remain only 18 on the list of non-self-governing territories now. The increasing number of Member States of the United Nations is the best evidence that domination, exploitation and oppression cannot halt the inevitable historic tide of liberation struggle, that colonial domination is doomed to failure and that it is impossible to suppress the aspirations of colonial peoples to freedom and independence. The future of any colonial territory cannot be determined without taking into account the genuine wishes of the inhabitants of that territory, which they must freely express. The will Of those valiant peoples and their continued struggle are the factors which will eventually enable them to free themselves from the stubborn shackles of the colonial system. Free Namibia is the best example.'
Despite all the positive developments that we have witnessed on the international scene, it is sad indeed that there are still millions of people in several territories and countries who do not enjoy self-rule and are still subjected to exploitation in their motherlands. More than 6 million Palestinians, in their Asiatic Arab country, are still deprived of self-determination in their own land. More than 28 million Africans in South Africa are still subjected to the most heinous forms of persecution and discrimination in their own land and are deprived of citizenship and are living under apartheid.
We are confident that the Committee will continue to discharge its task until
(Mr.i.El-Frttalr Syrian Arab EfiMlk)
the final disappearance of the last vestiges of colonialism. Towards that end, the international community is required, to implement General Assembly resolution 47/43 dated 22 November 1988 on the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism by adopting specific specific measures to rid the world of every shape and form of colonialism.
anifiSSOTZ: I now call on Mr. Stanislaw Pawlak of Poland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
JSM/cw
V45/W.J9 51
Mt,—EAMIAK (Poland) t I am deeply honoured to have the opportunity? aa current Chairman of the Group of Baatern European Statoa? to addresa the Assembly at this meeting devoted to the observance of the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The Declaration is undoubtedly one of the most fundamental and landmark documenta adopted by the Organisation. It not only testifies to the noble goals that inspire the activities of the United Nations aa a whole? but also indicates the way these goala may be - and should be - achieved through the determined co-operation of the community of nationa.
Needleas to say? the world we live in today is much bettor than at the time the Declaration was adopted. The increasingly rapid pace of change has made the world almost free from colonial domination and subjugation. It was only in March this year that we witnessed in Namibia the victory of its people in the struggle for its right to self-determination and the triumph of the principles off the United Nations Charter over the scourge off colonialism. Today we seo a free and independent Namibia taking its rlghtfful place in the Organisation.
Thore is no doubt that this irreversible process has been ffoatered also by the fundamental changes in Eastern Europe. It has been shaped? moreover? by the end of the cold war? which gave way to constructive East-West dialogue? and to the determined will of the States Members of the United Nations to give our Organisation real meaning.
Wb may say with growing satisfaction today that more and more often the United Nations is taking consolidated? unanimous positions on Issues of principle. An example of this is Sound in the question off apMthaid, which was so closely related? beffore Namibia obtained its Independence? to the problem off decolonisation. The adoption by consensus? almost a year ago? of the historic
(Mr. Pawlak. Poland) Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa gives us hope that apartheid will soon be eradicated from the face of the earth.
Our present-day world is almost free from the yoke of colonialism, but the word "almost" makes a difference. The remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories still require the continuous dedication, commitment and ongoing efforts of th. international community, in particular, the administering Powers should act in the best interests of the people of those Territories, to bring about suitable changes in accordance with the realities and demands of the present-day world, thus enabling them to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination.
Shfi_£BESIEEHI* I now call on the representative of Bolivia, who will speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group.
MEx-MAWAS. MQGEO (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a great honour for me to take part in this commemorative meeting, which is such a significant event, and to speak on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, in political, cultural and geographical terms, our Group itself represents the process of the last 30 years which we are now honouring. From being some 20 States which had already come of age as sovereign States, w. have witnessed the birth and growth at our side of a new generation of free nations which enrich our political region, and justify those who with heroism and devotion to freedom have given us a place of honour in the geopolitical order of the world.
Moreover, the new nations have encouraged us, by uniting for the noble cause of ushering in an era of peace, freedom and prosperity, an era from which racial prejudice and unjust exploitation will have been banished for ever. This has been the ideal for which we have fought and which will continue to be our objective.
Today, the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the G ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, is a day of rejoicing for the
(Mr. Navaias Mcqro, Bolivia) United Nations. This date marks a most remarkable fact. It is the commemoration of a starting-point in time and in history, and the periodic verification of compliance with one of the basic objectives of the United Nations; the universal realisation of the right to freedom of peoples still subjected to colonialism and their inalienable right to a life of dignity, free from fear.
Year after year, Assembly after Assembly, we have ratified and restated our determination to free all the peoples off the world who are still Buffering ffrom dependence and foreign exploitation, with their aberrant consequences of racial discrimination, religious intolerance and limited if any access to education, health and socia- development, which are unacceptable barriers in the age In which we live. We know that all those ills derive from the deliberate continuation of colonial systems of exploitation of peoples through practices which run counter to the right of every human being to live in freedom and in full enjoyment of the wealth which nature has bestowed on the land of his birth, and in enjoyment of his right to work the mineral and other wealth of his territory.
Despite the 30 years which have elapsed and the periods of discouragement and uncertainty which have occasionally impeded our efforts, the work off the United Nations for human dignity and the full enjoyment of basic values has not ceased. We have moved forward with our eye fixed on the broad horison of our task, without “I geographical limits, with a feeling of universal community, and within the reasonable goals and aims that are in conformity with respect for the traditions and lifestyles that constitute the spiritual identity of each people, the very essence of its nationality.
The task of liberation has been carried on by great freedom fighters who, interpreting the desire of the peo*l,3, have succeeded in leading them to victory
(MEJJwaiaiJtaijftU
and have enriched the group of nations that now constitutes the community off nation, represented here, it ha. not alway. been possible to reintegrate dismembered nations in their original form or to restore them within their original cultural boundaries, but the future of those nations will depend on the wisdom and sagacity of their own leaders and on the natural inclination of the people, who will seek logical forms off coexistence based not only on the purposes of development but also on spiritual affinities and cultural identity.
Our job is not over. There are still some occupied territories. There are still aberrant practices, such as apatthaid. There are still nameless nationalities and subjugated peoples. Some are fighting hard for their freedom. Others have already achieved it, among them heroic Namibia, whose flag already flies in space like a tribute to freedom. We share th. joy of this day, which is dedicated to commemorating the historic decision to struggle for the freedom of peoples suffering from economic and cultural dependence. On this solemn day off commemoration we wish to renew our promise to continue to fight every form off colonialism, whether it be that which manifests itself openly, without any attempt at a cover-up, or the kind which is camouflaged in anachronistic paternalism.
She PRESIDENT? I call on Mr. Yves Fortier of Canada, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mf-t_ FORTIER (Canada): It is an honour for me, as Chairman of the Group of Western European and other States for the month of October, to speak at this special meeting commemorating the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
When the United Nations was founded in 1945, the principles of equal rights . and self-determination of peoples were at the forefront of the minds of its creators. Indeed, these principles are enshrined among the purposes of the United Nations in the very first article of the Charter, while the responsibilities and obligations concerning Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories are detailed in Chapters XI and XII of the Charter.
In the years between 1945 and 1960, when the General Assembly adopted resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV), the membership of the United Nations grew from 51 to 99 Member States. Many of these new Members had obtained their independence from the Administering Power during those 15 intervening years and then sought full membership in the United Nations. But in 1960 there remained many other territories whose peoples had not yet attained a full measure of self-government.
Today, 30 years later, the membership of the United Nations stands at 159, with almost all of these new Members having obtained their independence through the exercise of their right to self-determination. The Group of Western European and other States welcomes the progress that has been achieved in this regard. The Group also notes that in some cases former Non-Self-Governing Territories have chosen other options, including free association with an independent State.
(Mr, Fortier, Canada)
In particular, the Group of Western European and other States notes with great satisfaction the successful conclusion of the transition to independence of Namibia and the essential role played by the United Nations and the Secretary-General. The presence today in this General Assembly of Namibia as a full Member of the United Nations is testimony to the determination of the Members of our Organization to promote the ideals embodied in the Charter and to seek the implementation of the principles of equal rights and self-determination among all peoples.
Iha PPESIGEIjli I declare this special commemoration in observance of the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples concluded.
AGENDA ITEM 154 (continued)
ELECTORAL ASSISTANCE TO HAITI (A/45/L.2)
33)®—EBESIPEHZ* A draft resolution has been issued as document A/45/L.2. I should like to remind representatives that it was introduced at the 26th plenary meeting. The following States have become sponsors of draft resolution A/45/L.2: Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and Suriname.
MX. AEARCpN PE QUESADA. (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): Haiti is a close neighbour of my country. In fact it is, strictly speaking, our closest neighbour. From our eastern shore it is quite easy to discern Haitian territory. Hundreds of thousands of Haitians live in my country, and they have the same rights as the rest of the Cuban population. They came to Cuba from our neighbouring country.
Throughout history our brother country has had to contend with factors alluded to in the Secretary-General's report: some of its people have been forced by economic and social considerations to emigrate to other countries.
(ME.. Alarcon de Quesada. Cuba)
It is not just geographical proximity that unites us with the Haitian people. We are united by bonds that have existed throughout our history. As a result, our peoples' cultures and traditions have much in common.
Therefore from the very outset my delegation worked actively with the other members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States as they were engaged in a joint effort adequately to meet the request off the Government of Haiti and Haitian institutions, including political parties, for the material, technical, economic and financial help Haiti needs for the electoral process it has decided on, and also to tackle many problems related to its economic and social development.
In that context we join the other countries of our region in supporting the request that the international community provide economic, financial and technical assistance to meet Haiti's needs.
At the same time, together with our colleagues in the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, we have taken the very firm position that we cannot accept any attempt to interpret or manipulate, in any way that could affect international peace and security, the Haitian electoral process for which the Government of Haiti has requested United Nations assistance.
In this regard I believe it is appropriate to refer to Article 2 (7) of the Charter, which retains its full force and, as we all know, clearly states that "Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorise the United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State."
My delegation, like the other fraternal delegations off the region, therefore opposes any intention to use or seek to use this question of assistance to Haiti in any way that would imply, on the one hand, a clear breach of the Charter - since
(Mg,«. Alarcon de Quesada, Cuba)
1	.0 ooootry „„ MTOr M roca.. „ Off.otlog lttetMtlonB1 .Murny - or, on th. oth.r, o,=.uraSM,Bt of lot.rf.rooc. Io th. dcotlc offolr. of the State of Haiti.
(Mti-Marcon de Quesada, Cuba) In this connsetion, we must say that it has been necessary to foil several manoeuvres over the past few months, and that, among other things, is the reason why the General Assembly has been unable so far to approve the request made by that Member State. Even today, when we have mat to adopt draft resolution A/45/L.2, the Assembly does not have an operational plan which would explain to us exactly the nature, content and scope of the mission to be carried out there by the United Nations.
In this context, it is worth recalling some remarks made by the Secretary-General in his report on the work of the Organisation, which he recently submitted to us. Speaking of situations in which the Organisation might possibly involve itself, he said:
"... should they involve the monitoring of an election or referendum, they should cover the entire electoral process in order to secure conditions of fairness and impartiality. Where the introduction of a United Nations presence in the electoral process of a State at a critical point in its political life is sought by the Government concerned and approved by the competent organ of the United Nations, it is necessary that there be broad public support in the State for the United Nations assuming such a role." (1Z45/L p.12)
We understand this to mean that in the case in point this criterion should be reflected in the acceptance by all the relevant institutions in Haiti, including its political parties, off the mission our Organisation is to carry out there.
The Assembly is considering this subject just a few minutes after commemorating the thirtieth anniversary off the adoption off the Declaration in resolution 1514 (XV). This is an occasion on which we recall the moment when the Organisation proclaimed the right off all peoples to selff-determinatlon and
(Mr-Alarcon da Quesada,Cuba) b-™,. .„a ,h„ th. nnit,a KatloM 0MDittaa UMlf w   process of decolonisation world-wide.
w. ar. ,1.0 Ma.ld.riag «hl. 1««, alaoat ,th. .,of th. two hu.ar.ath aaalvoraary of th. a,.,«1,. th. Haitian .lav.. ,Bol.-C.Sa,war. th. flr.t to can for ia««.ad.ac. i. «tia *,.1,„a  c,„lbaail.   „ .«Mi«, th... .lav.., „ho haa b.„ a.«,,fro. Africa to th. Crrlb.«, hot only hr«, tb.tr chain, hut ala. .tart.a .at on th. road t. lad.pMd.aw „a liharatl« for the whole Latin American continent and the Carribean.
Hou, «ben the Aaawbly lo p„.lbly «het to adOpt a daclaloa about .l.Moral MalaMac. to Haiti, .y Govorawnt «iahaa to give it. aupport for .ultabl. lat.ra.tloa.1 action to b.lp Haiti cop. ,1th it. problw. «a aaai.t it in it. .Horta at .colonic r.con.truction ana «1th ,hat.ver t.chnical «pact. Haiti a.«« «..ful in th. prop.. .rganlMtion of it. electoral proc..., Ho«.var, at th. .an. tine, w. want to nah. 1,gult. clear that w. oatlwly r.J.ct any attempt to ua. this united Hation, r..ol«tion sr activity aa a pretant for interfering in the internal affairs of Haiti, a fraternal country.
The people which 200 years ago was the first to rise up against colonial oppression and racism and for independence in America will surely be capable of repelling any attempt whatsoever by anyone who might seek at this stage to violate the sacred principle of non-interference and the sovereignty and independence of countries.
Zbft_£RE£XBEHZ: We have heard the last speaker on this item.
I ,hall aw «11 ,th«. r«pr..aatatlv«. who wish to saplala th.lr vote, bofor. th. voting. May i „,lad delation, that, la accord«,with o.a.r.1 M.«bly d«l.l.a M/401, .ooh wplaaatiM. ar. Halted to 10. .lout., art .hould b. made by delegations from their seats.
MES. PB&MCBR (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Mexico will vote in favour of the draft resolution now before us, convinced as we are that efforts must be made to establish better conditions for the economic and social development of Haiti. We have a large debt of international solidarity with Haiti. Little has been done by the international community to help Haiti overcome the difficult problems of extreme poverty and instability which have weighed it down in recent decades.
The United Nations involvement in Haiti is indicative of the greater attention the Organisation is paying to the least developed countries. The improvement of living conditions in those countries should have pride of place in the United Nations programme for the 1990s.
We hope that solidarity with Haiti will go beyond the electoral process and will be reflected in a clear commitment on overcoming its economic difficulties.
However, we wish to set forth our views on how this draft resolution came to be submitted and on its implications for future United Nations activities.
My delegation finds that unlike other cases, in which the sending of a United Nations observer mission was preceded by an extensive process of consultations with all parties concerned and an account was given of this in good time to Member States, on this occasion there was limited consultation. We have not received a report from the Secretary-General to give us any idea of the conditions in which the mission would be working. Also, the draft resolution envisages sending two types of observer. In one case, there is no doubt about what kind of work is going to be done, but in the case of the observers with solid experience in the public order field, there is some uncertainty about what functions would be assigned to them and how far these functions would be distinct from those of the peace-keeping forces.
A/45/PV.29 64-65
(MttiJillifilUJUlfifl)
K. mit furti,, lafomtloa fro. th. Secretary-General on thl. .attor. Th. M,lcm. telanti., uaderetead, that .min, thl. rt..ion .111 Mt ..t a precedent 1. ...mt of th. omul. JurLdlctlo. of stat... kt a.l.g.tlon wlm. to reatat. it. un.hnh.ui. conviction that electoral protesa.. 11. within th. main 1. ,Meh domtic Relation la each stat. 1. .overolga. Th. Salm nation. alulon u halts ,nt la thl. caie only because It was restarted by the Smrmae of Salti.
we are also concerned that la doeuwat AZ45Z13, outwitted to the Fifth Coaalttoe. the electoral proem la Salti la tabued with aa lateraatloaal dlmeloa, and It 1. stated that the holding of election, with an International prmneo could be teipful la roatralalas the amlvo enlsratloa of Haitian nationalso
K1/«M
(MugtlllcaxL<_J<9xi£a)
Me believe that the cause of the massive outflow of migrants should be sought in the state of extreme poverty afflicting the Haitian people and the solution of the problem of that migration should consist of resolute efforts for international economic co-operation which will help revitalise development in Haiti. To avoid confronting its severe economic plight and to relegate the problem to electoral matters would* it seems to us* be rather inappropriate and politically unwise.
Finally* we wish to reiterate that* as has been repeatedly emphasised in the informal consultations leading to the presentation of this draft resolution and its actual submission* the electoral process in Haiti is not a situation which poses a threat to international peace and security Consequently* the resolution does not presuppose any Security Council involvement in the matter. The report by the Secretary-General referred to in operative paragraph 3 applies to the General Assembly* and there is no reason why it should be brought before the Security Council.
The PBBSIPEHTt We have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A/45/L.2. The report of the Fifth Committee on the progresase budget implications of the draft resolution is contained in document A/45/606* which was circulated in the Assembly Hall. May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/45/L.2?
Draft resolution A/45/&.2 was adopted (resolution 45/2).
£hfi_EBKSU2raZ> Before calling on the first speaker in explanation of vote* X would remind delegations that* in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401* explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
X shall now call on those representatives «dio wish to explain their positions on the resolution just adopted.
Mf,WATSOW (United States of America); The Government of Hefti has appealed to the United Nations for assistance to help it conduct free and fair elections. This appeal clearly merits a positive and rapid response from our Organisation, in addition to others, including the Organisation off American States, which have already so responded.
The situation in Haiti commands our attention ffor a number of reasons. The Government of Haiti has requested assistance, including security personnel, for its laudable effort to conduct elections. The prolonged period of instability in Haiti has swamped neighbouring countries with Haitian refugees. More than 1 million Haitians reportedly are currently in the Dominican Republic, and as many as one third off the population of the Bahamas may be Haitian refugees. Many countries in the region have characterised the situation in Haiti as a threat to regional peace and stability.
Therefore the United States strongly supports a prompt and affirmative response by this Organisation to the request made by the Government of Haiti for electoral assistance. We believe that such aid should include technical and security assistance, as well as international observers, and should be co-ordinated with the assistance programmes of regional organisations. We agree with the Secretary-General’s view, as indicated in the statement of programs budget implications, that the cost of such an assistance programme constitutes an extraordinary expense.
The United States notes that this matter has been considered by the members of the Security Council in response to letters from the Secretary-General and is the subject off a written reply ffrom the President off the Security Council to the Secretary-General. Indeed it was this development which facilitated the consideration of this matter by the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
(Me*-Watson«- United States)
In these circumstances the United States was in a position to support the draft resolution introduced by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of many members of the Latin American and Caribbean Group. We do not believe that General Assembly authorisation alone is sufficient for dispatch of the security component, which falls within the purview of the Security Council.
My delegation urges the Secretary-General to implement this resolution as quickly as possible in order to facilitate free and fair elections in Haiti only a few weeks from now.
Ml., ROCHEREAff PE M S&BItlERE (France) (interpretation from French): The French delegation welcomes the affirmative reply given by the United Nations to the request for assistance made to it by the Haitian authorities. The process that has been initiated by the Government of Haiti for holding in the near future free and democratic e. actions in that country provides the Haitian people with an opportunity to recover institutional stability and also a climate of civil peace and freedom, which are necessary prerequisites for economic and social develop:, in their country.
The support the international community has offered through the United Nations now makes it possible for us to hope that this process will be successfully conducted in satisfactorily equitable conditions, in accordance with the wishes of the Haitian authorities.
France, which has very close ties of friendship and co-operation with Haiti, has given constant and firm support tv its request to the United Nations and today it is prepared to contribute in the process that has thus been initiated in particular within the framework of the operations to provide assistance we have just approved in principle.
The PRESIDENT: We have heard the last speaker in explanation of position. I now call on the representative of Haiti.
MtUaSBSIE (Haiti) (interpretation from French), The last tiw I spoke I said that I hoped I should not have to speak further unless it be to thank the Assembly. That is precisely the reason why I am here now.
I must pay a very particular tribute to the Ambassador of Cuba, who has a wide knowledge of the history of my country and who has reminded us that there will shortly occur the 200th anniversary of the Bois Caïman revolt, which took place in 1791. His aquaintance with Haitian history prompts me to request from him a further mark of solidarity in the future, as we celebrate in 1991 the 200th anniversary of that Bois Caïman revolt, which was the origin of the black people’s first breakthrough in history.
(Mr, Auguste, Haiti)
The difficult circumstances in which my country is now living have been commented on in various ways by many speakers. There is of course a crisis. That is why, while safeguarding our national sovereignty - as we have done throughout our history - and while making it clear that our actions in no way impinge upon or alter the jurisdiction and sovereignty of the country, the Provisional Government felt that, in these specific circumstances, it was necessary to surround the elections with all possible safeguards.
In full exercise of its sovereignty, the Government could have called upon one of its partners or a particular State. It did not feel it should do so because we have this international organization which is made up of all States and offers the soundest possible guarantee that countries will be protected from all types of intervention. That was the purpose of our request to the United Nations. I do not want to expatiate on the various stages of the process. I have already stated that it dragged out over a long period but this afternoon we finally arrived at what I would call the end of the long, four-month tunnel. Let us hope that, with the assistance of the United Nations, the entire country will at last emerge from this long tunnel - this process of democratic transition which has already lasted more than four and a half years.
I hope that in other circumstances the solidarity we have felt so tangibly here will continue to produce results that will benefit my country and the prestige of the entire international community.
PROGRAMME OF WORK
1189 PEBSIPENTs We have concluded our consideration of agenda item 154.
I should like to inform members that agenda item 32, "The situation in Cambodia", will be considered in plenary meeting on Monday, 15 October, in the morning.
IM meeting.rose at 5,45 P.m.
UNITED NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/45/PV.34
1 November 1990
ENGLISH
Forty-fifth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH MEETING Held at Headquarters/ New York, on Wednesday, 24 October 1990, at 10 a.m.
President?	Mr. de MARCO	(Malta)
later:	Mr. PEERTHUM	(Mauritius)
(Vice-President)
-	Tenth.anniversary of the University for Peace: draft resolution A/45/L.10 [150]
-	Operational activities for development [84]
(a) Operational activities-of the United Nations system: Observance of the fortieth anniversary of multilateral technical co-operation for development within the United Nations system
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official .Be.cordft-AC_the_g.eRer.81.. Assembly,
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-64274/A 2446V (E)
JOigU3ig££isg_wffiL_£allfi£_&a_jar3fi£_£
AGENDA ITEM 150
TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNIVERSITY FOR PEACE: DRAFT RESOLUTION A/45/L.10
The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Costa Rica, who wishes to introduce draft resolution A/45/L.10.
Mr,TATTENEACH (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a special honour for me today, on the happy occasion of United Nations Day, to inaugurate the Assembly's consideration of agenda item 150, "Tenth anniversary of the University for Peace". The University was established under General Assembly resolution 35/55 on 5 December 1980, for the purpose of disseminating knowledge aimed at training for peace.
The University's achievements and record since its establishment confirm the importance of the principle "If you seek peace, prepare for peace". That is the philosophical foundation upon which the University was built.
The continuance of war throughout human history and the constant threats to peace, as is demonstrated by the critical situation in the world today, force us to view peace ao longer as a negative concept or as the conclusion of a conflict but, rather, as a fundamental and continuing obligation of each country and of the United Nations.
Today the international community must meet this challenge: how will it face * the twenty-first century? A decision must be reached on how we are to shape our history in order to promote dynamic efforts towards peace. If education has been the ideal tool for the promotion of science and technology, it should also be the tool for the achievement of peace.
I should like, from the heart of Central America, to present to the Assembly the example of Esquipulas I and II, still relevant at the present time, during the term of office of our President, Rafael Angeo Calderon Fournier. These agreements deal with the pacification of the Central American region and not only reflect .	. Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
BHS/ras
(&XL,_W£ftD th,political elements of the conflicts, but are also the necessary instruments for economic, social, cultural and ecological development. Shat is to say, peace is being sought not only by averting war but also by preparing in a positive manner * for an active peace. The United Nations Programme for the Development of Central America and the United Nations Development Programme have given us valuable aid in this endeavour.
When the General Assembly unanimously agreed to the establishment of the University for Peace, it did Costa Pica the honour of making it the host country. That action was taken as recognition of the role Costa Pica has played for many decades in advancing international co-operation and peace, especially through the United Nations. This was the first international institution established by the United Nations in Latin America.
In conformity with article 17 of its charter, the University has worked for the last 10 years to promote graduate studies and, specifically, it has developed two masters programmes for the benefit of students from five continents. Along these lines, the University has established a masters programme in communications for peace, which is taught at the headquarters in Costa Rica, and a masters programme in development and peace studies, which is taught in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, at the European Centre of the University. There is now an agreement with the Government of Colombia to establish in Bogota the University of Peace international centre for the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
In addition to these programmes, the University has organised conferences, seminars, short courses, and meetings in more than 17 countries emphasising subjects at the core of the University's curriculum, especially in the areas of education for peace, the peaceful resolution of conflicts, negotiation skills, environment studies, human rights and international relations. In this sphere more than 15,000 people have been exposed to the University's messages.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
JSH/jh	A/4S/PV.34
6
(liixJEtttaittafiluJa
The University has promoted research programmes emphasising Central American' issues. It has focused on a deeper understanding of refugee problems; issues relating to alternative communications in the region; the human rights situation and the possible creation of a Central American court of justice. It has also studied the possibility of declaring Central America a sone of peace. In the sphere of education for peace it is promoting new initiatives with the Ministries of Education of Central American countries.
The University for Peace has also co-operated in regional programmes with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Rations Children's Fuad (URICEF) and ths United Rations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UHESCO).
The University now includes a Centro for Information and Documentation for Peace (CEDIPAZ); the Gandhi Centre for Television Production; and the International Radio for Peace, transmitting 16 hours a day shortwave programmes in Spanish. English. French and German. In addition, many of the programmes of the United Rations Radio are also transmitted.
The now Rector of the University. Mr. Jaime Montalvo of Spain, with the support of my Government and the Government of Spain, is beginning a new phase of academic progress. In March of 1991 three master's programmes will be launched at the University, one in the area of international relations, co-operation and peace, another in the area of education for peace, and a third programme in natural resources, quality of life and peace, with students from many parts of the world. In 1992, two other master's programmes will begin, one In human rights and the other in peaceful conflict resolution.
(Mtc.-TaLmhajI
At present* the University is conducting an intensive education program,,in the Central American region and ths Caribbean in the areas of peace* negotiation* communications and natural resources.
On the occasion of its tenth anniversary* it is organising a round of high-level conferences on various topics* such as* for example: new development patterns on the eve of the twenty-first century; the role of Latin American women on the eve of the third milleniua; prospects for a Central American community; and external debt and social debt in Latin America.
In the futuro the University will ba a world publication centre on science* the arts and the practice of peace* and a place of free academic expression for world peace without limitations of any kind. It will also continue its work on the role and the central contribution of the communications media to peace. Finally* it will help UNESCO in its efforts to develop more appropriate comprehensive education for all of mankind.
X wish to express thanks for the co-operation received by the University for Peace from Governments and both governmental and non-governmental organisations* for without their support little could have been achieved. Special mention must be made of the Governments of Spain* Italy* Sweden* Finland* Denmark* Norway* Canada* Yugoslavia and Venezuela* which* together with the Government of Costa Rica, have contributed material resources to promote work of this international institution.
I shall repeat here the recent words of the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica* Mr. Niehaus Quesada* before the Assembly:
"The spirit of conciliation should likewise be the basis for all world efforts in favour of peace. Costa Rica assigns a leading role to peace in the life of everyone. For the Costa Rican people this highest of values is
(MgjJR&feaiftAslb-J solidly founded on the fruitful basis of democracy. It is the focal point of our national life and the basic element in our foreign policy. It was in the belief that education for peace represents one of the principal instruments for guaranteeing the future of our species that we proposed the creation of the University for Peace, based in Costa Rica, which is now celebrating its tenth anniversary and to whose charter, approved by the General Assembly, we urge all Member States to adhere." (A/45/PV.5, p- 83)
We urge all nations to make best use of the University as one of our most valuable instruments, thus responding to the aspirations of young people and enabling them to prepare themselves and participate in this noble cause. We invite all nations to take advantage of the University as one of the most effective means to complement the efforts of every nation to organise education for peace.
To conclude, I shall introduce the draft resolution contained in document A/45/L.10, which my delegation sponsored, together with the delegations of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Belise, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Lichtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Senegal, Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Venezuela and Yugoslavia. We trust that this draft resolution will be favourably received by the General Assembly.
The first and second preambular paragraphs give a chronological account of the creation of the University and the various aspects of its work and activities pursuant to its mandate contained in resolution 3S/5S; this is emphasised in the third preambular paragraph, The last preambular paragraph and operative
JSM/jh
(Mr* Tattgabncb, Costa Bica> paragraph 1 recall the tenth anniversary of the University. The sponsors believe that it is inportant to celebrate this anniversary, which narks a turning-point in the life of the institution. Operative paragraph 2 invites Member States to accede to the International Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace. Operative paragraph 3 appeals to Member States and governmental and non-governmental agencies which provide financial assistance for research to make financial contributions in order further to advance the objectives of the University.
Operative paragraph 4 requests the Secretary-General to establish an agreement on co-operation between the United Nations and the University for Peace in order to make greater use of the facilities and potential that the University can offer to the United Nations and its system, at the same time recognising the University as an institution which is a legitimate part of the United Nations family since it was created by the world Organisation.
Operative paragraph 5 expresses its appreciation to Costa Rica, the host country, for its valuable support and contribution to the operation of the University for Peace.
The last two operative paragraphs request the Secretary-General to transmit the present appeal to all Member States to gain their support and to report to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session.
I therefore reiterate my request to representatives to lend their valuable support to our draft resolution, so that it may be adopted without a vote.
NR/ls	A/45/PV.34	' i
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will new take a decision on draft resolution A/45/L.10. Nay I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
graft regelation A/45/L.10 wag adopted (resolution 45/8).
The PRESIDENT: We have concluded our consideration of agenda item 150.
AGENDA ITEM 84
OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT
(a) OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM: OBSERVANCE OF THE FORTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF MULTILATERAL TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION FOR DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM
The PRESIDENT: The Assembly, in accordance with the decision taken at its 3rd plenary meeting, will now observe the fortieth anniversary of multilateral technical co-operation for development within the United Nations system.
Forty years ago the first United Nations Technical Assistance Conference established the Expanded Programme of Technical Co-operation. This solemn act. signed by 54 States, represented the fit it steps towards an
"international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples"
called for in the Charter. It is fair to say 40 years after that multilateral technical co-operation provided by the United Nations has made a unique contribution and had an impact in developing countries.
The Expanded Programme of Technical Co-operation was created on the basis of a historic resolution of the Economic and Social Council - resolution 222 (IX) -endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 304/IV. This was followed up in 1959 with the creation of the United Nations Special Fund to undertake pre-investment work and feasibility studies. United Nations technical co-operation
NR/ls	W45/W.34
12
(jtaLfEMiflfiat) played an important role in the initial years of the newly independent countries# and the resources grew at a steady pace. By 1965 the United Nations Special Fuad had attracted pledges of $422 million# which# in turn# helped generate over $1 billion in follow-up investment. In 1966 these programmes were merged into the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The United Nations Development Programme and other organs# organisations and bodies of the system engaged in technical co-operation have contributed to the war against poverty and offered developing countries an alternative to bilateral assistance. This alternative# with its special characteristics of universality# political neutrality and commercial disinterestedness# continues after 40 years to make a marked contribution to the development efforts of developing countries# as evidenced by the continuing trust put in it by its principal contributors and beneficiary countries.
On the fortieth anniversary# we acknowledge the dedication of many tens of thousands of men and woman of over 160 nationalities who have carried out concrete and beneficial development programmes and projects in all developing countries of the world. We should also acknowledge the efforts and sacrifices of all the people in the developing world. We owe them an immense debt of gratitude.
Forty years are a relatively short period in the history of mankind; but during this period we have witnessed many momentous changes in the world. The expression "cold war" was still new to us when the 1950 Conference took place. Ahead lay a long period of tension# mutual distrust and the arms race. With the movement from East-West detente to entente# we believe that a new era of mutual understanding and co-oparation is developing. Many think that we are on the way
(MIIMlifiEt) finally to realising the concept set out in Article 26 of the United Rations Charter, namely:
"the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world's human and economic resources". As I pointed out in my opening statement to the General Assembly:
"I see no reason why the unprecedented progress in the political field should not be repeated in the economic and social area. At this forty-fifth session the General Assembly should take the initiative to exploit this unique opportunity. Would this not perhaps be the best and most appropriate way to mark the fortieth anniversary of United Nations technical co-operation?" (AZ4S/EV.1, p, 16)
Compared to initial investments, the returns of the technical co-operation programmes and projects are substantial. Technical co-operation deals with the human dimension, which is at the centre of development. Sustainable development requires increasingly skilled and adaptable human resources capable of meeting the challenges of the 1990s with the tools of the 1990s. Fundamental to development and technical co-operation is the transfer of know-how, skills and technology. This constitutes the basis and central factor in strengthening national capacity.
As we begin the fifth decade of international development co-operation, let us reaffirm the continued validity of the basic characteristics which have guided the United Nations in the field of technical co-operation over 40 years. In responding to the future challenges, the system will undoubtedly be guided by the fundamental notion that lasting development must reflect local realities rather than imported models and solutions.
I should also like to quote from the landmark Economic and Social Council resolution 222 (IX), adopted in August 1949, which became a corner-stone of the
NB/ls	V45/PV.34
14-15
(Tbft Piggidgnt)
technical co-operation activities of the United Nation,. The Economic and Social Council stated its belief:
"that a sound international program«, of this character must combine and make use of the experience of many nations, with different social patterns and cultural traditions and at different stages of development, so as to facilitate progress in the less-advanced countries and to help solve their technical and economic problems." (Economic and Social Council resolution 22L1W)
That comprehensive principle formulated 40 years ago can still guide us today.
We know that development is a long-term process and progress is to be measured aver a number of'■years. It is, therefore, gratifying to note that the decisions taken 40 years ago have been supported by financial co-operation encompassing all ¡ountries on an entirely voluntary basis,

(Xta_2x&släai£)
Technical co-operation activities have com a very long way fron an initial annuel pledge of $20 Million to a current anount of over $1 billion for UNDP alone, Starting with three Field Offices in Colombia, Turkey and Yugoslavia/ the number has grown to 112, with the most recent one being the Namibia Office.
Although the United Nations system of multilateral technical co-operation is in place and functioning well, additional resources are essential if it is to respond störe aggressively and effectively to the needs of the developing countries, particularly the least developed among them. Ne should exploit today's unique international environment to channel increased resources for development.
Ths financial resources and sacrifices that are rightly being committed to re-establish the international order greatly disturbed by the invasion of Kuwait will, it is hoped, in the future be committed to break the poverty curtain that has long descended over a large portion of humanity and is the greatest potential cause of disturbance of international order and peace.
Anniversary celebrations have a way of going stale unless a message is conveyed, a policy is underlined, a dedication to the future is pledged. In the wisdsa of the last many a message is to be found. United Nations technical co-operation is epitomised in the old Chinese proverb that states: "Give a man a fish to oat and you have fed him for a day/ teach him how to fish and you have fed him for a lifetime”.
X feel that freedom for the peoples of the world can be achieved only if such resources are made available as soon as possible.
X believe tkat this fortieth anniversary is the occasion of a renewed commitment to change the life of those suffering from hunger and want and give them the most fundamental of rights: the right to live in dignity, the right to see their children grow in health and the right to sec their land free of disease and famine.

I call on the Secretary-General.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: As we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of multilateral technical co-operation for development, we can be justifiably proud of the achievements throughout the world of the United Nations development system.
The last 40 years have witnessed remarkable progress in many developing countries, particularly in the field of human development. Average life expectancy has increased by 16 years, adult literacy by 40 per cent and per capita nutritional levels by over 20 per cent, while child mortality rates have been halved. Yet, despite this progress, almost one out of every four people in the developing world is still trapped in the vicious cycle of absolute poverty.
One of the major challenges for the United Nations system in the 1990s must be the eradication of poverty and the promotion and consolidation of human development. People must be at the centre of all development efforts; they are both the means and the ends of development. To quote Paul Hoffman, the first Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP):
"It is poverty of opportunity, rather than just poverty itself, which causes so much suffering and discontent. Given better health, bettor education, better training, tens of millions of people now relatively ineffective could contribute greatly to moving their countries from poverty and stagnation to self-propelling economic growth."
I speak today on behalf of the over 220,000 internationally recruited staff and the vastly greater number of locally recruited colleagues who, since 1950, have striven to share their knowledge, skills and experience in support of the development efforts of developing countries. They are at the heart of the development programmes of the United Nations system in all parts of the world. As agents of international co-operation for development, they form the key link in the chain of world-wide international co-operation, involving people and institutions
	
in projects aimed at resolving specific development problems. I wish to pay homage to these "blue helmets" for development, men and woman of 164 nationalities who are dedicated to helping people to help themselves, often in difficult circumstances.
When the system of multilateral technical co-operation was created 40 years ago, few could have foreseen the magnitude of the task ahead or how technical co-operation would evolve. In 1950 fever than 10 implementing agencies of the United Nations system were providing their intellectual and administrative support for multilateral technical co-operation. Currently, the number is over 30. The comparative advantage of the United Nations system is in large measure a result of the work of these organisations, which provide universal access to skills, technology and resources. The neutral nature of the assistance, provided in the form of grants, and its universality continue to be the core of the United Nations development system.
The system has continuously evolved and adjusted to the changing requirements of developing countries. From the creation of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance in 1950, the subsequent establishment of the Special Fund for large-scale pre-investment and institution-building activities, their merger to form the United Nations Development Programme in 1965 and the adoption of the consensus resolution of 1970, the nature and structure of international development co-operation changed significantly.
While, in the early years, technical co-operation often consisted of discrete, individual activities, the consensus of 1970 created the country programme, formulated by Governments based on their national development plans, priorities and objectives. Firmly anchored in the tripartite concept, the consensus ascribed to organisations of the system the role of partners, having first, though not exclusive, consideration as executing agents.



With the adoption in 1975 of the resolution on new dimensions in technical
co-operation, yet more flexibility was introduced in response to changing needs and conditions. The basic purpose of technical co-operation as defined then still rings true todays to promote the self-reliance of developing countries through national capacity-building. And it is increasingly recognised that human development - meaning more choices for people so that they have more control over their own lives - promotes self-reliance.
In 1977 the General Assembly decided that overall responsibility for the co-ordination of the operational activities of the United Nations system at the country level be entrusted to a single official, the Resident Co-ordinator.

It has since called for intensified efforts to strengthen the programing process, to increase the effectiveness of the system's field representation, to enhance the capacity of Governments to implement programmes and projects and to reinforce the team-leadership capacity of the Resident Co-ordinator. The Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, working with colleagues through the whole system, in particular the Administrator of the United Rations Development Programme, and in the light of the views of Member States, is pursuing these crucial objectives.
The Governing Council of the United Rations Development Programme and other intergovernmental bodies have recently taken important decisions that will significantly affect the way in which projects are implemented. As a result there is likely to be even greater flexibility in the provision of development services, without impairing the inherent advantages of the system.
The substantive, advisory role of the system and its standard-setting and research activities are likely to take on new importance as developing countries decide to give priority to strengthening their national capacities in areas such as poverty eradication, grass-roots participation in development, protection of the environment, national resources management, technical co-operation among developing countries, transfer and adaptation of technology, and women in development. The United Rations development system, with its accumulated experience, is ideally fitted to undertake these tasks.
Much, however, remains to be done. The symbiotic relationship between enduring peace and the economic and social well-being of people is well recognized. Development co-operation can have a crucial impact on the lives of people, thus contributing to the promotion of international peace and security.
At this historic moment, when remarkable political changes are sweeping the world, let us rededicate ourselves to a bettor future for all people. Let us work
for a peace with justice that opens up store and better possibilities for all, meets the fundamental needs of the most deprived, furthers the development of nations, particularly the least-developed, and places human beings at the centre of its concerns, In this context, 1 believe that the United Nations development system can make a very important contribution.
The PRESIDENT: I call next on the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr, KARGBO (Sierra Leone): For many of us in the developing countries, especially in Africa, the coning years will be crucial in determining the course that our societies will take: whether we shall forge ahead, achieving some measure of modest growth, or continue to wallow in the economic doldrums. Certain patterns of co-operation must be given priority if gains are to be realised. Greater attention will increasingly be required in those areas where the most productive results can be achieved.
During much of its existence the United Nations has stressed the efficacy of multilateral co-operation as meeting the requirements for economic development. It has shaped the way we have come to understand the dynamics of social progress in an often hostile international environment. The work of the specialized agencies and the international institutions have been instrumental not only in breaching the cycle of deprivation and poverty, but also in raising the hopes and expectations of countless millions of people - the building blocks of their different communities -whose lives have been touched by their operations.
There is now clear evidence that this achievement, significant as it is, could have been maximised with a much greater commitment to a broader-based effort by much of the developed world. The anticipation of substantial growth in the 1960s and 1970s was undercut by a retreat from multilateral ventures by key partners in
(iftjaiglifiiJbKE&Jiani) the development process. It resulted in the 1980s in a marginalisation of the costly efforts made by so many of our Governments, jeopardising those sectors of society which were already vulnerable.
These lessons have been painfully learned. They have provided an incentive to our Governments to put a higher priority on national capacity-building. By so doing we have focused our energies on tapping the rich physical and human potential that we have available. Indeed, our determination can be seen by our commitment to the United Rations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990.
Over the years, the international community has come to realise that the furtherance of social and economic development is critical to the overall objectives of the Organisation. The cyclical episodes of natural disasters, crop failures, climatic hasards compounded by man-made obstacles to trade and resource-flows, and the pandemic debt crisis have led to chronic poverty, have weakened social institutions and have induced severely reduced economic management capacity, with a much more serious impact on the least developed of our countries.
The far-reaching implications for international peace and stability engendered by these conditions of underdevelopment have overturned the conventional wisdom which had hitherto dictated international economic prescriptions. It became obvious that no assurances could be given about the success of efforts to reduce tension and prevent conflict if conditions of deprivation were allowed to fester. Like nations, the international community cannot sustain indefinitely the existence of parallel societies - one affluent, the other deprived - without risking serious global instability.
It is against this background that we must take stock of 40 years of multilateral technical co-operation. It is not at '-of woe that we must recite. The clock cannot be turned back, nor can missed opportunities be recaptured.
<!ÎEjLj&WCgfeC>,_fiifiX However, the future offers «any chances for redress, for greater participation and stronger commitment by all of us to laprove the human condition rapidly. We in Africa have taken many steps in this direction, the most recent being the African Charter for Popular Participation in Development and Transformation, adopted by our Ministers responsible for economic planning and development in May this year and contained in document A/45/427.
What is now imperative is the. emplacement of new, innovative and productive patterns of interaction between the members of the international connunity reflecting the emerging international political reality from which so much is expected. A renewed commitment to the activities of the multilateral institutions, encouraging an acceleration of the development process, is strongly required. Indeed, as the Secretary-General observes accurately in his report on the work of the Organisation,
"The renewal of multilateralism will enhance the capacity of the United Nations to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the post-eold-war international order". (AZA5Zlx_Px_W
The activities of the intergovernmental agencies will continue to be critical in the vanguard of institution-building for economic progress and social transformation. In the rapidly changing world we live in today, the demands that will be placed on these agencies will be heavy as we turn our attention to more seriously alleviating poverty and enhancing social justice world wide. Will they be up to the task? Will we be willing to use then to meet the challenges that are now imminent? These are the questions we must all answer, for we can no longer put off the realisation of our common objectives under Chapter IX of the Charter.
V45/W,34 25
(MLJbigliiUJiiniJ
On behalf of the African Group, I should like to take this opportunity to pay a deserved tribute to the multilateral institutions whoso activities in the varied fields of human endeavour testify to the best in our vision of hope and quest for a brighter future.
As we observe this anniversary, we should strengthen our determination to work together to bring closer the achievement of a global society in which the improvement of the human condition is the centre-piece of those larger freedoms enshrined in the Charter.
EulEJKIBSSI,I call next on the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Bb-IAHMi (Syrian Arab Republic We are gathered here today, in this Assembly, to commemorate an important event in the history of the Organisation - the fortieth anniversary of multilateral technical co-operation for development within the United Rations system. That we do so on a special day in the calendar of the world body, United Nations Day, bears testimony to the importance that we all attach to the occasion.
The founding of the United Nations at the end of the Second World War was a triumph for hope over despair. It symbolised our faith in ourselves and in our ability to control our destiny, if we took good care. We hoped to build, through the United Nations, a world of lasting peace and true security, in which nations could devote their energies to promoting the well-being of their peoples. We hoped to build a world in which co-operation among nations flourished in the diverse fields of human endeavour, in place of confrontation on the fields of battle. Our aspirations remain unrealised. But the United Nations must stand as a beacon of hope - even if we stumble occasionally and are reminded of man's innate failings -so that one day our dream may be fulfilled.
Forty years ago, the United Nations took the first step towards giving concrete shape to the vision of global co-operation that inspired its founding fathers. It established an institutional mechanism for multilateral technical co-operation in the United Nations system - the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance (EPTA) - under a resolution that had been adopted by the General Assembly the previous year. By so doing, the United Nations began a process that would gain enormous vigour and vitality in the fullness of time. That may Lave been a small initial step, but it was destined to leave a significant mark, over
PKB/PLJ	A/45/PV.34	v?-'
27
(L£x~EldEAlx_£££ BfiBNbUfi)
the years, on the process of development in the developing countries.
Multilateral technical co-operation activities of the United Nations system have developed enormously in the 40 years since the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance began its operations in 1950. In that year, EPTA disbursed $20 million. That has grown almost one hundredfold in the past 40 years.
The setting up in 1958 of a Special Fund to meet certain urgent needs for pre-investment aid, marked the next stage in the evolution of multilateral technical co-operation. The rapid increase in the demand for technical assistance in the early 1960s in the wake of decolonization in Africa, led to the merging of the Special Fund with EPTA in 1966 to create the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The establishment of the United Nations Trust Fund for Population Activities in 1967, later renamed the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA), was yet another milestone on that road of development through technical co-operation.
The consensus resolution of 1970 which introduced, inter alia, country programming, is another landmark in this regard. It enabled developing countries to incorporate into their national planning the indicative planning figures of assistance that they could expect to receive from the UNDP over their plan period. In many countries, this reinforced the process of planning for socio-economic development and led to planning being accorded a high priority in the development process.
The importance of technical co-operation for development can hardly be overstated. Multilateral technical co-operation activities of the United Nations system have contributed to the efforts of the developing countries to achieve self-reliance in several ways - among others, through facilitating and supporting
PKB/PW
V45/PV.34
28
(Mto-.Eidg&ttJlLzUS EfiBJjfelifi)
investment, research, training and national capacity-building. Technical co-operation programmes and projects have helped the developing countries to establish a more effective framework for development. They have enabled greater use of disposable human, physical and financial resources and played an important role in helping to establish, and strengthen institutions in developing countries and to expand productivity. One piece of evidence in support of this, is the fact that developing countries are better able today to pool and share their experiences and engage in technical and economic co-operation among themselves for their mutual benefit.
Thanks to the technical co-operation activities of the United Nations system, developing countries have acquired and improved their skills in many fields, spanning sectors such as agriculture, water supply, sanitation, health, education, public administration, vocational and technical instruction, community development, housing and urban development. Developing countries have also benefited from the application of modern technological research methods to development problems and production techniques.
It is not often appreciated that technical co-operation activities have an enormous impact on the development process of a country that goes far beyond the rather modest sums actually invested in such co-operation. It is reasonable to believe that through this multiplier effect, technical co-operation activities of the United Nations system have stimulated billions of dollars worth of follow-up investment from public and private sources and thereby contributed very considerably to the development of developing countries.
While there is no gainsaying that there has been improvement in the standards of living and well-being of millions of people around the world in the past
FKB/PLJ
(Mr.El-mtal, Syrian Arab Republic)
40 years# it must be said that we have merely scratched the surface in meeting the challenge of development. Hundreds of millions of human beings still live in abysmal poverty in the developing countries. The problems of their growth and development remain as daunting as ever.
Developing countries are under no illusion that there is any quick and easy path to development. It will take decades of toil on their part before they can hope to shake off the scourge of poverty and deprivation. But the process of growth and development must be revitalized if they are to have hope.
(M’t.Bl-Fattal. Syrian Arab Republic)
The world cannot be unconcerned with the future of the overwhelming majority off human beings. That would be morally reprehensible. In ibis increasingly interdependent world# it would also be bad policy. At some future point# want and deprivation in large parts of our world could seriously threaten affluence in other parts. Let us not test the limits within which poverty and riches can safely coexist.
Multilateral technical co-operation activities of the United Nations system must continue to play a catalytic role in the development process of the developing countries. Indeed# such activities must be considerably stepped up if we are to confront seriously the challenge of development. There needs to be, therefore# a substantial increase in resources provided for this purpose. The donor countries# in particular those whose level of official development assistance is incommensurate with the agreed targets# should make a real and significant increase in resources for technical co-operation activities for development. They should do so# as agreed at the last session of the General Assembly# on a continuous# predictable and assured basis.
Promoting self-reliance through development off human resources is indispensable to development. The United Nations system must redouble its efforts to support that process in the coming decades.
3310 PRESIPBWIt 1 now call on the representative off Poland# who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. PAWLAK (Poland): The fortieth anniversary off multilateral technical co-operation for development# which the United Nations celebrates this year# is a very special occasion for all off us. It is a time to look back to four decades of development co-operation - to its achievements and setbacks# its struggles and triumphs. But it is also a time to look forward to the future challenges related
(Mr.. Pawlak, Poland)
to offering people more options to improve their standard of living, political freedom, human rights and further overall development.
Our celebration takes place in a year off unprecedented events in the political arena, It looks like we have finally reached a stage where the importance of multilateral technical co-operation has been fully recognised and put to work for the benefit of mankind. In this regard we share the optimism expressed by others to the effect that neutrality and universality - the two major comparative advantages of United Nations technical co-operation - will be increasingly in demand in the years to come.
Earlier this year we witnessed two important events scheduled to celebrate the fortieth anniversary. The first was the launching of the Hunan Development Report in May 1990; the second, a celebration which took place within the framework of the June session off the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Prograde. Now it is time to commemorate United Nations Day, 24 October 1990. We are convinced that all those activities will contribute to strengthening the public image of the United Nations in general and of the United Nations Development Prog amme and other participating organisations in particular.
There is no doubt that the beginning of the 1990s has brought a new mood of international co-operation. Many development problems require global action and an effective response. The potential of multilateral technical co-operation within the United Nations system is promising. With the growing support from Governments and non-governmental institutions the international community seems to be well-equipped to face the new challenges off human development and sustainable growth in all the regions of our globe.
(dLLli,aaL_i2iflaa)
The Eastern European States are in the process of deep political and socio-economic transformations that are creating favourable conditions for our broader participation in this international co-operation, thus contributing to a more effective use of technical co-operation projects and undertakings at the national, regional, interregional and global levels.
In conclusion, I wish on this special occasion to express our appreciation and sincere congratulations to all those, who for the past 40 years have been contributing to the unquestionable success and numerous achievements off the multilateral technical co-operation within the United Nations system. I firmly believe that the positive experience of the past will inspire all the parties concerned to undertake new and innovative efforts in this important field of development activities for the benefit of all peoples in need.
ZhS_EKE&U2EKZ: I now call on the representative of Bolivia, who will speak on behalff of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mtt-ffiffiMASJiQfiBQ (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly is meeting today for reasons of special significance to the developing countries. Forty years ago our Organisation decided to give practical expression to Article 55 of the Charter, which very wisely foresaw what is today the universally accepted doctrine establishing a causal relationship between peace, security and friendship among nations and the promotion of higher standards of living and well-being for all, as well as the solution of international economic and social problems: in sum, the promotion of what we today call economic and social development.
This conmemoration, quite rightly taking place on United Nations Day, not only recalls an historical turning-point; it should also provide a timely opportunity both to remember the multilateral technical co-operation of the United Nations
1,8/18	A/45/W.34
34-35
(Mc. Navaias Mooro. Boiiv4fl) system, which has remained in a consistent pattern of growth since its modest origins in 1950, and to stop and think about the present and try to glimpse the future.,
In recalling the past, it is only fair to remember with gratitude and appreciation those visionary people who did so much to ensure that technical co-operation - now co-operation for development - should emerge as a living reality of the ideals of the Charter and be strengthened through years of faithful and determined endeavours to become so much greater in quantitative terms and to incorporate fundamental principles of international co-operation subject only to the will of countries and their sovereign right to choose their own style and priorities of development.
, Mr. Peerthum (Mauritius), Vice-President, took the Chair.
BF/10
(Mr. Navalaa Moaro. Bolivia)
,• pay a tribute to the memory of David Owen, Manuel Peres Guerrero and Paul Hoffmann, to name but a few; we remember also Hernan Santa Crus, Hugh Keenleyside, Sir Robert Jackson and Bradford Morse, to name those who are not at present heading programmes of co-operation for development.
Between the modest beginnings of the first Expanded Program«, of Technical Assistance and its organisational bodies, the administration and the Technical Assistance Board and the present, when the United Nations Development Program!, (UNDP) can be said to be a very substantive, universal, indispensable international body, there have been times of faith, excitement, enthusiasm, and also despair. Today the Programme, our Programme, rests on solid, although still insufficient, financial foundations. Its activities encompass all developing countries and cover the wide range of their problems of growth. But, beyond this, the Programme is based also on considerations of international ethics, on the conviction that it is not morally acceptable, nor is it in the final analysis economically sustainable, that side by side with a prosperous one third of mankind there should coexist an impoverished two thirds.
There can thus be no greater recognition of the success and relevance of multilateral co-operation than our concern about it, the fact that we are not indifferent to its shortcomings and frustrations in the face of the vast problems of development that beset us. It is true that co-operation for development has grown and strengthened, and that no country, developed or developing, can ignore it without turning its back on its responsibilities and its own interests. It is no less true that, 40 years on, the general picture of development is deplorable and that since the beginning of this decade the economies of most developing countries have been sliding ever faster downhill, with the tragic sequel of the impoverishment and abandonment of broad sectors of the populations reaching unacceptable limits.
(Mr. Navaias Mccro- Bolivia) Development depends on many factors, endogenous and exogenous to the developing countries. Among them there is a scenario that favour, international co-operation if that is understood to mean not simply providing sufficient funds for co-operation - and funds have been insufficient in the past and are even more so today - but rather creating a climate favourable to unhindered international trade, investment, an adequate flow of financial resources to alleviate the crushing burden of external debt. and. ultimately, the creation of a framework of macroeconomic policies and practices that favour development instead of being prejudicial to it.
We must not forget that, together with the unfulfilled promises to contribute a certain proportion - 0.7 per cent - of the domestic product of the developed countries to offfical development assistance, we are now faced with the absurd situation in which, from 1982 to 1989 alone, the South transferred to the North #1.235 billion more than it received from the North. In other words, we have become net contributors.	'
However, this is a time not for recriminations but rather for celebration and faith. Much has been done and a long road has been travelled, although there is still a long way to go. But we must believe that the ideal, the principle, is to be found in that seed that began to grow 40 years ago, and that today finds splendid expression in the reality of our development programmes. We must nourish that plant carefully and faithfully, devoting our efforts to fulfilling the solemn commitments which unite all countries in support of development and which this year found their true expression in the Declaration of the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly, on international co-operation and development, the commitments of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade.
(Mr. Navaias Moots. Bolivia)
Th,countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, on whose behalf X have the honour of epeaking, urge that this occasion be seen as an opportunity to renew the solemn commitment made by all of us, by all countries, to the principle that development and well-being cannot be the privilege of a few without jeopardising the very foundations of international coexistence; they urge that, at this time of justified celebration of the destruction of the political walls and barriers that used to divide the world, we also dedicate ourselves to the task of pulling down the ominous wall that divides the international community into a prosperous North and an impoverished South.
She PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Canada, who will speak on behalf of the Group of western European and other States.
MliJtQSmi (Canada): X have the honour to speak today on behalf of the Group of western European and othor States in commemorating the fortieth anniversary of mulilateral co-operation. In establishing in 1949 the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, a forerunner of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the General Assembly gave concrete expression to the determination expressed in the Charter to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social and humanitarian character.
The early emphasis on technical assistance, as it was then called, was insightful, as it denoted a recognition of the need to foster human capacities as an essential element of the development process. While preoccupation with capital needs later dwarfed the financial scale of technical co-operation activities, we have seen in recent years a broad recognition of the centrality of the human dimension to the development process. It is entirely appropriate that the UNDP is supporting pioneering work, as seen from the human development report, in deepening our understanding of this.
(MKa-lttttiaxx-CaBada) It is well understood that the WDP has a central place in our system of technical co-operatioa as the principal financing channel, it is important also to acknowledge the very significant role played by the technical and specialised agencies of the United Nations system, which are partners of the UIDP and the Population Fund and the beneficiary countries in designing and implementing our programmes.
Shat the United Pations system for technical co-operation is so highly valued, despite its very small share of overall development assistance flows, is due in pert to, its particular characteristics of neutrality, universality, responsivaaess and voluntary participation. While th... characteristic. r—in .c.ntial, th. programs, must adapt to new challenge. and to lesson, learned from past •ap.ri.nc. To remain a vital partner for development in th. 1990., th. .y.t«s ,111 cad mor. than .v«r to .harpon it. focu. on measures which halp to enable people to shape their own social and economic destinies.
BHS/ras
(MLJteiÜiiL-fianflilfi)
Over the last few years, Governments acting through the General Assembly, the Sconoaic and Social Council and the Governing Council of the UNDP,' have initiated a process of reform in the technical co-operation programmes of the United Nations system. The main objectives of this reform are to direct resources to those most in need, to encourage discipline in United Nations programming, to re-orient technical and specialised agencies to technical functions, and to encourage more integrated and substantive functioning of the system at the country level. While many of these changes deal with bureaucratic processes, the underlying theme is the need to be effective by tackling well those issues which the United Nations system is best equipped to address. Many of these fall under the rubric of human development. Bovised models of technical co-operation which seek to combat poverty and enlarge people's choices by enlisting grass roots movements must complement the traditional model of co-operation with public sectors. Assisting countries to pursue development in harmony with nature is also a mounting part of the vocation of United Nations technical co-operation programmes.
There can be no doubt that the international community as a whole benefits from our collective efforts to support the development process. As a community, we have conceived diverse and technically rich institutional instruments which can co-operate in the development effort. We are on the threshold of an iiwnenss opportunity for development as East-West tensions subside and as substance replaces posture in the dialogue between developed and developing countries. It is our common responsibility to ensure that the instruments we have created remain effective moans of displaying human solidarity through international economic and technical co-operation.
Xhfi—2BSSXBHB, I declare concluded the observance of the fortieth anniversary of multilateral technical co-operation for development within the United Vations system.
The —etino rose >t n„<s a.g
m/is
(Mt. Il-fattal. Syrian Arab Republic)
The world cannot be unconcerned with the future of the overwhelming majority off human beings. That would be morally reprehensible. In this increasingly interdependent world, it would also be bad policy. At some future point, want and deprivation in large parts of our world could seriously threaten affluence in other parts. Let us not test the limits within which poverty and riches can safely coexist.
Multilateral technical co-operation activities of the United Nations system must continue to play a catalytic role in the development process of the developing countries. Indeed, such activities must be considerably stepped up if we are to confront seriously the challenge of development. There needs to be, therefore, a substantial increase in resources provided for this purpose. The donor countries, in particular those whose level of official development assistance is incommensurate with the agreed targets, should make a real and significant increase in resources for technical co-operation activities for development. They should do so, as agreed at the last session of the General Assembly, on a continuous, predictable and assured basis.
Promoting self-reliance through development off human resources is indispensable to development. The United Nations system must redouble its efforts to support that process in the coming decades.
33, PRESIPBWIt 1 now call on the representative off Poland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. PAWLAK (Poland): The fortieth anniversary off multilateral technical co-operation for development, which the United Nations celebrates this year, is a very special occasion for all off us. It is a time to look back to four decades of development co-operation - to its achievements and setbacks, its struggles and triumphs. But it is also a time to look forward to the future challenges related
#
NB/ls
A/45/PV.34 32
(Mr.. Pawlak, Poland)
to offering people more options to improve their standard of living, political freedom, human rights and further overall development.
Our celebration takes place in a year off unprecedented events in the political arena, It looks like we have finally reached a stage where the importance of multilateral technical co-operation has been fully recognised and put to work for the benefit of mankind. In this regard we share the optimism expressed by others to the effect that neutrality and universality - the two major comparative advantages of United Nations technical co-operation - will be increasingly in demand in the years to come.
Earlier this year we witnessed two important events scheduled to celebrate the fortieth anniversary. The first was the launching of the Hunan Development Report in May 1990; the second, a celebration which took place within the framework of the June session off the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Prograde. Now it is time to commemorate United Nations Day, 24 October 1990. We are convinced that all those activities will contribute to strengthening the public image of the United Nations in general and of the United Nations Development Prog amme and other participating organisations in particular.
There is no doubt that the beginning of the 1990s has brought a new mood of international co-operation. Many development problems require global action and an effective response. The potential of multilateral technical co-operation within the United Nations system is promising. With the growing support from Governments and non-governmental institutions the international community seems to be well-equipped to face the new challenges of human development and sustainable growth in all the regions of our globe.

NB/ls
A/45/FV.34 33
()-EaNlAlu_ËQlAxid)
The Eastern European States are in the process of deep political and socio-economic transformations that are creating favourable conditions for our broader participation in this international co-operation, thus contributing to a more effective use of technical co-operation projects and undertakings at the national, regional, interregional and global levels.
In conclusion, I wish on this special occasion to express our appreciation and sincere congratulations to all those, who for the past 40 years have been contributing to the unquestionable success and numerous achievements off the multilateral technical co-operation within the United Nations system. I firmly believe that the positive experience of the past will inspire all the parties concerned to undertake new and innovative efforts in this important field of development activities for the benefit of all peoples in need.
Zba_EBE&U2EliZ: I now call on the representative of Bolivia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mtt-ffiffiMASJiQfiBÛ (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): The Assembly is meeting today for reasons of special significance to the developing countries. Forty years ago our Organisation decided to give practical expression to Article 55 of the Charter, which very wisely foresaw what is today the universally accepted doctrine establishing a causal relationship between peace, security and friendship among nations and the promotion of higher standards of living and well-being for all, as well as the solution of international economic and social problems: in sum, the promotion of what we today call economic and social development.
This conmemoration, quite rightly taking place on United Nations Day, not only recalls an historical turning-point; it should also provide a timely opportunity both to remember the multilateral technical co-operation of the United Nations
1,8/18	A/45/PV.34
34-35
(Mr. Navaias Mooro. Bolivia) system, which has remained in a consistent pattern of growth since its modest origins in 1950, and to stop and think about the present and try to glimpse the future.,
In recalling the past, it is only fair to remember with gratitude and appreciation those visionary people who did so much to ensure that technical co-operation - now co-operation for development - should emerge as a living reality of the ideals of the Charter and be strengthened through years of faithful and determined endeavours to become so much greater in quantitative terms and to incorporate fundamental principles of international co-operation subject only to the will of countries and their sovereign right to choose their own style and priorities of development.
, Mr. Peerthum (Mauritius), Vice-President, took the Chair.
BF/10	A/45/PV.34
35
(Mr. Havaiar- Moaro. Bolivia) ,• P,y a tribute to the amatory of David Owen, Manuel Perea Guerrero and
Paul Hoffmann, to name but a few; we remember also Hernan Santa Crus, Hugh Keenleyside, Sir Hobert Jackson and Bradford Morse, to name those who are not at present heading programmes of co-operation for development.
Between the modest beginnings of the first Expanded Program«, of Technical Assistance and its organisational bodies, the administration and the Technical Assistance Board and the present, when the United Nations Development Program!, (UNDP) can be said to be a very substantive, universal, indispensable international body, there have been times of faith, excitement, enthusiasm, and also despair. Today the Programme, our Programme, rests on solid, although still insufficient, financial foundations. Its activities encompass all developing countries and cover the wide range of their problems of growth. But, beyond this, the Programme is based also on considerations of international ethics, on the conviction that it is not morally acceptable, nor is it in the final analysis economically sustainable, that side by side with a prosperous one third of mankind there should coexist an impoverished two thirds.
There can thus be no greater recognition of the success and relevance of multilateral co-operation than our concern about it, the fact that we are not indifferent to its shortcomings and frustrations in the face of the vast problems of development that beset us. It is true that co-operation for development has grown and strengthened, and that no country, developed or developing, can ignore it without turning its back on its responsibilities and its own interests. It is no less true that, 40 years on, the general picture of development is deplorable and that since the beginning of this decade the economies of most developing countries have been sliding ever faster downhill, with the tragic sequel of the impoverishment and abandonment of broad sectors of the populations reaching unacceptable limits.
V45/W.34 37
(Mr. Mavai,Mccro- Bolivia) Development depends on many factors, endogenous and exogenous to the developing countries. Among them there is a scenario that favour, international co-operation if that is understood to mean not simply providing sufficient funds for co-operation - and funds have been insufficient in the past and are even more so today - but rather creating a climate favourable to unhindered international trade, investment, an adequate flow of financial resources to alleviate the crushing burden of external debt, and, ultimately, the creation of a framework of macroeconomic policies and practices that favour development instead of being prejudicial to it.
We must not forget that, together with the unfulfilled promises to contribute a certain proportion - 0.7 per cent - of the domestic product of the developed countries to offfical development assistance, we are now faced with the absurd situation in which, from 1982 to 1989 alone, the South transferred to the North #1.235 billion more than it received from the North. In other words, we have become net contributors.	'
However, this is a time not for recriminations but rather for celebration and faith. Much has been done and a long road has been travelled, although there is still a long way to go. But we must believe that the ideal, the principle, is to be found in that seed that began to grow 40 years ago, and that today finds splendid expression in the reality of our development programme.. Ne must nourish that plant carefully and faithfully, devoting our efforts to fulfilling the sol.™ commitments which unite all countries in support of development and which this year found their true expression in the Declaration of the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly, on international co-operation and development, the commitments of the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library ■a
UHHl
‘''' —••  ',•,, i Y,1 , ,viVaZi.

■	IF/10	A/45/PV.34
I	38
I	(Mr. Navaias Moots,Bolivia)
■	Th,countri«,of Latin America and the Caribbean, on whose behalf X have the
■	honour of speaking, urge that this occasion be seen as an opportunity to renew the solemn commitment made by all of us, by all countries, to the principle that development and well-being cannot be the privilege of a few without jeopardising the very foundations of international coexistence; they urge that, at this time of justified celebration of the destruction of the political walls and barriers that used to divide the world, we also dedicate ourselves to the task of pulling down the ominous wall that divides the international community into a prosperous North and an impoverished South.
She PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Canada, who will speak on behalf of the Group of western European and other States.
MEi—EQKEUR (Canada); X have the honour to speak today on behalf of the Group of western European and othor States in commemorating the fortieth anniversary of mulilateral co-operation. In establishing in 1949 the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, a forerunner of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the General Assembly gave concrete expression to the determination expressed in the Charter to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social and humanitarian character. The early emphasis on technical assistance, as it was then called, was insightful, as it denoted a recognition of the need to foster human capacities as an essential element of the development process. While preoccupation with capital needs later dwarfed the financial scale of technical co-operation activities, we have seen in recent years a broad recognition of the centrality of the human dimension to the development process. It is entirely appropriate that the UNDP is supporting pioneering work, as seen from the human development report, in deepening our understanding of this.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library ■Mmmw—W——RW----------------------mr-     ■  _______________________ .
(MKa-lttttiaxx-CftBada)
It 1. well understood that the WDP has a central place in our system of technical cooperation as the principal financing channel, it is inportant also to acknowledge the very significant role played by the technical and specialised agencies of the United hâtions system, which are partners of the UUP and the Population Fund and the beneficiary countries in designing and implementing our programmes.
That the United Hâtions system for technical co-operation is so highly valued, despite its very small share of overall development assistance flows, is due in part to, its particular characteristicos of neutrality, universality, responsiveness and voluntary participation. While th... characteristic. r—in ....ntial, th. programme. must adapt to naw chall.ng.o «d te l.ssons loaned from past •ap.ri.nc. To remain a vlt.1 partner for development in the 1990s, th. syst« ,111 nood mor. than .v«r to «harpon its focus on measures which help to enable propio to shape their own social and economic destinies.
(MtiLJEfuttlftK&jibaAflA)
Over the last few years, Governments acting through the General Assembly, the economic and Social Council and the Governing Council of the UNDP, ’ have initiated a process of reform in the technical co-operation programmes of the United Nations system. The nain objectives of this refor, are to direct resources to those most in need, to encourage discipline in United Nations programing, to re-orient technical and specialised agencies to technical functions, and to encourage more integrated and substantive functioning of the system at the country level. While many of these changes deal with bureaucratic processes, the underlying theme is the need to be effective by tackling well those issues which the United Nations system is best eguipped to address. Many of these fall under the rubric of human development. Bovisod models of technical co-operation which seek to combat poverty and enlarge people's choices by enlisting grass roots movements must complement the traditional model of co-operation with public sectors. Assisting countries to pursue development in harmony with nature is also a mounting part of the vocation of United Nations technical co-operation programmes.
There can be no doubt that the international community as a whole benefits from our collective efforts to support the development process. As a community, we have conceived diverse and technically rich institutional instruments which can co-operate in the development effort. We are on the threshold of an iiwnenss opportunity for development as Bast-WOst tensions subside and as substance replaces posture in the dialogue between developed and developing countries. It is our common responsibility to ensure that the instruments we have created remain effective moans of displaying human solidarity through international economic and technical co-operation.
nwwn
fiSS/ras
Xhfi—2BSSXBHB, I declare concluded the observance of the fortieth anniversary of multilateral technical co-operation for development within the United Nations system.
Iht Mttiw rose at 11-45 a-g
Document symbol: A/45/PV.68
Best copy available
um,
HAWKS

Generai Assembly
,rasimi,
ÄZ45/FT.O
4 Jaseazy ISSI
mxxsa
Forty-fifth sessiora, GEKEEAI. ÄSSEJCBW hbotxsxoku. vessato? msm> or m swet-eigesh sseehsg
Seid at Seaägaarters, Sew York, °® Friday, 1,©ecemher 1990, Mt 10 a.,.
later;
later:
Mr. de sasso
Mr. Miwmms <Yice-?resiöe®E>
Mr. de MaS£O
(MaltaJ
(Cjpresi
(MalcaS
Fortieth aasiwersaxy of the establish,® of the Office of ta® Ofeited Sataoes High Comstissiocer for Befsgees
Statassest by the Fresidest
SLrri.r, cr?9iM, ,°, «seeches delivered ia Erglish 
ia the
.Sgraera.l. Issepfofy-
The final teat win be printed
, sa3atótc,d 50 original speeches oaly. They shoeld be JT , ®£ a ®“BÖ,r °£  «S,!,?,«, «,eceraed, witMaoae EC2-75G 2 !.	Sectio®, Bepartoest of COeferesc, Services,
750,	2 Itextad Katloes Flax, a«5 iacorporated ia a copy of the record.
9O-f447«/Ä 42309 (£J
Ä/4S/PF-4« Kal
Mwm «meçoeacei for the esjopest of branes rights of political, military, ecoeomic aad other form of assistasse© gives to the racist aad eoleæialist régime of Sooth Africa: report of the Third Committee [883
Effective implemectatioa. of Cxïted Eatiœas i,scrwseats os h,a® rîts a®«5 effective faaeticaiag of bodies established porsaaat to ssch iastraasts: report of the Third Ccasaittee <891
World social sïtœatio®: report ©£ the Third Ccswittee <901
Oi«ia,-tioe of all forms of racial discriaiaatio®: report of the Third Cessai tree (SIS
lepleraeatatioa of the world programme of actio® ©oecersiag disabled perses, asd the Qaited Kations Decade of Disabled Shersoas: report of the Third Committee (923
Staaa®. rights and scientific and techaological develepweats: report of the Third CoRstittee (93 J
Altexsatiwe approaches- aad ways and means withi® the Chstcd Kations system for .©proving the effect it.', eajoyweæt of hesra® rights aad fraedameatal freedoms: report of the Third ©emmittee (94J
Sew iateraatie®,! Saraaaï caria® order: report off the Third Ceæwittee (953
Policies aad progressa«, isvolviag yooth: report of the Third ©csaicte® (95)
I®pl,ssesacatioa of the Coe actio,os the Rights off the Child: report off the Third Committee (97 J
iMgleswatatiea of the Prograrar® of Actio® for the Second Decade to ©,bat Racism «rd Racial Siscrimäsatio®: report off the Third Ctoramittee (98J
©seatic, of aging: report of the Third Cosowittee (993
Cria, prevwstioa aad criminal jist-ce [100]
(a) Report of the Third Committee
(b> Report off the fifth Committee
Elimisatio® off all fora, of discrimiaatio® against womea: report off the Third ©sarasittee (1013
Forwrd-loohiag strategies for the advascemeat of wooca to the year 2000: report of the Third Committee (102}
AS43ZP7.88 ls}
XsFrnae, o£ «9m waiversal roalisatio® of te rit ©f pawl«, t© f-tetemiaatioe ate ©f tte syetey grastiag ©f iteayetewee to colonial eoTOtries sad pertes for tte effactiw® gaaraetoo ate ©tearvaaco of b,w rigtess report. of tte third Conaittee £1831
I,xwstl«sal Tear ©g tte fteilyz report of tte Third Cernite#,£1©«]
tearwtieaal cowasats ©a tanas rightss rswrt of Un Hird Comité, £185]
XlitewtLo«. of all forra ©g roligiws iotolamc,: ramerà of the Stira Ceanitta, £188]	“
" °,  ,s, æiÇ, Cteteesiowr for tefagws: report of 62, Third Cookittao £187]	”
-	forcer, ass otter ,1, iatanaa or tegrteiag trwtwst or pwistewtr report of the Shite Cawittoo £189]
-	Znv of tte $•«: rapcrt# of ste SeerataaT-Gesoral. ?<wfwl) £33]
,	$,f ,a® 02 «,• AteteMy of teste of State a,8 Gowrasnst of tea
teity os tte aerial «m xaval military attack T?, Soei,li>t Jaojpl,"# Ulyaa Arab JanaMriya by tba pretest Baited States Ateisiatraiti©,ia April 198$ £38]
- Arsad Israeli aggreteie,agaisse tte Iragi welter isstallatiow asd its Stete teteogwsea® for tte wtebUsted isteteatioaal rat, co«,« paaesSsl «Ms of s,cl,ar «aergys tte ac,eolif«raeio, of welter, «,?©, ted latertetic,! fteeo ate aacsrity [42]
”	t,8,? O< °, yrole«g®ti©,of tte azaed conflict beta,«, iraa ate
teograwa of work

AZ45ZPT.M 2
®Ä-M«21«S-2Ä_£aUR±Jii
ratnju Awxvzxsar or ,bk 2ssi3tis®aarr er ,bk emee carassxGJHEt roc «sfogosì
er ,es wmxd sazio«® kick
IM_£USSJSXI: ,• ecMntKoratioK today of th,fortieth asativersary of tha adoptions, by this wry body,of the statist, of the Office of the Belted «eclose Bigh Csweiaalooer for Befogs «IBM,? 1,both «e iagortast asd a sad ewxt. I£ the ieteraatloeel cowroity damestrated it, visdeo i® establishing, and later ii extolling rod reinforcing. the high Comissicror's ,data rod ecepeteece is regard to the noet vulaeraol, victiaso of awe’s iataroaity to ,ax., the sere fact thee w «,«■orate this «aiwrsaxy today is alar,l,g evideece of e«r faller, to prevese th, taros eoeeegwwees cf «,r inability to resolve the problem, off persecution and ceeffllct.
«race ISSI the developeest off incorsati«,! la, h,s provided a, iscrwsiegly neiwrsal framework iter protecting refugees, who, by defittiti«, caroot ter, to their «a Gown«,«, fOr protect,«, ,re sewrtheless re«!, ,«£«,> Of States that have a,yet beco, parties to the 1151 Coroestio© relactag to the States of hefegws «d it, iW7 Proto«!. asd I, ca. roly erg, the to seis, the eppertraity of the fortieth axsiwrsaxy ,«art year to accede to these fssdaaseatal bettaaitaria, isstrsnests.
Ifatarally, the garnet of taros disasters siate ISSI has far «•receded, both 1, «■tar asd la cmroptaal ,d geographical scope, ,tat the drafters of the emat statate aed of the MSI Coroeatio,tad la «Ind. x. a aerie, of iatarwstioes starti,® la the I«««, WBCh's history has bees interwove® with the tsrbelesce off deeolocixatloe and with the radical netasorphisis off the world's areMtectare over th, past decade,. UBW3 tas bees iswiwd - sot least at th, regrost of the
WIS.M 3-5
iz&xssi&st)
Geaeral Assembly _ ia protect!ag sad assisting the -excels of this pa! sir 1 historical evoletioa. it has played a aitigatiag role aad. viewer possible, has bees isstrsmestal is preeotiag aolstioas for the aasifold bssaaaitarraa tragedies that have ©ecstrred is tatis Aawriea, ia Asi, sad i® Africa.
A/45Z?r.«$
(Ite ?miì
Bowewr, the linkage between the boBaanitarias endeavours of the fflun aad political solations to asderlyiag casses has too often bees, «lesive,The coaplexity of the asap showing the world, refugees today is the telling refieetio® of «feat I coesider a aost worrisome facts the inability of State, to fforsaslate early ®ol®tioes i® terms of peaee-ketpiag- and the restoratio® of respect for boras rights is proportional to the xenber off coefliet sitsatioc, that gaserete ezodes off refugee,. Shi, oeght sot to be the ease, partieslarly at a tine «bea w. as aeafeers off the General Assembly and off the Secarity Coeasil, are ia the process off forging a ,ore effective secarity asd conflict resoletioa systto based oa greater respect for the Charter off the Baited Matioes.
It is imperative that bensaaitariasa qaestice, be gives higher political priority. It is with this in xisd that I shall he visiting the Palestine refugee caspa i® the ocaspiod territories and is Jordan res by a sister orgaaixatio®. the Waited Satieas Belief and Morks Agency for Palestine Beffogees in the Sear East (raffle, early is the sev year. Shis visit vili permit ee to see, at first hasd. the ««ditiaas faced by those living i® the camps ,ad to express to thee personally the export of the General Assembly and eomeers for their plight. I hope that daring ny tenere of office I shall also have the opportsaity to visit other refugees and express to those officials responsible for the refugee cange res by the !«& the snqport of the General Assembly for the «ay they axe facing the cfealleage estrsted to them by the istersatioaal eoMM&ity.
the ever isereaaiag problem off refugees is all the «are preoccapyiag is the coetext of another £&esom«sa<s. recently debated is the Third Ccemittee - namely, the growing nagntade aad complexity of world-wide migrati©«, which is largely motivated by another striding fallare off ths imtarxatienral eoHHvxity. I an referring to the gmestioa off eg&itable ecoeeBur and social development.
I sincerely hope that the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees provides Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, the media and the public at large with the opportunity to focus attention on the urgent needs of refugees around the world. It is a sad fact that in recent years financial resources made available for humanitarian activities have not grown in proportion to the number of persons requiring international protection and assistance. You will agree that it is an intolerable paradox if scarce funds are to be the international community’s response to a cluster of unresolved humanitarian challenges.

This anniversary should above all inspire us to find the necessary political will and ethical sense of purpose to pursue solutions for the victims of the innumerable man-made disasters that have marked our modern era and to eliminate the root causes of these repeated human tragedies.

I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, who wishes to address the General Assembly at this time.

The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Forty years ago today the General Assembly decided to establish the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In commemorating this anniversary, let us take stock of the considerable achievements of this Office of the United Nations and look ahead to what the future may require of it.

Since the UNHCR was created, solutions have been found for more than 20 million refugees world-wide. This has been an extraordinary accomplishment. Time and again the solving of refugee problems has reduced political tensions and played a significant role in fostering peace. In recognition of this, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has twice received the Nobel Peace Prize —
in 1954 and again in 1981. I wish to compliment the staff of the UNHCR for their dedicated efforts over the years.

Since 1951 no fewer than 107 States on all continents have signed the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. As a result, those who flee their countries because of a well-founded fear of persecution now have a basic bill of rights that has acquired universal validity. In Africa and Latin America regional arrangements have extended the refugee concept to cover victims of conflict and violations of human rights. In addition, the UNHCR has been repeatedly called on by the General Assembly to protect and assist those displaced from their countries for similar reasons.

Sadly, there have also been disappointments. It has not been possible for the international community to end all forms of persecution, violence and the abuse of fundamental human rights or to avert new refugee flows. Throughout the period of the cold war, and often during the process of decolonization, tension and conflict led to an increase in the number of refugees. Today, regrettably, there is a total of some 15 million refugees — a number so large as to shock the conscience of humanity.

We are living through times of momentous political change. It is a time of unparalleled opportunity, but also one of great uncertainty. Hopes of a post-cold-war world free of conflict have recently been clouded by the crisis in the Persian Gulf, while young democracies are being challenged by far-reaching social and economic problems. Meanwhile, large numbers of refugees continue to flee from their countries into exile, often at an unbearable cost to neighbouring States. The movements of people triggered by persecution or conflict are also increasingly complicated by migratory trends resulting from the growing economic disparity between regions and continents or from environmental decline. Unless such developments are managed with care, they can pose grave threats to peace.
The fortieth anniversary of UNHCR should serve, above all, to make us reflect on the global situation. It is a reminder to the international community not only of the immediate plight of existing refugees, but also of the urgent need to work collectively to eliminate the causes of refugee flows. The process of democratization and the end of ideological confrontation have provided us with a rare opportunity for concerted international action to achieve peace with justice and social and economic progress. The challenge that confronts us now is to ensure that we seize this opportunity. Only in this way can we envisage a world without refugees.

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT

The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Assembly that over the past three months I have taken the opportunity to consult informally, in my capacity as President, on ways and means of giving a more effective role to this forum.

In this initial phase my most intensive contacts have been with the group consisting of the Chairmen of the Main Committees and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, taking into account the informal but broadly representative nature of this group and the direct access it provides to the whole range of issues that are of immediate concern to all the Members of the Assembly.

Two points have clearly emerged from these preliminary consultations. There is an increasing awareness of the unique role the General Assembly, with its almost universal membership, can play in the conduct of international relations. At the same time, there is a deep appreciation of the fact that the recent positive developments in international relations have opened up new challenges as well as opportunities for the General Assembly to fulfil more effectively perhaps than heretofore the responsibilities entrusted to it under the Charter.
<3MJ£S£iim)
W o«® starting poise is this sratter is the roaUsatio® that the Geseral AMWftly is the eejer organ ®=  (  j    jer of the United Katisss «a egeal epportnsity to engage is th, coasidewtioo of wtters of «««a «««er,.   AssenMy    «ollectiwly i£ therefore assestially giving espressioo to th,voice of saahiad. Jet it is Wrally acWoeledged that both th, Assays «Wads of deliberation asd the effective«, with Wick its rettsweJaeions are followed «p require isproveeeot.
I, the coarse of the iaforsai coessltatioe, ie vt' - j have bees s, ideas aimed at «Wascisg the relevance of the laser	iliheratioea asd enssrixag
a «re effective response both oy Gowr«, and by Srsatioeal organixatioos to it, recemaedatioes have bee® diseased at sone length. &,o®g other eMsgs, these id,, have toothed «p,the spacing off Geaeral Assembly wetisgs thronghoot the year, the possibility of l,s«r   topical agesdas, and a closer «misterUi ixwlwmst is the Assembly, deliberations sod decisioe-Meg process. other aspects which are already being coosidrred within the framework of isg «eseltafcioas, 1,particular regarding the efficiency of the eeonoMc and social sector, of the ,sited Betites, have Mao been hept is view «hiring these coesaltatio«,.
“, Islets rood or IMboml «raiuttat, Ale, tex of oeeooMcr be,or . •,T FT.WOMXJ. «a JojAt .a««, !«,be, TOT «co«™. I „ ¡y <w™«l«£w be cte Cbblnea o: the «,j, Coa«!««,aS or the Moisoor Cow,lw,e ,KbObiotsAi, «aS M9tt,xr OaTCIom tor tb. Jocose«; .,d «,erocJoe u ta~ Ao,A CM, ««._-. IC Jo T JowaSo. to ycocoea MA the,JMbt,l «OOMOMO,owr A, eooiog aseebo. eolocgio, cb. Mtclo ot  «,«,«, co ioelodo. maj octet, tte amtec, of the Cecom Camlet, „d «j «a, o««bers or CM MMAly CMC ,i«lf„t , lo«r„t J. th. ,¡a,	ob},J,
W4$.a
13
(MßJBEßÜälÄ)
pawpar,a set of reesmeeadetices, at_,ptab3,to all, that, oæ, iapleawmted, «©«Id esser, that, at a ti, of dramatic aad £ar-r,ehiag ehasges is the system of istassaticmal r,latic®,o«r General Assembly «©«Id coccia«, to fulfil the sole evrisaged for it ceder the Charter.
He beli,«, that the Gemerai Assembly has to keep th, privacy it ©eesgies amamg sétimos, leading o,r Organised©, towards what has been described as the secoad generati©, Sai ted Keel©,.
AGEWA. 132MS S3 TO 19? ASE, 189
azotes® cchse®ss,ces roe theeksg,®3? or ascus aiGass or hxjsicàl, Miañara. wokmic ato «rasa roes or assissamce errai to ike sacist as® coejokimist arsis® or srosa atbicas setos? or the 3x129 cowmax {A/ismtj
etfsctot irawassasic® or «rm, haxicss isectssmests ok bos,arrears as® WXtTTTE F0KHOKEKÍ CT ,TOSES EOTA3&1SS23 PCTSBAaT TO SOCH IXSTESKESESSi 3®?CS? OF THE TX32S, COSOSTEE U/45/?«S>
M3ETO SOCIAL STSramOKs 32208? OF TSE 32130 C®«mE® <A/45Zmj
Ewaxmcw or all roses or ,aciaz. dischxmikkticss: azaro? or ■ss® ■sano cctmxfze® (AMS/747>
I,W«raASlCK or THE WOW PSOGEAAME OF ACTIO,CCaCE2Siro DISABLED POSOOS AS© THE onraz, sonsas secase or dzsahled rosases: asaro? or the tsxsd coseam® (a/4Sz?4$)
300® 93G8SS AS© SCIZaSIfTC ATO TSE3KKOG2CAL DETEEOSMESTS: 32208? OF TSE THIS© 00,0322® (A/4SZ749)
ÀE383SQOIWE jy&9QA£SEE5 AMD MATS ATO ,SAKS «CTESM theGKXTW KmCKS SISZEM EOS uesewiHG zar epfsoi esoozmext or Kaos higsss od íwbamessal Fsszroses: septo? OP THE TLISSI CQWSm® (À/45/750)
raw jssssraricaaE. assacmao, osso: aoorr or the tseijs c&boteee (Az«snsi)
KC.XCX1S A3© 3SOG&NSSS ISmwXBG TOOTH: ASPO«? OF TSE THIE9 CSBeOTTEE (A/45Z752J
IHmMBKOTlG,OF TSE COSHESTiaW OS TSE 2IGKZS OF THE CHIW: ,STOSS' OF 3W THI29 CCWCmXE (AZ4SS753)
XMKJM3KA3EÍC,OF THE P90S£fóME OF ACTIiM TO® THE SECC8© SECATO TO COMBAT XACISK A3© SACHE. 01502303301«: SESTO? OF THE TH229 CCeSSTTEE (AZCS/PSO
OOESEXOH OF ASXBGs BSP«? OP TTO THEE, OHSOTSE (A/<S/?55>
Ä/45/pr.M
14
CAUSE >8æW®SÏX6, USE) CAUOSAS. JUSTICE
ia> n?, or 5® san© ccwesreE (a/ss/tss>
(&î Äl,OaT or WB FUT® aSBOïSS <A/45/S«5)
EEZ3ŒŒXC# W AZI. FOfiMS 0? DXSCæDCQEÏC® AgtTWt MC3CS-
COBOOSOTE (AZ45/75?)	'
særorr or tse sans
®®M5 SZtASBGJBS ntl ®EE AS9Ä3K3B«acr OT MOMES 20 T8t HAÏ 2000,
©f tek sans, cæœrsEE (A/45/7sa)	,

,“LSLZ  œzw™ A, oamrAAŒle jm ŒB COWOrara CA/4ST7S9>
XKŒæraæiaKAz, nas or , rncax: bekmet or , rasa® cooossæE u/4smo> 2KHSA3IOSZ, cotebamis CSE «MUR Kioœsz raro, or T® Tassa ccwœmæ a/45/70) PZCK or azz. Feras or sbugicss nmxoAjKB: k,o, or n® cto© cetacmra
JSÎÎSJJ	iœk«t or ras ran©
see ran© oaoarara ca/45zjss>
bepobt or
Bl®_fSIK3K- 2 ©ail oa eta lapporteer ©f eke æü-a Coemite««, Mr. Msxi© Ce fesca ©g ö. Kiippis«, «s, ,in iMürcdBe,ite reports ©£ rie raird Cassi tree.
lfca_®_lEffi iSMlippises), Xsfportewr ©f tte raird CMMirtee: ®, ®urd CcMBirtee carri®d cut its wack deriaj o, ©corse ©f S3 metis, < wkick ,mticaal resolve®, wre «Scpeed, el, larger pereeafcage - e&art 9® per ,. &sicg aSogeeti witkowt a wee.
At tkl, «oraiag’s eeetisg I keve t>e taMtoor of presestiag 21 ©f eke 24 reports of tl, Ccmatxee for £1, ©©esidacfe, ©f t, Gemral Assert,ir. 1 stall iatrodece Eta, la eta order la «4sick tta are listed £■ tke £SXQHtl>
Oader Ie®, $3, “Adearae eemsmgMmras for the earjognest of hasca rights of politic,l,ailitary, economic and other fom of assistsaee give® to the recist sod colonialist regime of Sooth Africa“, the Third Ctnnittae recceaeads the adoption of the draft resoletio® i, paragraph S of it, report (A/45/744).
Osier iten 39, “’Effective IspleaestatioK of United Matiases iamtranemts oa hones right, asd effective ffsmetioaiag of bodies established parssast to each -iastraeeast,“, the Third Committee receoeMods the adoption of the draft resoletfo© ia paragraph 9 of it, report (AZ4SZ745).
Osier it,90, “World social sitsatia®“, the Third Committee recoeaHeasSs the adoption of the t,w draft resoletioes io paragraph 1,of it, report (A/45/74,).
Osier its, ,1, “Eliniaatic,of all ferns of racial direrinixatic®'", the Third Committee reec,,ds the adoptio® of the three draft resolatiee, 1, paragraph 15 of its report (A/<SZW>.
Cadet item 92, "Iapl®Bestatia® of the World. Program, of Actio® coaeersiog Disabled far,©®, asd the United ,«tiocs Decade of Disabled Per,©®,“, the Third Cents!tree reccnsesdis the adoption, .of the draft resolsticsB is paragraph 8 ©f its report CA/«5/T«d>.
Order item 91, "Saner right, and sciestific sad techsological developments“, the Third Coamittee reeomneeA, the adoption of the foer draft resolstio®,ia paragraph 19 of it, report €A/«5/?4,J.,
36r- ISevrosmati, {Coprasi, «iee-Prasideot, took the Chair-
ÄZ4SZTT.6« 1$
Q&uJ£OftS£UJSS£&£3£>
Under itm ,4, ««titled "Altaraaelw approaches sad ways amd sue«,® within the United Katfoex system for improving the effective «sjoysBeet of hmm, sight, and faadameatal frs®dems", the Third Comittee rosoeneads is its report (AZ45/758} tie •doptica of fear draft r«solistio®s, is paragraph 21, and a draft decision, Sy paragraph 22.
Hadar item >5, entitled "36ew istaraatiomal hassei, sriaas order", the Third Ceamiet, nwvirfa is paragraph 12 of its report the adaption of three draft resolstioms«,
Hadar item <M, entitled "Policies asd progresas,imvolviag yowth", the Third Committee rsecamsads is paragraph 7 of its report (JU45Z752> the adoption of a draft remalstic®.
Mar item 87, entitled "laoJemeatatio® of the Caovestio® os the Kights of th, AIM“, the Third Committee recsasmsds is paragraph 7 of its report (A/45Z753) the adoptio® of a draft resolntiom.
Seder item M, ©,titled "X®pleme®tatioai of the Programe, of Actio® for th, Secwsd Decmio to Combat Stacis, sad Social Biseriatisatioa", eh, Third Cemeitt«« reeawiadi. la paragraph 10 of it, report <A/W754) the atioptio® of a draft resolstioa-
Oader item «, «,titled "&,stic® of agiag", th, Third Ccamdtt, recoaneads is paragraph 1, «£ it, report (1Z4S/755) th, adaption of a draft resolstio®.
Hader item 108, «stifled "Crias, pcewstioe and criminal jostice", the Third Committee xweosmeseds is it, report (A/45Z7S4> the adoption of 17 draft resolstioes, is paragraph 51, and cm, draft dtcisio®, is paragraph 52.
Heder item 181, estitied "Blistssati©® of all form, ©f dsserfseisaei©® against wwwm", th,Third Casmietme reccmmmad, is paragraph 1 of its report (A/45/75?) the adepeioa of a draft resolstic®.
(ädOEaJBKSSßSlL MeObìS&k)
d,r Item £@2, entitled ”Fors®rd—loekisg’ strategie, for the advaaccraest of ,cm, to the yeas- 2800”, the Third Conmitt, seccaaMatSs is paragraph 20 of its report CA/45/758J the adoption of five draft rssoletioss.
Osder ita, 1®3, entitled “Thportssc, of the csiverssl realisation of the ribt of people, to self-deterasisatio® and of the speedy grastisg of iadcpesdeaee to colossei coestries assi people, foe th, effective gearaste, sad observasc, of ìm, rights'", the Third Conraitte, recoeaeads, is paragraph IS of its report <A/45/759> the adoption of three draft resolutions -
Seder it«, 104, entitled “leteraatioaal Year- of the Family”, the Third Ccaatótte, recoeeeads, ia paragraph 15 of its report (1/45/750) the adoption of two «Srsft resolutions.
Uader item 105, entitled "lotematioraal Covenants on hessa® rights”, the Third Ctoassitt, reccweeads, la paragraph 8 of its. report (À/45/761), the adoption of a draft resolatio®.	-
Order itera 105, entitled Tliraisation ©f all fori«,of religions ietoleraace”, the Third Cennitte,recowaeads, ia paragraph ? of it, report (1/45/762) the adepti©® of a draft resoloti©,-
®«der itera 107, emtftied "Office of the Qaited Katies.-, High CeraKissioaer for Befegee®", the Third Cerasti tree resoaeesads, 1, paragraph IS of it, report <34/45/763J the adoption of five draft resolutions.
Fiaally, cader ite, 100, entitled Tortsre asd other crwl, idsemss or degradi,} traatseat or psaishneet”, the Third Cesatiti, reccaaraesds is paragraph 22 of Its report (A/45/765) the adoption of three draft reso Inti ©a«,
Before comsitsdisgr, say I take this epportesity to thank all ray colleagues a,a&,rs of th, Third Ccsmittee for their active i®wolwa«st I, a, well as their
(fe_Bg-£tcs, tKnm.
'	Wr4 Cwtttw)
sabstrastiv, e@®trib®tio® to. Si, wck e£ ti, Comtówte- Xhere is so dovbt that the iasproved tose ©f tb, debate iras das to che spirit of co—operario® asad coseilittice they ©rasisteetly displaced. X ais, wish to pay a tribate to tk, Chairares, Astibaasador Anre Seasavia rad the two Wice-Chaisae®. jes. j. c. Coraba amé
Miss Chigo Zindaga, for chair raitirisg efforts is steering the work of th, ecamitt, towards a ««ecessfel coeelssioa. Lastly, ay thesis go to the «osiers of the Secretariat for all their assistasee rad support, partiewlarly ia the preparatic® of these reports.
2SaU
¿-¿•’■•TI’jiP
If there is so proposal rader cele SS off the rales of
procedere, X shall tale it that, the Gaserai Assembly decides sot to disccss the reports of the Third Coareittee which are before the Assembly today.
The WWW; Statrawsts will therefore be limited to esplasatioes of wot,. The positions of delegati©®# resdiag th, various reccsraeeiatiotts of the Third Caweittee have bee® sede clear i® the Crawittra and are reflected is th, relevas«: official records.
X reeisd aoKbers that, rader paragraph 7 off decisi©, 34/401, the Gaserai Assmhly agreed that
"Waea th, sa®, dr reseXati«® is considered is a Wie Cesarti tte rad is yleastry asetlag, a delegati©® should, ra far as possible, «spiai, its vote c®ly one, that is, either la th, Ceowitte, or ia plesasy sMsetiag, raleas that delegati©®’,v®t, is ylrassy aeetiag is different fro® its vote ia the
Canari ttee.“,
I restiad delegati,, that, also, ia aceordrac, with General Assent ly decisi©, 34/401, espirasti,®,off -~V5- ss, limited t© 10 ,¿metes rad should be made by delegati©®,festa their - ■. t-
V45V.$3 1,
fefor® vb begin, to take actio® o® th, rceomnexdstioats in the reports off the Third ©aenitt,, I have to advise representatives that w, shall proceed with th, voting is. th, sane masaer as is the Third Camlet,. This emus that «here recorded or separate rotas wet® takes, w will ds the sen®.
I hop# that w nay proceed to adapt withoct a vote the®, reccBaMadatiocs that were adopted withect a vote is. the Third Cammittee, «ales, off coarse delegations has, already notified the Secretariat to the contrary.
She Assembly will tnm first to the report off th, Third Chamittee (A/45/7«) o® agenda its® SI, «,titled "Adver®,©oeaseqsesees for th, essjoyosest off bests® rights off political, military, ecerataie and other fora«, of assistaEC, gives to th, racist asd colonialist regi®, of Soeth Africa'“.
Th, Assembly will ¡sow take a declsica o® th, draft resol®ti«® reccemesided by th, Third Ccenittee is paragraph 9 off its report.
X recorded vote has been reqeested.
A-asaasÈKlJBmL,
laJtoax; Afghanistan, Alania, Algeria, Aagola, Astiosa aad Barbed, Arg«®tisa, Sada®,, Bahrain, Bwsgladesh, Barhado®, 3elis, Seni,. States, Bolivia, Botswasa, Brasil, 3r®s,i Sarsssalaas, Wrkia, r,so, Borwadi, Byelorussia®! Soviet Socialist aepehlic, Cmeroo, Cape V«rd, Castrai Africa, Bepeblic, Chad, Chile, China. Cblcebia, Comoros, Coego, Costa Uca, Cote d’Ivoire,- Caba. Cypres, ©jibowti, Doaiaic®, Doatixicas Bspeblic, Eeasador, «arac, d Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabo®, Gambia, Ghaoa, Geateaala, Geis,, Gainea-aiss«®, Gcyasa. Saiti, Sosdotros, India, TaSocesia« Ira® (Islamic ,«pablic of>, Iraq, Jasaica, Jardam, Stay, Staait. Lao People’s ©asocratic Xcpoblic, Lehane®, Lesotho, Libya® Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Miserie®,!, Ms®riti«s, .Mexico, Stoppila, Marocco, Maeasdsiqe, sdamar. Namibia, sepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Bigeria, Casass. Balista, Page, ®tv Geis,, Paraguay, Pers, Philippi«,®, ©star, hMeada. Saint Kitts aad Bevis, Saint Cecia, Saint Vincent and th, Greaadises, Samsa, Smodi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leo®, Singapore, Soloeoa Islam,, Scasali, Sri Lasha, Seda®, Scria«,, Swaxilaad, Syrias Arab Bapeblic, Thailaad. Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, ©gwoda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist aepeblic, Gaio,off Soviet Socialist Bepehlics, Waited Arab ©airates, Halted Bepablic off Tassasti,. Orwgxay, VameatB, Teaesaeia. Vice Saw, Ttaea, Tegoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe
ÄZ45ZFT.O
28
i®Sa®t, Selgim, Fruce, Gerrasy, Italy, &traae£M3«rg, Bet&8rl,ad?, Forteal, ©sited Kiagdon of ©r«®t Sritaiat aged. Morttoers Ireland, ©sited Stat«® of leterlca	,
®8S£siBia8s Australia, Austria, Belgsuria, Caaada, CseeSscelovatia, ©esnark, Fialasd, ©rates, Keagary, Xeelaad, Ireland, Israel, Jago, Uacftta&stala, Malta, Xw Zealand, SorwiBy, Folaad, Scwaatia, Syais, Swedes, Ttriay
aUBiLKKlitto, m ite«4 rn T9tw	aatim
CresolvtiQa 45/S4>.«	,
2tt_JfflSJ3SRi Skis eo®cl«d«5 ear eo®a£d,r®tloe ©I agasda Itos IS.
• Sab,saastly, tie delegation ©f Pa&ana advised tbe Secretariat that it bad ¿eturäed to vote 1st favour.
Ä/45/W.5«
21
Wta-£E££i&S£>
IS, towbly will aw consider the report o£ the Ihird Gewsittoe os agenda itea 88, entitled Effective ispl«ne®tati«a ©£ the Qaited Xatioes iostswests on beaaas rights «ad effective ,.«aetioei,g of bodies «.«ablished permsst to ,sc& iastrneests" (A/45/745).
Use Asseebl/ -,ill ,gw take a decisis® era the draft resolstic® recoESBoaded by the Third Ceraaittee is paragraph, © of its report. Hao Third Comittse adopted that draft resolwtio® withoet a voce. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the ma?
ffl-WlSlStSiag-JaX-JesiSii. (resolstioa 45/85).
Ura Assubly will sow taxa to the report of the Third CoBsaitte® era agenda rt«a 5®, entitled “Wrld social sitsatio®- (W«n<5). She Assuhly will take a decisis,era the two draft resolaticras reccHraeadad by the Third Coanittee is paragraph 14 of its report.
©raft sesolwtic® I, entitled “XchieveMesst of social jestiee", was adopted by the Third Ccwaittee without a vote. May X take it that the General Asseefoly wishes to do the s,aa?
2X£&u3ialM125LJ	Cresoxstioc 45'M).
3&LJ3EHSS3EI2 Dr,aft resolatioo. II is ««titled "World social sitssatic®“. A recorded vote has bees regsested-
A/4SZPV.M
22
iJssaxMjsSäuaaJatea.
ISUÍJGBMSS
,22? M,Miw, Mali, Malta, Masritaaia, Kaeritias, Mexico,
Sepeblic. Oaioa ©£ Soviet Socialist B,$eblic, Waited Ara&
öait®d States of Anerica
ifesSaiaias:
Sart&era Ireland
gf,-0-53-
ite, 90.
V45«7.68
23
(MtSHJ)
©raft resolstio® I la entitled “Beport of the Coraittee era the Eliadrati©, of facial Dineriaiaatiae-. Draft resoletio® I ras adopted by the Third Chmittee witboat a wot,. Key I take it that the General Asseebly wishes to do the case?
BailLjasaals&iBaJLJHBa (resoletioa 45ZW-
S&&J3SSZ2S1Z: Draft resalsstica, II is eetitled “States of the latersatioraL CoraessticE. o® the Eliasisatioe of XU. Fems of Hadal Discrisdaatic®"- She Third CoMeittee adopted draft zesolotio® II witbeet a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the srae?
Sa££_xsml3£22«_n_3ai_ (rwsolstio® 4SZ®9).
JMJE22SI2ESS: Draft rraolsttioa III is entitled “Statas of the Ixteraatic®,! Ccraratio® e® the Sapprrasioa asd Psaiahsrat of the Cris® of SHmfeBiS”- & separata, recorded vote has bees regsestad o® the words “State terrorise“ is the fifth preaBbslar paragraph, o® the sixth preaabolar paragraph, and «a operative paragraphs S rad 3 of draft resoletic® III. I# there ray objectless to that regsest?
As there is ,see, I shall pet to the vote first the words “State terzocira“ is the fifth yrerabelar paragraph.
2LJ3BHSEfltslJ5B3L3®l_
•iS_£13E2S£s Afgheslstra, Albania, Algeria, Angela, Axtigea. rad Barbed®, Argratisa, Bahamas. Bahraias, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bells®, Brale, ,stra, Bolivia, Botswraa, ,trail, Breaei Daressalam, Barkisa Faso, Barxadi, Craerra®, Cape Verde, Central Africa® Xepablic, Chad, ©til®, Chixa, Coloebia, Caeoros. Coego, ©aba, cyposr DJiboeti, Dcntisicra Bepehlic, Bcsador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabo®, Gaabia, Ghasa, ©eatraala, Gaisea, Gejjxa, Haiti, India, IsSoaraia, Irra (Islamic Bepeblic of), Irra, araiea, Bordas, Shsya, Bswait, bra People’s Democratic Bepthlic, Lebeau Libya® Arab Jamahiriya. Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mraritaaia, fescico, Sfo®go3is, Morocco, Mosrabigee, Myrarar, Baxihia, ,Sepal, Biger, Nigeria, Gras. Pakistan, Papsa Sew Gefaea, Pere, Philippi,®, ©star, Braade, Shiat Loda, Sradi Arabia, Sea&gal, Seychelles, Sierra Leooe, Singapore, Scmelia, Sri Larka, Sedaa, Sexiraoe, Sraxilrad, Syrian Arab Bageblic, Thailasd, logo, Eriaidad rad Tobago, Traisia. Dgrada. IMited Arab Eafratra. United Bepeblic of Ttoeraia. Hrwgray, Vraeraela, Viet Bra, Trara, Yugoslavia, Zrabia
A/4S/F7.6& ~3
¿Stisiii Belgian, Canada. Denmark. Erase, Germany, Greece, Neagery. ' Ireland, Israel, Italy, -Tapas, Laxeeboerg, Netherlands, Vortegal, Saint Kitts and Bevis, Spaia, Waited Kisg&n, ©f Great Britain amd Norther® IreXassa, Waited States ©f America
SUas? Australia, Amstri®, ,sigaria, Byelorussia® Soviet Socialist Bepcblic. Costa Bica, CSte d’Ivoire, Csechoslowaki,. Saeisica, El Salvador, Fialasd. Baaderas, Iceland. Liechteasteia, Malta, Sew Zealand, Sorwey, Paraguay, Pol,, ,¡sraaia, Saint Vincent «ad the Greaadises, Sansa, Solen©® Islands, Sued«®. Ttarkay, Wraistiffis Soviet Socialist Bepeblic, Gaien of Soviet Socialist Bsgeblies, Zaire
ss-s-£x-sa3‘s-5ix££ss;3jgs:-2t_£i s,2als2£efiUax,ExsLJEmS2S!i
3$N-£SS32S Bert 1 shell put to the vote the sixth preeabclar paragraph cf draft re®olsstioss III.
¿ujaaaEsissLjaif-vst
la_&ES2K£s Afghaaista,. Albania. Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbed®, Argeatiaa, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belise, Sesin, 3hetaa, Bolivia. Brasil, Sresei Darassalsn, Berki®, Faso, BETHSdi, Byelorussia® Soviet Socialist Bcpeblie, Camwrooe, Case Verde, Cestral Africa® Bepeblic, Chad. Chile, China, Colcabia, Conor©«, Congo, Costa Bica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cab®. Cypres, Djibouti, Dcmiaica. Dominicas Begeblie, Ecuador, Egypt. El Salvador, Ethiopia. Fiji, Gabo®, Gambia, a®®®, Guatemala. ©«Ine®. Guyana, Baiti, Nomderas. India, Indonesia, Ira® (Islamic Bepcblic of J, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya. Kmunit, Eno People's Democratic Bepeblic, ikebanas, Libya® Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali. Maeritaaii, Static®, Moagolia, Morocco. Mosamfcigue, Myanmar, Namibia. Sepal, Nicaragua, Kiger, Nigeria, Oaaa, Batista®, Faya® New Odes®, Faraguay, Fere, Philippi,, Satar, Bmtnia. Saint Kitts aid Nevis, Saint Lada. Saint Niaeect aad the Greaadises, Samoa. Saudi Arabia, Senegal Seychelles. Sierra Leone. Singapore. Soles©, Islands, Somalia, Sri Laaia. Sedas, Seriaame, ,«aailassd, Syria® Arab Nepsblie, Thailssd. Togo, Triridad asd Tfebago, “jsisia, Ugaada, Ukraisias Soviet Socialist Bepehlic, Galo® of Soviet Socialist Bepeblies, Halted Arab Emirates, Halted Zepehlic off Tanaami®, ©rageay, y«®®®,.!®, Niet Warn, Tmecs, Tegoslavi®, Zaire, Zambia, Zisibabee
asaiszls Belgie, Canada, Fraace, Gersasy, Israel, Italy, Jape®, Laxembomrg, Nfetherlaads. Fortmgal, Halted Kingdom of Greet Britain sad Northers Irelaad. Heited States of America
A/«5/W„SS
25-3®
AÉaixlas:	Asstmlia, laseri,. Sellarla, Ctactaslcvakia, Desmarl, Fisi,©«,
Grece, ,sagary, leeland, Isolana, Liechtenstein, Male, Kev Zaaland, Bomay, Feniani, Banani, Spaia, Seedm, Tsrtay
3&uj&>£L£££aaiÈx&K-2£zagx3Kii_a£_<g£
lli-JH2S®LJÈG_12,_MÌS&JULJtìMffiE
«• «•,•",■,V,-•-,•:€
Seri. I tórli p«t eo the vote operative paragraph 5 o£
draft r«®ol®tice. III.
&-J3S2IÌÌ£É_352S3L-S3£_ll
iK-SXSGSi: Afghanistan, libasi«, Algeria, Angola, A®tig«a assi Baris,, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Salir®, Sesia, Stata, Solivi, Stasali, Brussel Daressalam, Berkis, Ftoo, Bsmadi, Byelgressiaa Soviet Socialist Begoblic, Caner©«®, Cage Varò®, Castrai Africa, Bsgehlic, Chad, C&ile, Ghisa, Coloabia, .	Comoros, Campo, Costa Bica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cab, Cypres,
Djibouti, Bohinica, Dcmiaieaa Segabile, Eosador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gelso, Gasbia, Stasa, Gsatanala, Guise«, Gsyana, Baiti, Koaderes, India, Indonesia, Ira, Cibimele Bagsblie ©£J, Iraq, ¿antica, ¿orda, Easy®, Kronit, Imo People’s Democratic Espeblie, ¿ebano, Libya, Arab ¿,ahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, MuEritasia, Mexico, Stoogoli, Marocco, Maxasbiga®, Myamar, Katsibia, Segai, Xicaragaa, Kiger, Sigari, Gea®, Fakist,, Pag®, Sew Gela®, Parwacy, Pere, Shilappines, ©star, Bussai, Saint. Kitts «ad Savia. ?st Leda, Salse Viaeemt enei thè Gres,dzj,s, Sane, Saedi Arjefti®, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra leene, Singapore, Solca, IslS Sanali, Sri Lanka, Seda, Seri,,, Seesil. ad, «pria, Arab tagehlic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad astd Tobago, Tasisia, ©gasala, ©traini, Soviet Socialist taglile, Wio, of Soviet Socialist Eegsblies, Belted Arab Bnirstes, Belted Bepidklie of Texani, Srng«,y, anssmela, Viet Bau, Iene®, Tsgcelavi®, Zaire, Zatsbia, Ziababwe
àSa&El£= Belgium, Canada, Frase®, Germassy, Italy, Esenbovrg, Kettarlasds, ortangal, «Mited KiagSt, ©£ Great Britain and Borthem Ireland, United States of Aawric,
&&&A&gise: Australia, Ansatela, Kslgaria, Cxaefecslorakia, ©earner, Finland, Greece, ,angary, Icelaed, Ireland, Israel, ¿ages, ¿esatta, Liechtenstein, Malta, Kev Zealand, Homey, Poland, Basasi®, Spain, Sande, T®r ley
fim&£Ì2Buao6i,iL&Oìa££_x«iials£isaoXLjs®a
2Z_jfca£®a£issa-,
, ■rnbs,g,estly the delegations of Pana, sad Baaeam advised the Secretariat
that ebay had isteaded to vote in favoer-
A/45r.it
31
SMLiSSSEBSEs Scat I shall gat to tta vota operative paragraph 8 ©f er&ft. se#ta®ti©, Ui, ©a vfeieh a segarne®. reconata vota tec# boas rvgwstta-¿Lj&sSe&JESS&J
iZ—iansaxs	Afjgfeaalstaa. Albani®, Algeria«. Aagol®, Asti®«® ,ta Bartad®,
togeafciaa,Bataans, Bahrai®. Bangladesh. Barbados. Salix, Beai®. Stats®, Bolivia. Sots,«,®. Basali. Stasai Baraxsalav, tarila® Sta, taraaaSi, CMBerooa. Caga tarde. Castrai Africa® taglile. CtaS, Chi!®, C&iaa. Coloabia. Ccnorc®, Cenge, Costa ,le,C6ta d'Xvoxr®, Cab®. Qjns, Djitasti, Sta&alc®. Bos&tica® taglile. Icvador, Egypt, ¡£1 Salvador, Ethiopia. Fiji. Gabov. Gnia. Ghaaa. tastatala. Gelata. Gso®. Baiti, Moadesas. lodi®. Xa&wnsi,. irta flslatac Segabile of}. Ira®, «tanica. Jota®®, taa, Banale. tao Frogia', tatacratic Segabile, tabavo®, tavothe, Elbya® Arab Jaaahiriy®, Madagascar. Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, taerlttaia. Maxico, Mongoli®, tarocco, taxastbigee, My«v®r. taRibi®, Magai, Mlearaga®. Kiger, Sigari®. Gas®, Fabistta, Saga® Bev talee®. Baragsay, Bar®, Fatillppiae®, ©atta. Banta®, Salta Bitts sad Bevi®, Salta taci®. Salta Fiatata ata thè Crestaia,«. Sano®. Saradi Arabi,. Setacei, Seychelles, Starr® leene, Stagagor®, Solevo® Islavds, Sonali®. Srl tasta. Stasai. Svrtaam, Swtaitaad. Syria® Arab tagtalie. Stallata. Togo. TriaitaS sta Tobago, Taxista, ghetta. Sdraiata® Soviet Soetaitat Segabile.
■Bata® ©f Soviet Socialist Bageblics, Qeitta Arab ,irta,®. Gvitta Segabile of Ttasaata. Stag®ay. «aventta, Ttat Kb, leave.
Tagewtavta. Zaire, Zuabta, Statata,
e3a:	Belata®, Bevsark, Frase,. GetMay, Gtaece, Ireland, Italy, tag«®,
tasaatasr®, tattarlsata, ¡Portagai, Spai®. United Xtag&n of Great Britaias ata tarttara Iretata, taitta States ©f Aavrica
BSdial: Aestralta, Aasstrta, Bvlgarta. Casta®, CaectaalowaSti,. Fialata, Beary. Icelata, Israel. Meefctaestai®, Malt®. Kev Zealata, Moreey, Folata, Bcnaasi®, Seta«®, Turkey
8$OGiaS&-l_££_££ÈÌI_21tóffla_JJI_3iMUEm
IZ-JEtemiS®!-,	—-———,	r.™
Ä/<&fW.«
32
SlÄ-£EE£lEHK, X aw pst to the vote draft resolution III. as a whole.
A recorded vote has bees regwmsted-
JLXBffiaSSStjmfcJEKJU
IsUkcasE: Afghanistan. Albania. Algeria. Angola. Astigea sad Bashed,. Argentina. Bahama,. Bahrain. Bangladesh. Barbados- Saline. Benia. Bteta®. Bolivia. Botswana, Brasil. Bmaei ©amsaalaa, Bex kina Faso. Bemndi. Byelom,iaa Soviet Socialist Bepablic. Caneceo,. Cape Verde, Central African Bepeblie, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia. Comoro«, Congo. Costa lisa, C&te d,Ivoire, Caba, Cypres. Djibouti. Dowtiaiea, Boninica, Bepeblic, Keaadar,. Egypt. H Salvador, Ethiopia. Fiji. Gabon, Gambia, Ghana. Geatanal,. Geinna. teinea-Siasam. Goyana- Haiti. Banderas. India. Indonesia. Iran (Islsnie Bepeblic of). Iraq, Jamaica. Jordan- Keaya, Sswait, Lao People, Oenoeraitic SBepnblic. Lehane®. Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya- Maiers. Malaysia, Maldives. Mali, MmBritaai,. Mneritias. Mexico, Mongolia. Morocco. Masaabigae. MyaaBear, Kanibia, Sepal. Kicaragna. Mger. Bigeria, ©mm, Pakistan, Tapaa Bee Guinea. Parngaay, Bem, Philippine,. Qatar, Kneads, Saint Kitts and Bevis, Saint 'facia. Saint Vineeat and the Grenadines. Samoa. Saadi. Arabia. Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Lec©. Singapore. Solomon Islands. Somalia. Sri tanka, Sedan. Sarina,. Snaatilaesd, Syrian Arab Bepeblie. Ubailtad. Togo. Trinidad and Tobago. Tunisia, Uganda. Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Beyeblic. ©alas of Soviet Socialist Sepablic,. ©jilted Arab Bnlratea. ©sited Bepablic of Tanaami,. ©regmay, Vaamatss,Venesnela. Viet Kam. lense- Tegoalavia. Zaire. Zaobia. Zisbabwe
SfiBiOSS:	Chitad States of America
¡aXAiaisg: Australia. Austria. 'BelgimB, Bulgaria. Canada. C®eche«l©wakia, Seanark. Finland- France, Germany, Greece, ©salary, Iceland, Ireland. Israel, Italy, Japes. Uechteasteia. tsxenbomrg, Malta, ,etherlaeds, Bev Zealand. Korney. Poland. Portugal, Bonsai,. Spain. Soedas. Turkey, ©sited Kingdom of Great Britain and Korttera Ireland
8SSuJ3GKlLE£i2aOJLLi_-Al_JLJ&elXi-J
Md&GBHSlfltt (resoletiom 45/9©),
5$2J3EES8EE£s I call on the representative of Botswana, who wis,®s to explain her vote.	“
, Sebsegwemtly the delegation of Panama advised the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favew.
A/45/W.8«
33
kJEyJ (leesMtta): llthosgh Setsasasa woe,ä 5® £aw«r of draft
raadatio, III i® 4®: um lit A/45/742 w, ar® eoagsllod to rasar®, oír jsoitioe o, the ,&£& prsM&dar joragragh and. os oberati®, paragraph. 5.
SÄJ
’, W lave eoadwäd ©,r consideratio, ©f agenda ita, 91.
TW Aasoobly will «sw eoasidsr th, reject of th, Stir, Ctaoaittao U/45/748) ©, agnia ics, 92, «stiel,“Zajlanratatio, d eh, «scia ffrojm, cf Astio, coaceraiag ©iahte!,# 9,rso,ts «ad th, Wita,Batians Soead, of MwhW Sarao,“.
IW Issonhly will aow taW a dccisie, o, eh® draft ratsolatia, rocsanMadad Jjy tW Third Canaleta, i, gnxagsrajh 8 ©f its rajare.
3W Third Cansite, adopted th, draft, toádsele, withe,®. a wot,. My i take it that th, Gosorai Waaphly wishes to do th, saw?
SML.&a&B,fil	Cr«ad,eioa 45/91).
SÄÄEEEÖHEß1 That toadas, ©or ©oaoldsrotiea of «aovada ita, 91.
Seat w tar, to the rsgoet ©f th, Third Ctamitr, (h/45/749) o, agrada ita, M. ®®titl,ß “Om, rights «si seioseific ani toctadogieal dowlcjMts--
TW WMMhlj Wa to taka a «seisios o, th, fosse draft reodsticns r,eowi,ds« hy th, Third CMRittae 1, paragraph > ©,it, rayset.
©raft esodati, x is «atield “itema rights nd reiracific and tachaolcgieai <whl,f«,«W. Th, Third Cernite,adoytd draft esodati, S withowt , we,. Kay I tab, it that th, €,8«,1 h,o«a&iy wishes to do ths s«b,T
0&«£Safi2sSSftJLjaL	Cr,ol®tio, 45/92J.
JMJ
t? Craft, rosdeeiott XI is also ontitlsd “©■■, rights and
sdstttifie a,£ t«cW©2®cd devslognrats“. Th, Third CWnitt,adojtsd draft rasolstis,II wieWst , we,. May I taW it that th, AsooÄly daw, to <5® eh, sand
$KS££UKttita%JS_ Creodati«, 45/93).
1/45/FV.SB 34-35
SìftJSHBESSBEi W tra, aow to dralt risolasti«, in, ,atiti®d ""Seed to «s«<rr, a tealtoy towitoanaat «or to, w,ll-teiag ©f iadiwidaal,-. Ite toird CB,i«ee adeytod dx,ft traeteti«,XII without a vota. M I tai, it that to® tearaMy wishes to do to, trae?
Bratt Fraaiwtfa® irr wra «atod Csraotetio,454)
Sis.

lastly, to,Assrafely win tate , decisi«,©s draft:
totolwda® IV, ratitted "Gsid®lis®s fw toe regnlatiw. ©I ccagwtraised prases,! difca «ila,, toito to,X&itd Coneittee adopted witoowt a wote. May I tala it teat to® testebly wiatea to do toe ran,?
graffe ro8gi#ta IV  <flmtf (r«®e,lwtioe 45/95)
UftJSEäBKßs te tea, coecladed ora coraidesatio® ol agalla ito, 93.
Ä® AsMtoly will so,tra, to toe saport ef to, Iixd Ctonitto, (A/45/75&) «a agenda ito® M< «etitlad "Altratotito «gtoatoas assi ways «®d saara witoia to® BttiSad Bstftos ayatto «oc ipcowiaig toa effectiw «sJoyswaBt of Shmtcb rigato «ad <®sda««tal frwediMe'”.
SS, Araetoly &as ècfor® it fora dxaft rasolwtioto rad oa, drait deciaio«.
Sha Jk®ss®,fely will aew tal® a damisi®® e, tìtee Issar draf t rosolasti.©«® rec®B«®d,d By to, Sfeixd Cernito®, ia yraagrafte 21 ©f ito «post.
A/45/W.éa 3€
<SÌ£-££SaÌ!taÈ£>
Draft r««olstioa I as «,titled “Altemativ® approaches and waj ■ and areas# withi® the Steited Satie®,system for iepewiag the effiectiv, «sajaysrest of heara® rights and ffresdanostal freeze««“.
A recorded vote has been regsrested-
A-ia££xiM-3Si23L
JaJTSaxs Afghanistan. Algeria. Asgola, Astigsa and Barbs&a. Argentina,
Sishaeres, «sforai,. Bangladesh. Barbados, «elise. Sesia, ,seta®. Olivia, Sotsreaaa, Brasil. Brasei Darressal, Bearti, FA«©, JBsraadi. losrsssiaa. Soviet Socialist Bepehlic, Caserocffi. ©ape Wrd®, Central lirica, Beyohlic, Chad. Osile. China, Cslcssbia. CaBoros. Crago, Costa Rica. Còte d’Xroire. Csba. Cprcs, Djibasti. Daeinlca, Dore-iaicara Bapsblic, Ecuador. Bgypt, E1 Salvador. Khiopì,. Fijl, Gsbo®. Cambia, Ghana, Gnatasal,. Saiaea. Gainea-aissae. ©avara, Siiti, Boaderais, India, Isdoeesia, Iraa (Islamie Beptanlic ofj, Iraq, Jaeaie, Jordan, «_jya, Sswait, £ao Peonie’, Democratic «egeblic, Sebacea, tesotbo, Uby, Arah Jaeahiriya, Madagascar, «sisari. Malaysia, Malves, Mali. SCareritasaia. M riti®,. Mexico. Mongolia. Marocco. Msxambigare. raswar, Bsnihsa. Bepal, £«w Zoalamd, ffiieamg, «iger, Sigari, tea®. Pakistan, Pape, Bere ©seìsmi Parogtasy, Pera, Fkilippises, Qatar, Baosda. Saint Kitts and Wevis, Saint ineia. Saint Bincmat asd «he Gresadiaas, Samoa, Saedi Arabia, Senegal. Seychelles. Sierra leoae, Singapore, Solano® lalaad, Somalia. Sri SasSa, Seda, Scritta«®, Seasilaod, Syria, Arah Repeblic, Thailasd. Tega, Trinidad asd Toboga, Statisi, ©gasda. Ukraiaia® Soviet Socialisti lepeblie, itelo® off Soviet Soeialist «epeblies, Daited Arah Sniratas, Qaited Sepehlie o£ TesstaBEia, Uregoay, Estareat®, Rteserasela. Viet Kam. Iene,. Yegoslevia, Zaire, Zaaòia. Zishabwe
IfiffilSSEts ,sited States off America
ààSS3ÀS13Qi Australia,Assstria. Belgi!, Steigerns, Cssada, ©,icasoslovaki,.
©cascar,-, Fielasd. Fraate, Gesnasr, Greece, H®,gaxy. Iceland, Ireland. Israel. Italy, .lap«®, Kiechteastein, lassenhooirg, Malta. Stetherlands, Soroay. Poland. Fortogal, Sostatala, Spaia, Swedes, Ttarkey, Ifeited Xisg&s, off Great tritala asd Sörther, Ireland
&Of£-2,SK!,S£iaSLXJ2ai_Jfi£2££ff£JaL
fresoletio® 45/9SK,
, Sebsagaeetly the delegation of PeEWta advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favorer.
ÄZ45ZPV.O
3?
2&£jE2SSX££EK, MS tostai soar to draft resol «tic, II, «©titled ""Sight to
develogeest".
She Third COaeittee adopted this draft resolwti©,vithovt a vote. Stay I taha it that the Gessexal hsscs&ly wishes to do the saw?
2ll£&-J3£®&S£jB_II_’!l (resolotic® 4Sm>.
S&fJ
©raft resolwtioa III is entitled “Tespect for the rietet
of «very©«® to owes property ?,3©ee as well as is asssociatio® with others aed its ©oetriheti«® to the e«csE©«ie aed social developeeet of MMber States'".
Ihe 'Shard Ceemittee adopted this draft resolatico wieheet a vote. May I tale it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
ES3iSLJS-$22s£ie5LJI	(resolwtifiMS. «5/W-
I_iI2®S= ©raft resoletie,IV is entitled "ISevelogeest of patire
iatforaatioa activities is the field of heneas rights’,.
She Third Cesaeittee adopted this draft resolBtio® withoot a vote. Mt? I tai, it that the Assembly wishes co do the sanse?
2flí3LI32als&Í<	(rosolati©,4S/99).
3S«J
The Asseahly will sow tale a decisi©® ee the draft
dacisioc reconmeeded hy the Third CaaBiittee la paragraph 22 of its report
(AZ45Z75e>.
The Third Ccsnaietce adopted the draft det sloe. Mey I tai, fit that the Isseebly wishes to do likewise?
ISatoSsuteiJEi
XbfcJSSSISES? I call cm the representative of the «sited States of
Aeerica, who wishes to expíala, his positions after the vote.
JiiXJSswSSSSi («sited States of Aeericajs For th, reasons w&ich ay
delegati©,stated ia the Third Ccmsaitt®® oa 23 XOveaher, th, United States did sot participate is the Ceserai AssendOy's adepti«, of draft resolwcie® II, ««titled
Äu>-63ZW.fi« 3«
öiuÄlteJSMas)
,ig,e to develogeeat,. Fertoer, w cesletely disassociato ©«rselves fire® Zhis
«CtiO,.
!«i,tV
tost ©oscltoes oof «assiderati©,©4 aspada ito® 94.
$&• Assaehly will sow tora it# attesstio® to arcada its® #5, «,titled "Bev
iateraatiosai toe,®! tarla,arder“.
2&e toseafcily wül asar tato deeisioes ce toe toree draft resoletS©«« recc®Be®aed iy toe toito Caenlttoe i, peragragfe 12 ©£ its regort (A/45/751J.
©rafe r®scsl®tio®. I, eetitled “8taeeei.tori.ea assistaace to vietias ©£ totoral ditoítors ato atollar energesey sitoati«®,'”, to, adopto by toe toito CcraB'ittoe witooet a tote. May 1 eossiátr toat toe Gestera! Isseably vistos to tooyt it alto?
&2&Sfi£13£&aiJL Cresoltoie® 45/l&9>.
. 2M-E32aES£SlEXs ©raft resoletioo IX i, eatitlto “toe totersattoeal toaatotaria® ©toer“. It tos tootto by toe latirá Coneictoe witooet a tote- iüy I teto it toat toe Asseably Misto# to do toe asase?
SKBÍSLXllsZjtó	Cresolstioa 43/101).
SMLJESgSSSiSSZs ©rafe re®©l«ti«® XIX i# etoitlto Treeotio, ©f iatoraatioeal eo-©f,ratioa i, toe bmáeitorias field“ aa& to, adofted >y toe Ikicd CfflMfcittee wittaQet a vote. Jüy X tais, ít toat the A&eee&ly vitotee to do tibe eaee?
2£lí!LJ,SEijbtóSSLJnXja	Creeeletioa 4SZ1&2).
> Ke .base toas toadeded oer eossideraticMB ©f arcada ito, 95.
¡¿■¿■«í !<-,:'/■
SSe tara ,est to toe repact (A/4SZ7S2) ©£ toe tolto Cotoittoe ©e egetoa ito, 95, eatitled “Tollcle# sto georame, iswoliriwj yoetb,.
too lasM&ly vili bow cato a ¿tecistoe ©® toe draXt resoletioe reoosnetaded Èy toa tolto. Cannittoe 1, jrrag-rate 7 ©f ita reyrt.
ms/re.&s
39
au ta£t «Sölstiw ws adoytod by tto Tfcird Ccswittoe wittoat % veto. May X tato 3t tast tto toseral tosewbly wisto® to do tto ja,?	.
Tto draf t gesolatioa was asetad (rwsoletic® 45/103).
a, MBIJWff.t Ito Ässaafoly tos ttos eo®el®d«d its cosriderariGa ©£ agead® Ito,9$.
Tto tosaably will aow ceaaidar tto reyert <1/45/753 $ of tto tisird Ccsatitto, ö® •gwd® 3ton 97«, «¡adrled “Xssgloasstoeioa ©f tto Cooveatio, so Eto Bigots of tto Child’.
Ito tosaably will sow tato a -decisi©© ©e tto draft resolstisa eecoeimeaded by tto Stira Ctoaitto® i, yaxagrajb 7 of Its ¡rayere.
Ito Third CsaotiEto, adcytod tto draft rendati©® wittoto a veto- toy X tato it ttot tto Gtoaral tosenbly vistos to do Eto sane?
XìaLJO&LJ£22£&2&-!S£-2 (rasatoti©© 45/104).
-,4j4]
to torn tto, coedwSed ocr co®sider®éi©a of ,geoda
Ito, 97.
Ito tosaably will sow ©acsidar tto reject (1/45/754) of Eto Third Ctoaittee ce agasada iton 9®, antitlsd “'Xsyleweatotio® of tto Fregara«, of Actio© for tto Seeood Becada to Castor toda® sad lacia! Oíscrtotoati©®'".
Tto totoably will ,©w tato a decisis© o® tto draft rasototio® .raeoanaaded by tto Third Cenftittoe to yaragragb 10 of Its rayere.
Tto draft r«sol®tio®. «atletod “Sscood Becada to Castor Stacis, aad toetol BtocrtotoafetocT, was adoytod by tto Third CtoKittoa wf ttoet a vote, toy I co®sider ttot tto Gaaaral tosatoly wishes to do litovtoa?
3a_toí£adí£ji	(resolwttoa 45/165).
IM-
,,?M?¿,x®
I call a® tto reyr®s,®tatiw® of tto United Stores, uto
«datos to egea!: I, «jtylax&tlßc of voto aitar tto veto.
A/45/Fr.M «O
KtftJK&&2SSg!, (United Stat,off America) : For th, reese®,wfeich ay delegati©© stated Is th, Third ©amitt, ©, 2 Kswaaber the United Stat«, did act paztieipae® is th, General Axs«W, adsgtioa of th, draft re,©lwtio® «fettled “Secesd Decade to ©cebae .Saeima and Social Diserimiaati©®"“.
Umu

That coeclades c©E,ià,ratIoa off ageada Ite, 9®.
M, sow sow,to cosasideratioa of the report (A/45/755) of gh© JM,d Camnitte, cm agenda item ,. ««titled “Osestioa. off aging,.
Iba Aaamtòly will war tal® a decisi©, ,; draft resolution recommended by th, Third ©s«nitt®e is paragraph 11 ©f it, report.
Th, draft reaolatle, ««titled “Impleaesfeatica ©f the Estorcati©®,! Pl, off Actio© os Aging asd Belated Attiviti««-, wn adopted by theThird Cbmeitte,without , vota. May i take it that the General Assembly wish®, t© do the awe?
3S®,ilE3£jLJ322lsSj£gLLJKJ2BS (resolatio, 4 57105}.
3,J®SB2SZs That eoeded,«: eocalchratio, off agsad, item ,.
V45nff.O
41
W sew proceed to agenda item ISO, "Criss® preveœtiœ «ad criminal justice“.
Th, Ceserai Assembly has before it 17 draft resblati. recœmesded by the Third Ccemittee in paragraph SI of £: ,
I call css the representative of India, who wishes , ; vote before the vote.
1 draft decisioss sns«}.
’ "wplaaati©®. of
JfiUJSBEa (India!s Math reference to the report of the Third Ccawittee (1Z4SZJ55) cm crie, pcwaatica and criminal jsstic, specifically paragraphs 27, 28, 31 and 33, my delegation ,weld lib, to recall that we ,ade a siegle stateswat is «spianati«, of vote is respect of draft. .iWäl,ti«s, X to XIII, recoswended for adopt!®, by the Gemerai Assembly at the Eig&th Edited Satiass Congress os the Frewemtion of Crime and the Tteatawsst of Offeadssrs.
Seft .MMPflfXî Sb, Assembly will mow take actio, o® the 17 draft rosolati©«, zeccmmeaded by th, Third Cornaitt®e iu paragraph 51 ©f its report (1/45/734). Th, report by the fifth Ccanàtte, cm the programme badget iaplicatiocs of draft ress-feticBts I, II, iv, yj. IX to XIII and X7 is ©aœtaised is docroeat A/45/MS.
Draft rosolati©® I is ©,titled "“Istematio®®! co-operatio© for cria, predenti«® and criminal justice in the cemteact of derolcjmest-. It was adopted by th, Third Conaittee wiehoet a vote. Mey I tab, it that the General Assembly too wish,# to adept the draft re®ol®tio®7
Draft rwolytiw I W5 ajftjl (resolsrtiosa 45/107J.
ÎMJf3S£Î2ESs Draft resolstfo® II is ®@tlU®d "Review of the fcaetieming amd program, of work of the Eteited Esta©,# in crin, prerestio® and criminal justice“. Th, draft «esoleti©® mas adapted by th, Third Coemittee without a wot,. Kay I tab, it that the Sanerai Assembly too wishes t© adopt the draft resolwticca?
12O&-£®ials&ifi&JUL_3ai_jfeg£s (resolati©® 45/10® J ,
1/45/7V.58
WL
1 Bratt resolatie® HI is ««titled ”Ct«psterisatioe «f
erteteal Sesti«’. Ite Third <tt,adopts tte draft r wte. Mar I tal, it ttet tte Gaserai tesetely «lates to d© tte ««?
tft......MSlMiifiS TU wtl adopted (resolatioe 4S/1B9J.
IM_E
- teaft resotelo® TV 1,««titled -Waited tetiees Standard
Miai«, «ales for 35o®-«stodial teaseres (ite ToSo tele«)", ite draft r®,ol®tioe «ss adopted 25- tte Third Camitte, «itiM a «te. tey I tate it ttet tte Ge«r,l
testebly also wistes to adept it?
Saft rmteios iy w adopted (resoiatio, <5zue).
3SeJ
 Braft rosolati©,▼ is ««titled “Sasic prieciptes for tte
treataatóst of prisessers“. ite draft resoteti, «ss adopted by tte n?nt Cswdtte® watteet a vote. tey I tate it that tte General tescably too «dates to adapt tte
draft resolatioa?
XlS-TtiiliaS-	(«eoteti©,45/1113.
2S«_E33SI2ESI: ©raft reeotettea VI is «,titled Tteited tetioee
Geidel tees for ‘tte Prevsteioe of Jarwesile ©aliaaeney (Tte liyadb Geideltees)". Ite Itera Coatette, adopted tte draft reeotette® «dtteet a sots, tey x tate it that tte Gaserai tesenbly testes to do tte sate?
Sà«J
:s ©raft resolattes VII is ««titled "Waited Katioes teles
for tte Froteetioe of ciseailes Dspriwd of tteir Liberty,. Tte draft resoletioe «ex adopted, hy tte Third Comittee tettewt a we, tey I tate it that tte Gsaeral teseably to© wishes to adopt it?
Pull r,MiM ILw adopted (resoletioe 45/1133.
A/45/P7.M
43
SfiJKSESK: ©raft molatit, Vin Is entitled “©onestic viole,©,'
She draft rsaolwtioa was adapted by ths Third Ceasittse without a wot®. Kay I tabs it that th, General Asseafely also wash, to adept. ths draft rssölatieaET
¡&afiLnalsaJailjffiia_ Cresci«,!«© «sm«}
fs Draft re&olstioe IX is «,titled -Xsstrwseetal css of
ehlldrasE la crieisal activities". Th© Third Ceetóttee adopted ths draft rssolstioa without a wots- Kay X tai, it that theGeneral Assembly wish©# to do thesans?
EZSXSXf$alxXlS3L	{readable, 45/115).
ZioUESSSSSSEb ©raft resolatie, X is ««titled -Medel Treaty era
Istraditi«,-. The draft resolwtioa vss adopted by the Third CcMKitbee without a vote. May X tabs it that ehe General Assss&ly to© wishes to adopt the draft rasolwtios?
&&££_JQEEllJ&i&£jgLXBX Crsradsstio© 45/214).
SSSSSSSSBEXs ©raft resolwtio® XI is ««titled -Model Treaty oe MMbnl
Assists,©, is Criaisal Matter#-. She draft resala,!,© was adopted by theThird Cc©,itt,e without a vet,. Nay I tabs it that tSw Cesserai Axsesbly too wishes to adopt it?
&S3j&J33£l£Ejjn (rssolatio®. 45/117).
SSftJEIlSIgglXs ©raft resolwtiaa XXI is «,titled “Model Treaty o, ths
Transfer of Froeneediag, la Criaisal Matters“. Ths Third CeeKittee adopted the draft rstsolwtio, without a wets. May X tabs it that the Ceserai Assa&ly wishes to do the sane?
□téEJOSSK&SSLjaa	(re®ol®tiö® 45/111).
ÄJSSES
’i ©raft resolstioe XIII is «,titled “Mbdel Treaty os the
Transfer of Sapervi#!«, of Of feeder# ConOxtioeally Saastswad or Cosditieeally
Ä/45/W.O
44
<Ä6Jmiä®8&>
Belaaaed”. 3h® draft raaolBtioo was adopted ty the Shire Caanitt®,withoct a
,®i," ,T I tale it that the Ceserai. Asseaßsly also wishes to adopt it?
fejtit rasolatioo XfT? was adopted (rasoiastio® 45/119).
H£J
Steaft rasolatioe 3W is «,titled “Cria® preweatic® ami
crietiaal jastices expression of aggraciatioa te the Genresweet and people of ©aba °® the. ©ccasie® of the Eighth Halted Kstioas Caograss os the Premesti«, of Crine «ad the Siea&BGffit of Offenders”. She draft resolsstioe was adopted by th© Shird Cowitte® withoet a we®. May I take it that the General Isranbly too wishes to adopt the draft rasdstioe?
®S3LXffiE213&aEJS3J	(reseiastio® 45/12®).
®iL.
": ©raft resolBtioa It is «©titled -Eighth Halted Entices.
Coegress o® the Protesti«, of Cria, aad the Treats,«,of Offenders“- She Third-CoeKittee adopted the draft resolatSos withowt a vote. Mey X tal, it that the General Asseably wish«® to do the sane?
&£3X,-j3«21a'£Ì3&-JE	(resoletio® 45/121).
2&eJEE8Si5SEI= Draft rasoi «io® 33n is entitled -Criatisal jostiee
edneatio®-. The draft rasolstio© was adopted by the Third- COMbittee without a vote- May I tale it that the Geasral Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft ra®ol®tiQ®?
®£a££_ES2Sd3£13SLJ££LJ!&_3i (rasolwtioa 45/122).
OiEKaZs Draft rasolatioa xm is eetitled -letersaticffiai
eo-operatioe la cwbatisg organised trine”. Ute draft solatio® ws adopted by the Third Osmittee witboet a vote- May 3 tale it tìfctìt the General Assembly also
wishes to adopt it?
,£s~i®lssiaeJKZIXjs_iSe2&£g <ra®oi®ti«6 45/123)
&£-,
s U, General IsseBB&ly will aw ta&o actio® o® the draft
decisi, raeomeded by the Utird Camitte® is paragreph 52 of it- report
A/45ZPV.4A 45
<IBg Fmim)
CA/45/755). Ite draft decisio, ««titled "Criae preeeetiw and criai,l ¿«stiee”, was adopted fey tte Third Ctewittee witoewt a vote. May I tala it that tte Asseably wish®® to do tte sate?
M-toilJSisiiiEuaoteyS-
SHtJ3EEEEfi8£s I shall aw call oa regresestatiw, «to wish to {Espials eteir positteB. on tte decisiGas tte Assec&ly tes Jost taten.
J&s—JSSfiffiGE. CSaited .States of Anericajs For tte reasons ay delegation stated la tte Third Ccmeittee os 23 Sweater, tte United States did wot participate la toe Seseral Aa®«toly,s adopt!«® cf draft resolBtio® XW, entitled "Cris® ptewation and eriwiaal justices expression of appreciation, to tte Goveraeeat asd people of Ca&a on. tte occasion of the Eighth Ghited Shtioes Congress oe tte Preraeetioa. of Cris® asd tte Treataest of Offesders',.
ISLS..J3ES&S&V Cteioe. of S' riet Socialist teyeblics) Cisterpretatiosa free tessiaajs Ite Soviet delegation joiaed 1, tte coaseosss adoption of tte draft resdatioca 0® the Eighth Waited Eatioss Coagress oe the Preveastiott of Cris® asd tte Troataassst cf Offenders.
With respect to draft resotetfoo. X, estitled "Made! Treaty w tenditta", ay delegatioa wishes to state the folloarlag: It is well Isoms that the {seastioc of «xtraditioa. is of great iaportaae, la tte cwtext of ixterxatioeal to-operation to ccetet criae, especially tte most widows fems of crime each as terrorise, drag traffickiag and organised crime. Tte swtadatory «xtraditiw of crieisasls gwilty of sock wrioes cris®, ewes, tte prospect of ©ertaia esrtraditio®, as is dear front practice, is waoag toe ssost effective aneasts of ccntetisig sweh crises. Therefore, tte Idea of ptegariag & Made! Treaty oc Extradition was intended to facilitate tte csedatsic® of istersatiocal treaties c, this stoject# sad we sappaet it.
A/iyw.M 45(,-4
W feel that sa of rhe eoviskas off soäel txuttte seen mfaì. M i, the
light off mat X have saK, I asst ansie sees cewaaMts <9® peragragbe (s) and <, ©f
esticla 3 off the Model Treaty «a ©straditi«- taeeg the cirennatasca,Mete,La
kbea® pesagrta fiat 3©t greeting estraditi©® atze the political «etere ©iff a crine
aad the political ©pitLose off the ssspact.
A/457W.6« 46
It is «sr dee thct la thè gs,«asc (traiti®® thè istarpectaticra ®g th,, pasmsswph# «tight tederda, thè effffoctiwaess «f isteraatio,! ee-sgesatie® la cambetisg cria®, pdaerily tessei, «off drag trafficai,®. That vosi# «fa® ag prò®#,’-ia «or stasa® «ad thè reietti©,off extzadtiee 2sr politicai raas&ae. 13, eaafeaae off thè®, yarsgrap&s I, ceotrazy t, ,a,r©, #sc«aeda ©ff rt® Baita# Kc£&meb, ia perticai«- Gsaoral sedly rosolati©, 44Z2S, disk «aeqdvocally ecwterae, ss cridsd ad ®sja®tiffisde, ,11 acts, satfeate ani praetica® off terre-riso dexevor «a# b? «benaver esaeitts#.
X, dw ©ff «tot x bave jest saK. ©ad tdiag iato aceeost thè face «hot thè provi,!««, la thè Treaty generali? «a parai? ©pulsasi i, «et«,., ,ir doari? ladies«,1, ragragh 1 ©ff thè seoelatiau w beli«©© thst th, peodoimas ©ff ce«r, i, , «,? dd State,1, dedéisg thè aatt,r ©ff «rtrsdtioa off ¿ridami,. iedaSiag Le perticai«- eh, pcevisioas eeatdad i, this a$ze«ae,t. r©r «r y,. w iato,to stick to thè «derstadisq a,# eh© agreeeeot roached i, pewi© eseetoe# off thè General Assaehiy ,$ also et thè Caderene,.
«toc, thè 1®, &,• Ceaveados ©a csn&etieg iilogal «cs agaiaot thè ad,«? «ff mrL, dippiag «,ffrafft,«, paragrsg&s A ad 8 off artici,111, w&ich , idasticai to eh, ffomastien off yaragraghs A ad , off thè reeoletioe wr, «elAtd ffm it.
21&J3SS133K&Z: W beve campiate# tbis stage off «er ©aastórretioo- off abrade itan iee.
The Aasedly dii Star ter, it, attawtio, to aged, it, 1®1, «ditld “Xliwiasati«,«ff all far, ©ff <iseri,ia,cio, ageiast evaMr. The Assedi? dii aenr te a «ed,!«,©,o, #rafft rodioti©, roc©MMo«d by th, sdrff CtamittM ia POTSfh # d it, report CA/4SS7). The ffrdt ««©Isti©, aetitld -e®««!©, «,thè Slidaatle, off All Fora, «ff Siscridastie® agdsst Me,«,-, ve, dapteff &y
V«$.o
41
OaJEmStesl
SÄ# fblr® fMki, wxthsret , wt,. May 1' tata, St that tb® JtsseMhly wishes to die tib, MM,!
, We trift WMiflR„W-,teB,ä fresolati®,45/124).
SBftJBEKBiBflE8	,• hawe new esodata® cwr eotoitorati©,of ,yMi,
it, 1«1.
■t stali aev toeaitar tta «yort of tta ®M Csanitto,(a/45/753) m jaii iiffik 182. «etiti®® "Ftasord-Ieskie® staratala®; far thè tavtocasiesit ®f «nee t© tta ysae 2®ta“<
SI, tasetaly «ili ,a, tata , tacisi®, ©s thè fi, toast reolstitos ,«•■■••te,ìy tta Wird CoMKittoe ia yaragrayb 2# ©f ita reyort.
®ttat resdatica I i, «etiti,® ">Iar©wM««t «f tta stata, of «zana, la ri, Sectatariat“- ‘ite assira Ctadttee atoyce® «bis taaft cesoisti®,witteat a ave®, tay I esasi&r ttat tta Goderai taseMbly vista® to to là, su«?
lCtiXjQlK&B_l_3S (resoletim 45/125).
Stau
4BSMuMa#
’s W stall sow tata a ascisi©,est draft cesoisti®,il
satitta® "Vtaas so® literacy“’. Wis ■draft resolsti©,was adopted fey tta Sfeird Conttae vittast a veee. May I ctrnsiSer that the ls.x®,bly vistas to do tta smw?
Ssa&LJSKSalJAfiSLJXjmLJ <re®ol,tl®,45/125).
3teJQH3XS£lZ8 taaft «totatie, Ui is «etiti,® TaterxegEioaal
tososltattaa eo wees ia ycblic lif,-. ita 3&ir<4 Camitts® adoyto® this draft reoelstloa vittawt a veto. May 1 toesitar ttat tta fetaoa&ly vitato to ta likewise!
&QOBlgtiaflLJEIXJSft (retoletito 45/122).
2MJ
’t ©raft rtoolati©,IV is satitlsd “taitad W?w
taveloyesot Fatal f®c OBta,”. We Wird Ccsmittto started this draft rtoolati®« «Sttaat a veto. Wy I «sasitar that the Asseajsly vistas to to tta sue?
&3££UBB&82&i£9Lj£jS	{reselsti«, 45/123).
ÄX-iSZ.O 4,
De FgZWT: ©raft í«taisti«t V is «astittod. ’”l3ple«#toati¡att of tto Malroto r©rw,rd~lmktog Strategies for tto AdvasEcanwt of Moa®,”. Tto Third Cestotte, «aSsjted this draft rasolstio® vittore a voto. May X consider that tto tostofely wistos to do tto saaatl
l£S_j£l£t>	(raoetotiss 45/12$).
Da TOCTHs to tosse ttos ceadocfed esc «eaasitoratiaffi of agenda ite, 102.
Ito tostotoy will sew cosaids-r tto report. of tto Third CaRtótt«® (A/45/759) es ,®8®da Steas 1S3, «stitlod “lapesrts®©, of tto «Htirarsal realixatio® of tto rigte. of peoples to «•lf-det®®aà®ati4se «ad ©f tto sge&dy grtotiag of iadepestone® to colmisi eoaetrie-s asad people® for tto «ftoetiv® g®®ra®t«e «ad ©toervaac® of tosas® righto’’.
Tto tosetstoy will now tato a dedale, o® tto tto,draft ra®ol®tio®s racssesacsstod by tto Third Ctototto, to paragraph to of its report.
Tto toaaatoy -will first tato a decisi©,m draft rasatoti©, I, esciti cd "Isportasace of tto «stiweraal ratoixatio® of tto right of peoples to self-tostoxatio® asad of tto' speeSy gxasattog of isSspessdeaw® to colonial coesstries and peoples for tto «Sfacci,gsarastee and ©toerwsce of tosrsasa rigfecs”.
A recorded voto tos toes ragmsted-
A/4&W..S3 4«
LHSKMjSÌlJMJaÈE.
2l£KSQEL< Afghraiaten, Albania, Oreria,Asgala, Aastlgra sad Barbed®, Argenti,, Kahanes, «abrasi, Baagtetete, Barbados, Balia, Scaia, State®, Salici, toesrasa, Brasil, Strassi Sftrsraaìra, tarifas, teso, taranto, Camere©, Caga tarde, Cenerai Africas® Segabile, Chad, Cbila, (Stira, Caleabis, Comoros, tengo, CSte d'Ivoire, ©aba. Cajera, Svitanti, Srateica, tomiKicaa tageblic, Serale, ®ao, «teiepi,. Fiji, Cabes, Gambia, Chara, tasterai, Gotera, tafora-Biaesra, Crpwa, Salti, Saeteras, India, latearais. Iras (Islamic hepwhXIc ®f>, Ir,®, ¿tarale, torto®, Sesga, Ksrait, £ao Bragia”, tanoeratie Segahlie, labrara, Serate©, CiSgra Arab tonahiriya, Statasi, Stotaysia, Maldives, Mali, Stanritaesi, Stawritiss, Mede©, Stangali,K '©, NasastaSgce, Maarar, tesibia, Segai, Sicaragra, K2g,x. ligada, teas, taiistra, Fiesta Saw teina, taragray, Sara, Skiliggina«, tetar, Sraata, Sainé Kitta and Bevis, Salse lacia, Sadi Arabia, Scafai, Seychelles, Sierra Zaras, Singapore, Soleaos Intends, Serail, Sri teda, tatas, Scrinane, Sparitemi, Syria® Arab Segabile, Italiana, togs, Triaid,! rad Tobago, Traisi, Berate, Baled Arab tairates, teitd Segabile ©£ tarara!,taigray, tassate, terasrala, Wist ten, tara®, Tngralavia, Zaire, Arabia, Zimbabwe
ASKlssS:	Belgio«, Carada, teraaxl, Fidami, Frasea, Gerasray, leetessS,
terrai, Italy, Iccranboesg,tetterlaste, Korray, Sratea, Ghited Kingdom ©f Great Britain, rad Sorte,®, Ireland, taited States of Ararle,
ÜMBaíadaS,lastran, teatri, «algasia, «yetaras,!,® Soviet Socialist Segabile, testa Bica, teeetealovdia, S3 Salvator, Create, tangary, Ireland, tega®, Oechtemstei,Malta, ®ew Zealand, Fcirad, tortsgal, «cesarla, Saint Vincesse rad the Craaadiaes, Sara, Sgela, terlay, Elraiaiass Soviet Socialist Btòlic, Baio® of Soviet Socialist tegebliea
_	lUB&ifil.I,,. afiWClrt frF 111 W lSr vitfe ZI (¡,fttgtiw (resolctios
45O3®>.,
s«_
■<:>?'>?W ’,■>
te® teranbly vili new tate a tecisio, e® draft rmsol®tioc
U, ratitled "tesirarral realisation of tee right of peoples to
,®-teter,isi,tite“. tee teird teaanittee adopted draft, reflation II witeoet a vote, HhT i ©oesider that the General Assembly winheo to do the name?
&£3fiLJ3BBta&&2&JQLja$ (recateti©, 45Z131).
® Sebeagsratly tee delegati«® of «arara .advised “_¿e Secretariat teat it had intended to vote is favoer.
AS45/W.68 5®
Sft-23S3SEs Fisally. w tora to draft resolwtio® HI, entitled "B« ©£ snrcaaAzie, as a a,s, so violato hans, right® «ad to ¿sped, toe exercise of toe right of peoples to self-detorwisati©«'". a recorded vote has be«® regaestod-
JLX££i£ffiäLj£2&
Ia_£®CSSK3 Afghanistan. AHsaaia. Algeria, Angola. Artiges ad Barbnäa. Argweiaa. Bahsssas, Bahrain. Bsagladeto. Barbados, BeHse, Bessia. ,eta®. Bolivia. Botswsa, Brasil, Breeei Darassalw Berkiaa Faso, Tanradi. Byetorassia® Soviet Socialist Begsblic, Ctoerooss, Cage Verde, Central Africa® Begeblic, Chad, Chile, China, Cdeehia, Coaoto,. Congo, Costa Bica, Coto d'Ivoire, Cabo. Cypres, ©jiboeti, Doeiaica, Baeiaiea® legtolie, Eesasdor, Egypt Salvador, Stoicpi,. Fiji, Ctoo®, Ganbia, Gbass. Geatonals, ©«iaea, Geiaea-Bissas, Guyana, Bhiti, Bonders, Zadia, Idecsaia, Ira® {Islanic Wjtolic of), Irag, Jaeaica, .Jordaa, Itoga, Kawait, lao People's ©saeczatic Bepeblie, tobaam, lesotoo, Libyan Arab daaahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia. Maldives, Mali, Maritoai,. Mwrities, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Moxaehigee, My«,ar. Sanilia. Sepal, Kicarag«, Xigsr. Algeria, Cea®, FaHstos. Pape, Ww Geises, Paraguay, Pera. P&ilipgiaes, Qatar, ©Bead#, Seist Kitts sad Bevis, Seist Dscia, Seist Viacest aad toe GresadiaesSaaoa. Saadi Arabis, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra leone, Singapore, Salmon islands, Sonalis, Sri tasks, Sedas, Scrixa®«, &toxU,ad, Syria®. Arab Zepeblic, Thailand. Togo, Trinidad aad Tobago, Tesisia, Ogaeada, Wraiasi®, Soviet Socialist Bepeblic, Safe® of Soviet Socialist Bapnhlics, Witod Arab Wirato, United Srpeblic of Tansania, Oregeay, Tasaaats, WBaaaBoela, Viet Ba®, Teaes, Tagoslavia, Zaire, Zotoia, Zimbabwe
¿,¿JH&s Belgi, Fraace, Geraaay, Italy, Jaja®, teweboazg, Wtoerlaads, Fortogal, Qsitod Kiagdan ef Crast Britain aad Bortoera Ireland, Ositod States bf Janerica
i&aiXiBa: Asatralia, lastri, Baigeria. Canada, Csechaslewtoia, Sesasasi, Finland. Greece, Beagary, leelaad, Irelaad, Israel, Zietotoestoi®, Malta, Be, Zealand, Sfecway, Poland, Bcnasaia, Spais. &tedsa, Turkey
UsrJSStÄf“111"5
LJ
wt«
The Assembly has tons cocdeded its ©tosideratio®
of agenda item 163-
, StoengneBtly toe delegation of Pasaana advised toe Secretariat tost it had intended to voto is favoer-
1/45/W.O
51
(MJ&miik)
Me taxa sew to the report of the Third CcMaitte, (1/45/769) os apetaa item 184, entitled Tstersatioeal Tear of the FanHy“.
3h® Assanbly will tel, decisions os the two draft resoleticns reccnnesded by the Third Ceassittee is paragraph 15 of its report-
Soft reeolntfoffi I 1# entitled Tatersadoroal fear ©f the Easily". The Third Ccswittee adopted it without a vote- Mey I tai, it that the Geaeral Assembly wishes to do the sasne?
5S3£$LJBEKlMiSBJLjai2_J (resolwtiom 45/133).
Zfet_ESS3ESZ: ©raft rtaolwtioo IX is estitled "Tollow-np to the Gridiag Principles for ©ewlcproatal Social Keifaxe Polities ata Prograwwes la the Sear Eatare, ata the negative social e&eseg&esBces of alcohol wa". The Third Cconittee adopted, draft resol«ti©<s H without a toco. May I tai, it that the General Assembly also wishes to do sb?
SlBÖ-SSÄlJ&ifi®-!	íresolsstfca 45/134)
The i
«■Mt>äne
M, hat, ©rodsded oer corosideratiott of agenda item 104
The Assembly will row consider the report of the Third Ccswittee (1/45/751) oa agetaa itero 195, entitled “Istersstiocal Coresaats o® Basan Eights",.
The Assembly will tal, a decision on the draft resolatic® reeeemetaed by the Third Committee in paragraph $ of its report- The Third CaoKitte, abated the draft resolaticra withost a wte. Mey I tale it that the Sesera! Asseebly wishes to do the same?
'frMilV M=
3&B.Jh3£&J3Ei£2&É	(resolsstioa 45/135).
£ Me have coeeltaed eer consideration of agenda itero 185.
The Asseotay will row eeesider the report of the Third ©oroittee {1/45/70} oc agisca itero 10®, entitled ,E3iai®®tioa of all fora, of religion, iatoleraasce,.
ViS.CI
52
Ibs iSMly will td, a &d,h® es th© «rafft reasolattlo© recramesded by eh© Sbird Camille© la yaragregi& 1 ©ff its rsyort. Sh, «raffe, resoltstioa wes adeyted by eh© Tbird CoMBietee wiebost a wt,. May X lala it that eh,Geaeral &x3«ably wis&es to da ehe sa«©?
3ä£j&QK££0Q&&&i	<®«,ol®eic, 45/135).
2&8dE£SiSXlSZ£: , hawe cösfecisded owr ©e©,iderati©® ©ff &$©,&, ite© 1©®. Uae Ässeably will aow consider täte «ort ©ff ehe Äird Camitte® CA/45/7&3) ec ageada liess IST, «stitled -©fffic© ©ff eh, «Seited Katioes Sig& Ccwttissioeer ffor ®e£age«s“.
2h,Isseably will iahe decJsioies c® the ffiw, «raffe r®®ol®tio®s rwesaneaäed by th,Third Camille© la paragraph IS ©ff it, saftet.
©rafft reeolwtio, I, «atltled -Xatersatioeal Caaffere®©, o® ehe Pligbe ©ff ©effwgee«, Beters«, aad Binjäaead Pers©©, I, Sonthera Äffrica”, was ©Sayeed by ehe XMrd Ccmitte,withMBt a vot«. MSy X taäs i& th,E eh© ©ttseral Ässaably wisbes to da ehe $,•?
&al£_X«SalsSiÄJLsS®_J#SS <r«®ol,ei©a 45/137)
a, F
•■•,■■>,■•;..:•..>•
©rafft reaol«t£«s ix is «©titled “ffalas'gwwat off eh,
Esetwtiv, Cemaitte© off eh© Frograna© ©ff th© Belted Batlas© Kia CceMKisaiooer ff©r aeffsgaes“. 3h© Third Camlet,adopted draft redolati©® li «ietovt a woe«- May I tala it that th© Geaeral la&eebly ale© wiehe© to adayt Iti
SX15£-ESS£13ì1J„IJ_J!	<r«,©lsti©® 45/13,).
2fetJ35S3SGE£s ©rafft r,s©lwtl©e III is «©titled Taergeacy heaaaitarias assista«, to O&erias reffigg««© aad displaced perso©,-. 2h, Third Conwietae adopted draft reaolwtio© III withoet a wt,. May I tabe it that the J&senfely wishes to <&, the san«?
£o£SLJ3E3ifilä&	Crseolstis,45/139).
V4§¥.tt
S3
BttJSffiSffis Soft: resoletio,IT is entitled '"Office of Elie Qcited K,tio®s Sigh CsMeissicaer far Befagu,. Sm, Third Coeoittee adcgtod this draft resolsEiaa tea without a vote. Mey I tai© it that the Ässesfely wisha® to «Sogt it? SsaL££~B81S£lS&ÌSaJSL3H (resoltEtioe 45/143}.
'S!, pl ¿unnm&M

flsally, we tacca to ¿raft resoletio, T, «atftled
Tsstaraatioeal Cs,fer«ä,cse os Castrai teorica, refegees". Th,Third Ccta«itE«e
adogtad graft rasolotio® V fittest a vota. May I tale it that the Assoshiy also
wishes to äo so?
¡SafiLJBSSSlSäiSS	(rosolati©, 45/141}.
SeJSSI&EgXs I «cw cali oc thè reyreseetative cf thè Osited States, vèo wishes to «ai® a ,tat««eat fa esplasatic® of hi, delegati©,'’,gositioa.
SCs—£££9$53t (Baite® States of feerica)s For thè reesoes ,y delegati©® #t,t«g ia thè Thizd CosaiEte® oc 2, Ssweefeer, thè Baite® States did net participate Ì, thè Gaserai Asseehly-s adagtioa of draft redolati©® II eetitled “Zalaxswsext of thè $s,c®tiva Casaittee of thè Prcra,, of th, Witeé Katioes Eit Ctìaeissiocer far tesasse,1”.,
S&t W
«•,-?i,J,ai«
Sfe have, öoi?«l,äe(3 ©or «rasigerastie® of «goods ite, X®7.
She ls®e«3bly will bow casatidcr the report of the Third ©anssitt®, (1/45/745} oe ageada ite, 105, entitled Tortsre aed other creel, ishesas or degradiagf treataeat or prai#a,eait,.
The Arsacfoly will tale gedsioes' oc the three draft resolwtioss reccuw,eio5sd hy the Third CoMsitte, i, garagrah 12 ©f its regrnt.
, The Presides«, retexeed to the Chair.
W<5Z?,.il
54
©raft resolotioa I„ entitled “Report ©f the CoBBtittee aaisst Tortsr# asd states ©£ th, Ceeveati©«. egaisst Tartare sad Other Creel, Is&ssa®. or ©egrsdisg-Traatneet ©r Paaishmsae“, wes adopted by the Third CosMtitt®,withoet a ■rote- Hay 1 eoesider that th, Csmral Assaahly wishes to do the «site?
SaaXs-saafiSsslaa	Cresoiotfoa 45/142).
3htJE33äE3SaSs ©raft reozntia# II, entitled “Edited Xatioes Volsstary
read for victim of Tartare“, was adopted by the Third Ccuetittee Behcet a wte.
May I take it that th, Assembly also '-.-"ishes to do so?
ß£JÜL£~aafil«£iaSLJ	(cesoisti©# 45/143).
SttJ
[i ©raft resolwtioa. ill is eetitled Tartare assi iabaasm
tresieait of childma io detesti©© is Sooth Africa“. The Third Coscritte® fopted this draft resoletiea without a voc,. Kay I tsi® it that the Asseagsly too wishes to adopt iti
2lä££_13®ßls£jbaLJLII (rosolati©® 45/144).
33fctd
’, Me .have coecleäed ©etr co®side.ratioe of abrada ite, lay
The raeaiaisy aborts of th# Third Coeaittee, oa aeeda items 12, “Steport of the Isoscele: sad Sodisi ©eesac.l“; Id, “Istereati©®,! actio® to cca&at drag abase ead illicit XraffieÜagf“j asd 110. “Zichaaeiag th, effectieasess of th, principle of periodic assd gesssii, elects jos“, will he coesidsred is a pleaary s®,.tisg aere Tuesday, IS ©,©,",b,r. 1% th, aft«r,aa.
ASSSK TEEM 33 fcß®£laa£ä)
LAE or ns m
U) loom or ®k «
UKT-CaEWEM. (Ä/45/543, A/45/712. A/45/721 asd Chrr.I)
CM ©k«t useeoncw (Mm.2S)
23MtJE21S0Ss 1 shosld lila to rsosisd represeatatives that the defeat# •¿, this ft, was ®a®c3wl?4 «t th, ®Sth plesary ,©etisg. held ©a Tsesday, 11 ©eceaber.
AS4SZFV.6,
SS
CSàt-J±EÉ$£>
3&, Ax&«sÈ>ly will bow coesiÄts- Ü, tait r®s©l®tio® isswad as äocsaeae 1/45/&.29. Ha Salloviag ©oaastxi®® &«,e &eeoM sponsors of tb, cfcraft xsol«tio® siaee it was iatrcBead: Brazil, Caba, GSasa, ®ai,o,-®issa, amd Vassaac,
A
Ä/45/W.S3 Sfi
(TM- hwi4m)
Th, tesetely will tate a dedalo, ac draft r®®ol®tlo, 1/45/5.25.
W stell sew tegia tte voting pro©,®, a recorded vote tea tees r®ge,®tte. JUOBSäälÄJKSa
IZ-SOEST,
à®jæ&j#
hfgtedatm Ubaste,- Ugarte, tegola, tedpw ani Battete, tegetetea. teatrali, teatri,. Bahamas, Serate, Basgtetesh, teste,«. Baig!:,, teli,, tesate, teste, Sdivi, Bot®,«,, Brodi, Bread Bexæssal, Belgarte. fecratei, Syelorsæsi®, Soviet Soeteltet tegablie. CaMeree®, essate. Cap, teste, Central Africa® tepehli©,Chad, Chile. Otea, Colessi®. Sonoro«,Congo, Costa Biea Cote d'Ivoire, ©tea, Cypres, Caecteelovalte. fetesrk, Djibouti, Stoeteica, Saeteiem Begeblic. S®e. H Salvatee, StMcpte. Fiji, Fissiate, tenue,Gate®, tenete, tessa, Grèves, teat®,te. Gdaea. Gdaee-Btesa®. Gay,,. Baiti, Steagary. lessiate. tedia, teteessaia. Iras (telami© tegohlie of). Ira®. Iretete, Italy, tende, tepaa, tertea, Easy®, teawit, Lao tesate-, tewoeratic tepshlie, immota. tesotte, Libya, Arab teBahiriya. Stechteassteis. læwnteerg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Msldiw®«, Mali, Malta, SSBEriteæi,. Messiti®, Mexico, «tegoli,. Morocco, MosaMbispw, «gassar, BmìBìb, Sapai, tetharteate, few tealard, Micaragsas, Mger, Mgeri,. Korway, Qaaa, teMart«®, teg®, few Gela,, teragasy, Shilippix,®, Potete, Voctagsl. Qatar. Bonasia, teetea, Saint Kitts and teds, Satet teda, Saisit Vincane and tte Grenadine®, Sas,, Saadi Arabis, Smagai,Seychelles, Sterra teone, Singapore, Salone, telate,. Somite, Spaia, Sri tester Stea®, Sertesne, Saldiate, Swedes, Stellate, Togo, Trteidte ate tebago. tesiate, ©gate,. Steatetea Seviet Socialist fegehlic, Sates of Soviet Socialist fegtelics, Qdtte a,pwb>ie of Tassaste, Sjnsgery. Vaaaatæ, Viet tea, Tones, tegoslavia, Zaire, tenùûa. Ztebahne
tertey, Shitte States of Aassrica
Ztosador, Saraasy, Israel, Fer®, United Xtegdcm of Groat Britai# ate Borthers Irelate. tecaæeel,.
SoXsjæzalsLisæ.&'l (resotettes 45/145)-,
■S-J2S£ïâJ!X-llâL3sæ_aJLdlSSLJ
Zbt-£SSSI«SSSZs 1 shall sew call ©a -those repcesesftattees who wish to sate stataaesnts ia cspteaatioa of vote.
, Sotewjeescly tte detegstteas cf Barite, Faso ate tte United Arab
teteates addste tte Secretariat that they fete teteteed to vote te fewer.
AZ45ZFT.O
SX«i
J5S3B3& (Alleatila} Ciasterpretatio,feem Spanishes My
coBSsfcry iasterprets tie third eaebelar paragraph asd operative paragraph 4 of tie ’draft -resolotio® jest adopted is. tie light of tie dedaratio® it wade o,
S Getabar 19,4. «fee, it sigeed the ©sited Satioes Coccventic, ©a the Tw of th, S®,  p&rtiewlar, this relates to th, last paragraph. of the declaxacio, which reaffirms the dear statanest is article 31® of tie C,,tic, that the ,exes fosse ass integral part of the ©s®veffltfcau

®SS (Ifexted States of Saericajs Use Sailed States view, the
,9,2 @,5 ted Satie«® ©asweetioe on the Saw of the Sea as a aajor acocaaplisheeBt is the drwelog,eafc of iotersatioeal law of the oe,s$. u® Co,weastieei has ,y positive aspects ,ad the teited States has actively sapported and promoted observe, of the east sejority of its provisions.
Ibis year the tfeited States wade a coacorted effort, to isprove certain aspects of the draft resolatioe co this Itou w «de a s,d&,t of coecrwt® proposals that waold have allowed os to ch,ge ®ssr vote, ihe ©sacral then, of those pcepowss was a recogaiti«® that there are oetstaadiag issaes that seed to be addressed regarding the regime for the area and its resooxces, sad a call apo, all States to address those issoes. Me also soet , regeest that States hear this 1, aiod is comrderisg ratification of or accessioe. to the CoevaMtio®. However. we were told by see, delegations that the tia, was sot yet. ripe for aekecwledgiatg I, a reeolBstic® that th,®,issues exist. therefore. we had. to oppose the draft resalwtia®. ©evertheloss, we preeiate the support w received freer sasy delebtioaa aad w thaw, then for thei, hard woefc.
Is ww have said is the past, we have feadaneetal objections to the deep-sea-bad srixiag provisions of th, Ccsweatio,. Over the past year we- have hid the epgortaaiity to discs®, o«r objectia®, with a ,saber of State®. W have
AZ45SW.&3
53
<«£x_M£.fc£ljjE£t
«splaSaad that circsestanee, have charged markedly sisee 1M2, suggesting a seed to stasd hath free the existing text off part XI and «,aider the problem in aere concepts®! terms. Distilled- to its essence, ©er view is that the changed ciremeetanees cited ly the Secretary-General is the report cm his initiative suggest th, asad for a substantially scaled-hack iastitstioual structure and a more ,ar&et-oriaetnd approach to the nssageeeet off the area and its resources - an approach -which is flexible enough to adapt to new circeastaeces-
, were encouraged by our ccnsultatiosss but, at the same time, I nest «■phanis® that the lingering «Soches expressed by seme States lead as to conclude that we have sot yet reached the stage for negotiations. While we see evidence that easy States are cowing to the view that the sea-bed nisiag règia, seeds to be «©justed to reflect the realities, it is ingortast, before -we embark on such as raportaast step, that all interested States believe that there are reasonable prospects for success.
hawing expressed ©er concerns regarding the sea-bed règia® . I should like to «press my Government.’s support for the emphasis placed apee efforts to encourage State, to bring their national law iato cossforaity with intert-stio,®! law as reflected in ths provisi©®, of the OjnseaBtion concerning traditional use, ©f the oceans.
Sy Goversmnt has bee®, active is supporting ,sd promoting compliance with these provisions and in discouraging claim® inconsistent with international Iw. In particular, w, welcome the action kg aasy States to revise their Imus and regalati«®, to ensure conformity with international law, and we encourage others to do the sane.
Me also believe at Is is the interests ©f the world ccmmssaity to know that excessive maritine dales have been closed. Protesting against such claims, whether diplomatically ©r in practice, is necessary is order to ,intais the
A/4S/FV.O 5,-«9
Cfcslaslsas-Sdss ist®grity ©f 6b# swigatiosal ©ad ©ratrHighc provisiots of 6b# Cowwotioou M© also b#p® that Stats® will act to saba protests gMwraly iswo to 63# world csHUMssity, S#c& actios, will server to dawaestrat© to© wtocespttoility ©f such dais, and to ©aeoag, Stotos to .«edify toair laws sod regalatioa, to cowfoxs to thetoms of to© towmstio,.
■• hope tost ©towr Sowasaanets toss, this ©©sews, foe rajectiog illegal ■aritia, d,i,„ thereby ©saistiag ia saistaisiag a fair baXanc© ©f istoxcat &©t,e«a coastal ©of «aritia, Stotos.
X should also lika to tabs this opportoffiity to joist ©at tost to# WM States does sot wi©w th# call ego, all States to safeguard th© salty of to© Cessvestim as a liaitoti©,os either to© right or to© duty of all Stat«,to act la acc®sda,sa with those port!©®# of toe CtomuBtica tost reflect csstonssry istossatloBBl lw.
Finally, ©y ¿dottles vswld lit© to Joia la to© eeassi©,©f ajjroeistie® £ear to© stor ©w aariaM, sdawtifis: raoearto. E© gastiealarly safjort. too tocewaaswlatioa for greater istaxaatiooal eo-ojiarstio© ©a oc,«s rwsaarete &ad soaitociag, to isgarow# oar wMSerstasdiag- ©f th© role of th© oe©#© la isfXwcsEciBg cUast© sad to© global ©sviroaBMSit aged to jeowii&g a sowd ®ci®sti.fie basis foe ©writofflaastal d©cisi©&-iBahiaig. «© ar© also $!,«,•$ that to® r®®olsti©a eHjhasisi«s to® role of the specialised Whited S-stices agoscics asd to® iaportaac® of co-©p©r,tio® asd co-oedixatio® ooto©©® toea.
AZ4J5ZW.M fl
BúuJBK (,sitad Kieai): May I start by w«s,ly welcoreisg tha wlwable report of the Secrretary-Seaeral ore davelogaoNBts relating to the Cffiasreretiore. es ths Earn off the So,. IM,is, as «war, , most wsefaa «ad detailed egasporedi, which the Secretariat has pg, together with its «assai clarity sag procisiore. It ao&ss ,wry hanr reversas, acarea, haspisg vs s$> to data a, drv&lsgaaats w&rld aid,.
©slogati«, way wish t© be swam of two atesarais ia ©«sr ow® law which barare taha, placa fa the last year. first, w has, iaTreecreted i, ©w doanstie law th, Viasa, Ccmvretati«, against illicit trafile i, narcotic rogs. <rb ©f coara© has S«p©re«at prevista,® regarding «sforcasMat at se,. Saeoadly, w have© estesdred ©«r pò®®«, ©f polisti«, control to ©war dreapisg ore ear car® ecretisretacal shall by ship® of any flag.
Iba report refers to th© Secretary—Gesserai’, iaitiaciwa is prOMvtiag , dialogs, ore the®, .aspects of the deep-s®,-&«d «ii!6iag provisi©«® which have protestad Stata®, iaeladisg the Gsited Kingdon. from ratifying the CwweaBtiore. This is , stoat positive drevolsgreeret ore which the S®crotary-Geaer,l deserves ©or ®Br®s,rs®d coagratslatie®®.
As th, Secretauy-deaerai has .acknowledged, tiare, have chaaged sixes the Coawatis®. was ©rigisally opeated for sígase®,©. We ar© all sow ©«ch moto ,vero of th© distasi prospect off visible doey-sea-bod atiaisg, and also of the difficulties which will attered it. Is. additi©, world -wide there has bees , reasscssnsrert of ecocMsic tkiakisg «ad as acksawladgssMoit that, is the losg res, robedy beaefits  ®aa®ea®x,ry restricticres ©re the ’,©ckiag® of the ,arhat, is over-rregolaticffi or is attempts to distort th, ,arhat is th© specific esse of certaía. «retal,.
As a resolt of these saw factor, there is as atsohrere off co-operatic® sarroreading the .-ilog,© aad , real hep,that progress; say .sow be achievable, 3Se ,rest allow thsre wrilliag to pet very sehstaw,. ” isvestamst itabo dsroelcpiag this, sew are, of the world’s rresoercres to «abe , roasoeablre retams vitboret ®®tha®
A/45/FV.fa SX
fMr. Aaet. Heitad- XiiwqdaiB) restriction. At the sane tiw w, arase achsowledge tiw æed foc aecsaaasy reg«l®tic«, for example to prevwæt «secreptahle «anriroaMsstaX dung® and also to give effect to the principle that th, reearar«®,of the S®«? ,,-&,£ ax® the esaaaos heritage of ®,ahiad-
Ther® is a© dœbt that the Secretary-Geeeral'# Initiative is therefor« particularly well-tiaed. tad we ara bopefsl that the dialogue will indeed load to change® which will being ¡shoot the vstiveraal acceptasse of ths United Mattioas Coswestioe. ©e ths law of the Sea. let thee, be so dosbt that we view this Ccœwsætiœ io all bet part XX as very ssefal; ose, ths pcoblasss of part XI axe resolved, fits ssiweraal aseptisas will b® a sssjoc advenes and represent a ssgoifieaet achieveewat for ths Halted. Nations.
With the positive dewlopsests we have oetliwd. it is a casse of sons sadsess that we were set in a politic, to vote for the resol«tioe this year. However, we abstained because of certain aspects which we were ¡stable with epesisteaey to rapport. In particular, we ©oeld sot vote for a rvsolstioe corataiaieg operative paragraph 4. Gives the hope for progress free the Secretary-General's initiative, sod the general récognition of the seed 'to face op to the fssdséeisgtal problems of part XX, it cassot he helpfsl or right to call for iaeediate ratification of the Cossestic© as it stands, thereby increasing polarixatiooi at a tiara when we are seeHag to cone together.
This resolatioa eocttaias srach that w, ccswuecd, and we ar® certainly sepportiwe of its general threat ssd direction. Ma shall ©cotisée to play as active aad positive role la ssportiag the Secretaxy-Gdoeral's initiative, aad as observers to the Preparatory Coa«iissioœ. -rd hope to play cer part with others in achieving svhstastiwe progress in the caaiaag year.
A/«5/W.$a o
Mfr Ü3M {XWheyJr Xarfcey eotad agaisst ti, draft cesoisti©, os r, law ® Öse Sea cooEaised is. docseet l/dS/XM, ,iA has jest bee® jqgfM Äy Öse ©■••sal laseebly. X&e reason for «y delegation,# segativ® voce la that sene of the •lenests ecoEaiaed la the Mossesele, os the l,r ©f the Sea which pnH,t Tsrlay f«n aggeewiag the eonvaatic, as,still retaiató fa this resolstio®. Ssrhey saygocta ES,iWeraatiosal «fiesta to establish a regia, of the sea ,bich Is basaci cm £>,pciseipl,of egaity .sad which cata be acceptable to all States. Kbwever, the Cedesti®, de«,aot ató, «Segaste prowisicaet for special geographical sitsatioes “ , • cn,s«5®ffiBce, is sot able t© establish a satisfactory balase, betsee® coaflictirg laceraste. Ferthesosore, the Coewestio® ashes so provisi©, for register!,® reneresti©, so specific daises. Hthosa we agree with the Coasvestio,1,ft# gaserai latest asd ,ost of its provisions, we were «sable to sies it ©mí,® to these serióse, shortceasiags. Ibis beieg the ease, we cassot accent the-provisi©® is this reeoletioe which regwires States, to coefem with the Coeweetiraa M the far -of the Sea is drafting their «atios,! legislation.
Hfc-mSBBKt Stat cooelsdes eer ©c®sid®ratio® of agenda. ite, 33.
1SK3EÄ. IXEM 3®
BCCZÄSafZOf CF IW 1SS2MKX CF KASS CF ISSAS® 13© CäCraaSMEEF CF SSE fflWtwmrny asicmí $äist osi SK mm iw sani xxfxzizr issacx asuest see söczaust FSCFtE’S UXBUK HO JAÄ1MI2IX3 K SSE FSHSZST CSEEEE3 SS1SES 1SMIM1SX2ATICB US ÀF2XL im
She 1
,irtpu«
Follcwiag eoffiseltatioas., it is «y «aäerstaodiag that
consideratici et this ite, «¡ay .be deferred to the forty-sixth sessions of the
Geeerel isseobly.
May X tale it that it is the wish of the Isseably to defer ©assiderati©, of the ite, and to iaclsde it io the provisional agenda of the forty-sixth sessioa?
><>1R«kH
X
ibis ceeclodes ©or coesideratic® of agenda ite® 3®.

-3E_JE2_SÌè-
V457.O £<-€5
À/4SZW.O $6
ASO,. I33M 44
GJK3SO3S or is paseaKAsioK or iss we ecBszicr msmezs wa m mg 2$£-23SSSSHs Bn Aasenbly àscia,® co 21 Steoher 199® to ¿relata this It«, ia the arrota of the forty-fifth sessi«,. It is ay esderstasdisg that there is ao safest for discessioo ostar this ita, daría® this sessi«,.
Skis coecl®á®s «wsr ecesideretie, ©f egesda ite, 44.
Bsosauaa,or sos:
2ÈÉ-1BS1BBS.8 Befos® adjoorsisg the swetiog, I staeld like to aste as sseoeectoest Is regard to tta a«t gtaeary aeetisg ©£ tta Assembly, setafele® for ®sesdgy¿ 18 Becoaber, ia tta aiterò©©,.
I, adtatico to toositarisg the remara Wir® Ccaeittee resorts, tta. taseobly vili al,© tata actio, ©a the draft resolatioes relating- to agesta ite® 14, -Balieies of 3BlS3&Ki& of tta Gtaerooswt ©f Sooth Africa“, agesta ite, 117, “tariew of tta efficiency of tta ataisistrative aad fiaascial fsadctiociag of tta Osited Satioes- ar® agesto ite® 152, “Critical ecoaosic sitsatios I® Africa“.
UNITED NATIONS
GeneralBAssembly
FORTY-FIFTH SESSION
Official Records
FIRST COMMITTEE 17th meeting held on Thursday/ 25 October 1990 at 10.30 a.m.
New York
VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 17th MEETING
Chairman
Mr. RANA
(Nepal)
CONTENTS
Observance of Disarmament Week
This record is subject to correction.
Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section. Room DC2-75O. 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each Committee.
Distr. GENERAL A/C.1/45/PV.17 31 October 1990 ENGLISH
90-63106 2501V (E)
The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
OBSERVANCE OF DISARMAMENT WEEK
The CHAIRMANi In keeping with a tradition initiated at the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, the First Committee is holding this special meeting to observe Disarmament Week, which began on 24 October 1990.
I am pleased on this occasion to welcome to the First Committee His Excellency Mr. Guido de Marco, President of the General Assembly at the forty-fifth session. On behalf of the First Committee I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election and also for the skilful manner in which you are carrying out the important responsibilities which have been entrusted to you.
I am also happy to welcome to the First Committee His Excellency Mr. Javier Peres de Cu£llar, Secretary-General of the United Nations. Your untiring efforts, Mr. Secretary-General, in promoting the purposes and principles of the United Nations and the cause of international peace have earned you the appreciation and gratitude of us all. Your timely and important initiatives in the areas of peace-keeping and peace-making in recent years have raised and renewed faith in the United Nations Charter. The United Nations is today poised to play its proper role in the shaping of an interdependent world.
The Final Document of the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament proclaimed the week beginning 24 October - the day of the founding of the United Nations - as a week devoted to fostering the objectives of disarmament. At the second special session on disarmament, in 1982, the General Assembly, noting the usefulness of Disarmament Week, made it an integral part of the World Disarmament Campaign launched at that session. Governments and non-governmental organizations have been urged to make Disarmament Week the focus
(The Chairman) of efforts to increase public awareness of the dangers of the arms race, particularly the nuclear-arms race, thereby creating an atmosphere conducive to progress in disarmament,
Recent years have raised unprecedented hopes for meaningful and sustained progress in the fields of arms control and disarmament. With the end of the cold war, we are at the threshold of a new phase of history. For the first time since the Second World War serious efforts are being made to arrest the relentless escalation of the arms race. After the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - the INF Treaty - of 1987, which, for the first time provided for actual reductions in nuclear weapons, the international community has welcomed the agreement in June 1990 between the Soviet Union and the United States on the framework of the strategic offensive arms reduction treaty and looks forward to an early conclusion of the agreement and its implementation. There is, of course, a long way to go. The process will have to cover all types of nuclear weapons, incorporating eventually those of the other nuclear-weapon States. But the prospects for sustained progress are indeed positive.
All of us feel greatly encouraged by the progress in the negotiations on the reductions of conventional forces in Europe (CFE). It is the hope of the international community that the conclusion of a CFE agreement and the summit meeting of the 34-nation Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), to be held in Paris from 19 to 21 November, will mark the beginning of a new era and system of security in Europe. We also hope that a CFE agreement will provide momentum towards further reductions in conventional arms and forces. Progress in conventional disarmament in Europe also calls for effective measures to curb the transfer of surplus weapons to other parts of the world.
BHS/ras
(The Chairman)
Elsewhere there has been progress in promoting confidence in Central America through the Esquipulas process, which is to include, inter alia, the establishment of inventories of weapons and machinery and a system of monitoring and verification. The laudable achievements of the CSCE process and the encouraging progress in Central America underline the importance of a regional approach to matters of confidence-building and security. These positive trends deserve to be emulated in other parts of the world.
Equitable economic relations based on co-operation between industrialized and developing countries alone can provide a lasting framework for peace. Access to modern science and technology is crucial for the development of the developing
countries.
(The Chairman)
At the same time the world community ought to focus greater attention on the elaboration of modalities for conversion of military economies to civilian economies. International co-operation in the area of conversion could assist in the adjustment process. It is hoped that the peace dividend could be invested for social and economic development, in particular of the developing countries.
The dramatic developments in bilateral and some regional arms limitations efforts have not, however, adequately permeated the multilateral disarmament process. The opportunity provided by the new climate of international relations must be seized to extend disarmament efforts beyond the nuclear and conventional arsenals of the great Powers and their allies. Disarmament, to be meaningful, has to be the joint effort of all nations. The United Nations provides an irreplaceable forum for this endeavour. As the Secretary-General has said in his report on the work of the Organization:
"The turn for the better in the field of arms limitation provides an impetus and a fresh sense of purpose to the disarmament machinery within the framework of the Organization." (A/45/1. p. 20)
The' celebration of Disarmament Week can be an important instrument in building up strong public opinion in favour of strengthening the multilateral bodies that deal with arms limitation and disarmament issues.
I now have the pleasure to call upon the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Guido de Marco, to address the First Committee.
Mr. de MARCO (President of the General Assembly): Mr. Chairman, in the first place, may I thank you for your very kind words on my election as President of the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly. The Assembly work also depends much on the work that the Committees of the General Assembly provide. There is such a definite not linkage but almost identity between the work of the Committees
and the work of the General Assembly, and for this I have even more to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your great co-operation and the valuable advice you have given me since my election to the presidency of the General Assembly.
The year 1978 was the year that the General Assembly proclaimed Disarmament Week as "a week devoted to fostering the objectives of disarmament".
By doing so, the Assembly highlighted the concern of the international community over the dangers of a spiralling arms race. It acknowledged the urgent need to mobilize world public opinion
"in order to create an international atmosphere conducive to the implementation of further practical measures with regard to the cessation of the arms race and disarmament". (General Assembly resolution 33/71 D) The importance of the resolution is twofold. It expresses the General Assembly's conviction that peace and security can be sought - and obtained - at progressively lower levels of armaments. It underscores the need to involve world public opinion on the issue.
In the ensuing 12 years, Disarmament Week was observed against the alternating backdrop of hope and frustration. Progress in disarmament was often elusive, but efforts continued to edge it slowly, yet steadily, forward. Notwithstanding the tension and turbulence that at times seemed to paralyse such efforts, the international community always persevered with determination and patience.
Over the last 12 months, international relations have undergone tremendous change in several key areas. The world community has witnessed the end of the cold war and the emergence of a super-Power partnership. The cruel East-West confrontation has been replaced by fruitful East-West co-operation. A generation of mutual trust has culminated in the dismantling of barriers and the unification
of Germany within the framework of a more secure Europe. The process of democratization is also leaving its mark in other regions in Central and South America, Africa and Asia.
All these changes increase expectations. Their positive impact on arms limitation and disarmament is already evident. The recent breakthrough in the United States-Soviet negotiations on reducing conventional forces in Europe is a case in point. It is expected that a conventional arms agreement will be ready for signature before the next summit of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in November this year. The dawning of a new security system in Europe is imminent.
It is my fervent hope that the progress achieved so far will be matched in other ongoing multilateral efforts towards disarmament, in particular the early conclusion of a chemical weapons convention.
Just as we are heartened by these positive developments, we are faced with a new regional conflict that threatens to destabilize global security and jeopardize the lives and well-being of millions of innocent people.
The events in the Gulf region are a vivid and painful example off the explosive nature of regional conflicts and their spill-over effects on global stability. As super-Power confrontation recedes and the halting and reversal of the nuclear-arms race become a reality, it has become obvious that an effort which parallels that which in the past mobilized world public opinion on the danger of the nuclear-arms race must be undertaken to halt and reverse the stockpiling of conventional arms and weaponry on a regional level.
Regional conflicts have sown death and misery among millions. There is an urgent need to resolve such conflicts - open or simmering - not by means of force,
JVM/4
(2hfiJififiiflanLfiLth£
SfiMiaLàfiSfllDÌllx)
but through the building o£ trust and confidence among nations. In this respect, the success of the CSCE process should be considered as a model for other regions of the world.
The firm, unanimous response of the international community to the invasion and annexation of Kuwait underlines the vital role of the United Nations in the peaceful resolution of conflicts. In a growingly interdependent world community, the relevance of the United Nations in bringing nations together to tackle problems in the political, economic, social and environmental spheres has come into sharper
focus.
The same need for common action holds true for disarmament. Bilateral arms control negotiations must be complemented by multilateral and multifaceted efforts. In this respect, the United Nations has a pivotal role in all relevant areas, including confidence- and security-building, arms transfers, conversion and verification.
At the recent World Summit for Children we were reminded of our grave responsibility to our children and to coming generations. They are entitled to a safe and peaceful world, a world that is not plagued by poverty, burdened by debt or endangered by a deteriorating physical environment; a world that is free from the scourge of drug-trafficking, free from terrorism, and free from violations of human rights. Above all, children are entitled to a world that is free from armaments and from the threat of war.
A step forward in disarmament is a step forward in the survival of mankind.
The Romans believed in the principle si vis pacem para bellum - if you wish for peace, prepare for war. This principle has been subjected to great criticism, and, in my view quite rightly, because it justifies the arms-race escalation which is only a step short of war. Many have changed the Roman principle into "si vis pacem para pacem" - if you wish for peace prepare for peace.
But one should distinguish between pacifism and preparing for peace. Preparing for peace involves not only a forma mentis regarding peace but also, in some instances, that peace itself be defended. One has to find a just balance between optimism and pessimism, linking idealism with a realistic approach in any situation.
Precisely because of this reality, taking a meaningful step towards disarmament is not easy. It requires a spirit of pragmatism and compromise, a
willingness to confront the substantive issues and address specific issues that stand in the way of progress. It requires a commitment to a new philosophy, the philosophy that was so well articulated in the preamble to the General Assembly resolution in December 1978, wherein it is stated that:
"the old concept of armed national security to which the peoples of the world are conditioned has become obsolete [and] is giving way to new concepts ... that ... require the full partnership of peoples", (resolution 33/71 N). This is the spirit in which I believe Disarmament Week should be observed.
The CHAIRMAN: I thank the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Guido de Marco, for his kind words and his very thoughtful statement.
I have pleasure in calling now on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de Cue. lar.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: First, Mr. Chairman, I should like to thank you for the very generous and encouraging words you have addressed to me.
The annual observance of Disarmament Week provides an opportunity to take stock of our efforts to promote the cause of arms limitation and disarmament. This year, 1 am addressing the First Committee at a time when signs of progress are more hopeful than ever in the past, though the shadow of regional conflict darkens an otherwise bright picture.
The fears and assumptions which brought about the creation of two major military blocs are now seen as the features of a confrontational past. A saner concept of security is taking hold, at least on the global level. As a result, the arms spiral is not only being halted but beginning to be reversed. The Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles - INF Treaty -
was a first step, which I hope will soon be followed by an agreement in Europe on drastic reductions of conventional armaments and military capabilities and by the expected agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States on substantial cuts in strategic offensive arms.
Yet enthusiasm at this turn of events must be tempered by a sober assessment of the tasks before us. The issue of nuclear weapons and their continued testing remains a divisive one, as the recent Fourth Review Conference on the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty has shown. While the need to strengthen the Treaty has not been questioned, it is of paramount importance that a viable regime for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons extending beyond 1995 be agreed upon by the international community. It is my hope that the widespread community of views existing on this issue will be extended to the thorny question of the cessation of nuclear testing. I have repeatedly underlined the desirability of a comprehensive test-ban treaty and I urge that all sides seek to make progress on this sensitive and heretofore intractable question.
The high priority of nuclear disarmament notwithstanding, other weapons of mass destruction continue to be a cause of deep and widespread anxiety. The proliferation of chemical weapons is an alarming development and the appalling danger of their actual use in conflict has in fact increased. This spectre alone should encourage States to remove the remaining obstacles and speedily conclude the chemical-weapons convention that is being negotiated in the Conference on Disarmament at Geneva. The firm political will that has led to agreements in other areas needs to be mustered to rid the world at long last of the scourge of chemical weapons.
Substantial progress in conventional arms limitation and disarmament is being made on the European continent, and it is gratifying to witness this development in
what has been regarded traditionally as the most heavily armed region of the world. The significance of this process goes beyond the sheer numbers of arms and armed forces involved. Entirely new security arrangements are being shaped as mutual confidence replaces suspicion and fear. However, this constructive change has yet to be extended to other regions. Only when the new appreciation of collective security becomes more firmly rooted world wide shall we be able to claim that a new international order has come into being.
Recent developments have clearly shown that aggression and the resort to force in international relations are not acceptable to the international community. It is to be hoped that the sense of shared responsibility reflected in the firm response of the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter, will also be demonstrated by a progressive dismantling of the world's huge stockpiles of weapons - nuclear, chemical and conventional. The efforts currently being made to tackle the issues of conversion and redirecting military capabilities to civilian purposes are healthy signs of the new sense of direction. I welcome the initiatives put forward and the proposals made in this respect and trust that they will be taken up energetically by the international community.
The turn for the better in the field of arms limitation and disarmament should lead us to redouble our efforts on behalf of peace. The responsibility for building a safer future is a universal one and I should like to pay a tribute on this occasion to the commitment of non-governmental organizations around the world. They have been selfless and persuasive champions of the cause of disarmament, and they have heightened public awareness of our objectives. They deserve our support and co-operation. A rare opportunity to alter the equation of

international peace and security is now within reach. Much depends on our grasping it. After more than a generation of confrontation, expectations are high, and we cannot afford to disappoint them.
The CHAIRMAN: On behalf of the First Committee, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his very thoughtful statement.
The First Committee has thus concluded its meeting devoted to observance of Disarmament Week.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.
UNITED
NATIONS
A
General Assembly
FRO VISIONAL
A/S-18/PV.1
26 April 1990
ENGLISH
Eighteenth special session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ERO VIS ION AL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE FIRST MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 23 April 1990, at 9.30 a.m.
President;
Mr. GARBA
(Nigeria)
-	Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Nigeria
-	Minute of silent prayer or meditation
-	Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
-	Credentials of representatives to the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly
(a) Appointment of members of the Credentials Committee
- Election of the President of the General Assembly
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-60003 7230V ( E)
- Address by Mr. Joseph N. Garba, President of the General Assembly at its eighteenth special session
- Report of the Preparatory Committee for the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly	:;.
~ Organization of the session	"!
-	Adoption of the agenda
-	Admission of new members to the United Nations [10]
(a)	Letter from the President of the Security Council
(b)	Draft resolution
-	Statement by the Secretary-General
-	General debate [8 and 9]
The meeting was called to order at 9.45 a.m.
ITEM 1 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
OPENING OF THE SESSION BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE DELEGATION OF NIGERIA
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declare open the eighteenth special .session of the General Assembly, devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular the revitalization of economic growth and development of the developing countries.
ITEM 2 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silent prayer or medi ta tion.
SCALE OF ASSESSMENTS FOR THE APPORTIONMENT OF THE EXPENSES OF THE UNITED NATIONS (A/S-18/8)
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before turning to the next item on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with the established practice, to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/S-18/8, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he informs the Assembly that 10 Member States are in arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the United Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under Article 19 of the Charter, “A Member of the United Nations which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contributions to the Organization shall have no vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding two full years."
(The Temporary President)
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of this information? It was so decided.
ITEM 3 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
CREDENTIALS OF REPRESENTATIVES TO THE EIGHTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(a) APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT., We shall now proceed with the appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee.
Rule 28 of the rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly at the beginning of each session shall appoint, on the proposal of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of nine members.
The Preparatory Committee of the Whole for this special session of the General Assembly devoted to international co-operation has made a number of recommendations in paragraphs 30 and 32 of its report (A/S-18/7).
I invite members to turn their attention to the recommendation concerning the appointment of the Credentials Committee.
In accordance with precedents, and taking into account' the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, I would propose that the Credentials Committee of the eighteenth special session should be the same as that of the forty-fourth regular session of the Assembly, namely Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, China, Colombia, Malawi, the Philippines, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America and Zaire.
If there is no objection, I shall consider the Credentials Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided.
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT; In this connection, may I invite the attention of the members of the Assembly to a note verbale from the Secretary-General, dated 2 April 1990, in which it was stated that credentials should be issued for all representatives to the special session, in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. I would urge all members to submit the credentials of representatives to the Secretary-General as soon as possible.
ITEM 4 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT., I now invite the Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of the General Assembly. In this connection, the Preparatory Committee recommends that the special session should take place under the presidency of the President of the forty-fourth regular session, Mr. Joseph Nanven Garba of Nigeria.
I take it that the Assembly wishes to elect him President of the General Assembly at its eighteenth special session by acclamation.
It was so decided.
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT., I extend my sincere congratulations to Mr. Garba and invite him to assume the presidency.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the President to the podium.
Mr. Garba took the Chair.
ADDRESS BY MR. JOSEPH N. GARBA, PRESIDENT OF THE (ENERAL ASSEMBLY AT ITS EIGHTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
The PRESIDENT.- I must express the profound appreciation of my country, Nigeria, and my personal gratitude to the Member States of the Assembly for electing me to preside over this special session. The confidence reposed in me by the international community continues to be a source of satisfaction and challenge to me.
Today we meet to undertake two important assignments.- the adnission of Namibia and the beginning of the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly. There has been much change in the world since we decided here to convene this special session. It has been breathtaking change. Sometimes the scope and direction of that change, and often its speed, has been unforeseen. We have saluted new democracies in Eastern Europe and southern Africa as well as the pledges of support to the fledgling democracies. Among the wondrous transformations of the world in recent months was the birth of a new nation in Africa.
Namibia, the country that we are about to welcome as the 160th Member State of the United Nations, will for ever remind us that usually even'-the most intractable problems can be solved when all concerned States and interests muster sufficient political will and co-operate in good faith, as envisaged in the United Nations Charter.
This year, 1990, has been remarkable. Certainly we are entering the new decade with enormous hopes, that the easing of tensions and disarmament will open up opportunities for dialogue and co-operation on the critical problems of the world economy, and that development will become a priority on the international agenda. Our assembling here today is, therefore, an open and profound expression of our collective hopes.
As our Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, underlined in January at the Moscow Global Forum on Environment and Development for Survival,
"we have to act on the realization that security has economic and social dimensions no less demanding of attention than its political and military ones."
This is, admittedly, a complex and difficult aqenda. It implies eliminating economic and social conditions that might generate conflict and insecurity for all- It means, further, that the peace and security purposes of the United Nations, as expressed in Article 1 of the Charter, will also be pursued through international co-operation to solve the most urgent development problems.
The opportunity to understand the interdependence of the world and to build a future that is beneficial to all mankind is before us. But this opportunity gives us almost daunting responsibilities.
The difficulties that led us to convene this special session - devoted to international economic co-operation and in particular the revitalization of the economic growth and development of developing countries - remain unresolved. As was stated very pointedly at the last session of the General Assembly, if we had sufficient and balanced growth of the world economy there would be no need for a special session devoted to growth and development. Through this special session we want to give an impulse to international economic co-operation in order to overcome the slowdown of the world economy in the 1980s and the dual-track development that has left the majority of developing countries with retarded economies.
Even for the world economy as a whole the aggregate growth record of the 1980s was lower than in the two previous decades. In addition, growth differentials have become larger. The developing countries bore the brunt of the decline in growth during the 1980s, and the gap between developed and developing countries has
increased. The most sombre aspect of this reality is that it is not merely past history, an we are alarmed that most of the forecasts for the 1990s are for much of the same. The prospect of another decade of stagnation in most developing countries must therefore be a matter of grave concern for the international community.
The developments in Eastern Europe represent a step further towards the integration and interdependence of the world economy. International co-operation is confronted with the additional responsibility of helping fledgling democracies to overcome their economic woes. Understandably, some concern has been voiced about the short-term economic repercussions of a possible diversion of finance, markets, investments and attention away from developing countries. No one can be sure of the answers at this moment. However, as the economies of the countries of Eastern Europe recover, their integration into the world economy will provide new impulses to trade and growth from which developing countries might benefit.
There are other potential benefits. Developments in Eastern Europe, while constituting one element in a broader picture of the slowing down of the arms race are also part of a scenario in which increasing resources should be released from military budgets and shifted towards social expenditures and development.
Such a shift in expenditures and other sound domestic measures are expected from all countries, including the developing countries. It is recognized that for any country - developed or developing - to succeed it has to rely on adequate domestic policies, on liberating and mobilizing the initiative and the savings of its own private sector, on programmes to increase the competitiveness of its agriculture, industry and services in the international markets, and on control of the inflationary vogue or tendencies that, in various countries, have left State budgets out of control. There are no doubt changed perceptions on the relative
(The President) economic role of the private and the public sectors and the need to streamline the State. And there is certainly a need to link development to poverty alleviation, to human resources development, to the enhancement of human rights, to scientific and technological progress and to the protection of our physical environment. For such domestic policies to be feasible, they have to be able to mobilize their own internal system of political support on a democratic basis - from the grassroots to the leadership.
And yet, sound domestic policies are no longer sufficient - if they ever were. For better or for worse, interdependence and integration have made nations more vulnerable to distortions, uncertainties and brisk alterations in the international economic environment. But, obviously, interdependence has its drawbacks. For all countries it imposes limits on the effectiveness of domestic policy alone. But these limits are not the same for all countries. The economic weight of a few countries is such that the reverse condition prevails, and the impact of their domestic policies overflows their borders affecting the global international environment. The reason for domestic adjustment then is not the same as for vulnerable countries, namely the need to adapt to an unfavourable international environment, but it is, on the contrary, the need to avoid transborder consequences unfavourable to the international economic environment.
The realities of interdependence are such that growth and development in developing countries cannot recover without increased international economic co-operation. Such co-operation is needed to redress the development losses of the 1980s that came about through a particular conjunction of unfavourable external factors.
These interrelated and mutually reinforcing factors - the high level of previously accumulated debt; the sudden rise in, and overall the unprecedented levels of, interest rates in the 1980s; the drying up of new finance from private sources since 1982; the deterioration in terms of trade of developing countries and their inability to increase exports to cope with the rapid rise in debt service -all these factors together have brought us to debt levels that developing countries are simply unable to repay in the original conditions in which these debts were contracted. And this has been recognized since 1989 by the Brady initiative, which favoured debt reduction.
I welcomed this shift in international policy towards debt reduction at the opening of the last session of the General Assembly. For many indebted countries, the mobilization of domestic resources required by the presence of a net negative transfer on account of financial flows is beyond economic feasibility with any given set of domestic policies. The Brady initiative has to be extended to more countries and deepened, before growth and development can be restored in most developing countries. Debt reduction becomes therefore even more necessary at a moment in which a worrying upward pressure on interest rates in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries might reduce the effect of painstakingly negotiated debt reduction accords.
One word only on the importance of external finance to support developing countries in their development efforts. It cannot be limited to a solution for the debt crisis. A large impulse would accrue to developing countries if the recommended target of 0. 7 per cent of gross domestic product for official development assistance could be implemented by all. The special official development assistance target is even more justified in the case of the least developed countries. And those countries that have reached and even surpassed this target have to be praised for their developmental responsibility and certainly their solidarity.
It is my sincere belief that an improved market access or the further opening up of world markets, in particular for products from developing countries, is another important development issue. International trade has an increasing role in generating growth. This is true for all groups of countries, but even more so for the economically weaker countries. On this front also, there are multiple signs on how necessary integrated and co-ordinated international action has become. Import contraction spreads the effects of the debt crisis to the trade partners of the indebted countries. Just to give the Assembly one instance presented by the
(The President) Director-General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), between 1981 and 1986, while world trade increased by 7.5 per cent, the imports of the 16 most heavily indebted countries declined by almost a quarter.
With seven months to go before the completion of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, it is imperative to emphasize the importance of results in the market access area. This means not only reduction of tariffs - and above all non-tariff barriers in particular for tropical products; but it also means the elimination of tariff escalations that do not favour diversification of the exports of developing countries, it means bringing back to the discipline of multilateral GATT rules sectors such as textiles and clothing, as well as agricultural goods, and also the multiplicity of gray area arrangements in steel, cars, electronics and machine tools, that put an unfair burden on the exports of the most competitive among developing countries. Additionally, it means concerted efforts to stabilize commodity prices before diversification can take care of all other export difficulties. It equally means undertaking special support measures for products of particular export interest to the least developed countries. But most of all it means reinforcing multilateralism against the danger of arbitrary and unilateral action, and the establishment of predictable and equitable rules and conditions for competi tion.
Much work went into the preparation of this special session. Mindful of the manpower hours expended so far in the preparations, I am particularly grateful to Ambassador Zepos, Permanent Representative of Greece to the United Nations and Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, for his persistent efforts to build a common understanding and a common ground for action. I am also grateful to all Member States, and particularly to the Secretariat, for the co-operation extended to him. I will not dwell further on all the major and complex development issues. Suffice it, however, to say that they are amply identified in a host of documents that have
(The President) been so ably prepared by the Secretariat, and that we have indeed been actively discussing during the past months. I do not for one moment deny that there are other major areas in need of international co-operation, such as the protection of human rights, to which I have made mention, the fight against hunger, poverty and disease, famine and the protection of the environment. My remarks derive from my personal conviction that many of these problems have their origin in and are intertwined with the lack of development, particularly in the developing countries.
Let me conclude by reiterating my wishes for the restoration of a pragmatic and productive development dialogue in the United Nations. The complexity and gravity of development problems can only be solved through complementary domestic and international action. Economic issues have not only become more interrelated themselves, they have become more political and more intertwined with social and environmental issues. It bears repeating., they have also become linked to the construction of a future that is peaceful and secure for all nations and all peoples. The chances are there for the construction of a better world for all of us. I have no doubt that members are all resolute in their determination to achieve that noble objective.
AGENDA ITEMS 5 AND 6
REPORT OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE EIGHTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY (A/S-18/7)
ORGANIZATION OF THE SESSION
The PRESIDENT; We turn now to the next order of business - the report of the Preparatory Committee for the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly, contained in parts I and II of document A/S-18/7, and the organization of the session.
In this connection I call on the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee,
Mr. Constantine Zepos of Greece.
Mr. ZEPOS (Greece) , Chairman of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole; I have the honour to present to the General Assembly the report of the Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the eighteenth special session devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular the revitalization of economic growth and development of the developing countries, issued as document A/S-18/7, parts I and II.
The Preparatory Committee held its first session from 31 May to 2 June 1989, its second session from 26 February to 2 March 1990 and its third session from 16 to 20 April 1990. The decisions and recommendations of the Preparatory Committee to the General Assembly are contained in section IV of part I of the report and section V of part II of the report. The Preparatory Committee submits a text as a basis for the preparation of the final document of the General Assembly at its eighteenth special session, contained in paragraph 33, on pages 8 through 15 of part II of the report. The Preparatory Committee also submits a compilation of proposals for the introduction to the final document, contained in paragraph 33, on pages 14 to 19 of part II of the report.
The PRESIDENT; I thank very warmly the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for his report. The General Assembly is grateful to him, and to those who participated in the Preparatory Committee, for their efforts to expedite our work, and in particular to get the special session off to a good start.
May I take it that the General Assembly endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee for the eighteenth special session, document A/S-18/7, and the recommendations contained in paragraphs 30 and 32, as a whole?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; On the basis of the decisions just taken by the General Assembly and the practice of previous special sessions, the Chairmen of the Main
Committees of the forty-fourth regular session would serve in the same capacity at the eighteenth special session. Accordingly, I should like to inform the Assembly that the following Chairmen are present at this special session; the Chairman of the Special Political Committee, His Excellency Mr. Guennadi Oudovenko of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic; the Chairman of the Second Committee, His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Ghezal of Tunisia; the Chairman of the Fourth Committee, His Excellency Mr. Robert Van Lierop of Vanuatu; the Chairman of the Fifth Committee, His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Fathi Al—Masri of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In paragraph 3 0 of the report of the Preparatory Committee, which was endorsed by the Assembly, it was recommended that the Chairmen of the Main Committees may be replaced by members of their delegations or members of the delegations of States belonging to the same regional group. Accordingly, the following replacements have been communicated to the Secretariat; for the Chairman of the First Committee, His Excellency Mr. Andres Aguilar of Venezuela; for the Chairman of the Third Committee, His Excellency Mr. Gaetan Rimwanguiya Ouedraogo of Burkina Faso; for the Chairman of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Thomas Hajnoczi of Austria.
The Vice-Presidents of the forty-fourth regular session who will serve in the same capacity at the eighteenth special session are the representatives of the following Member States; Antigua and Barbuda, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, China, Congo, Costa Rica, France, Gambia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Morocco, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zimbabwe.
In endorsing the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee the Assembly has established an ad hoc committee of the whole, which will be designated as Ad Hoc Committee of the eighteenth special session.
In accordance with the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee will be a full member of the General Committee of the eighteenth special session.
Concerning the election of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, the Preparatory Committee recommends that the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, His Excellency Mr. Constantine Zepos of Greece, should serve in the same capacity in the Ad Hoc Committee.
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly at its eighteenth special session to elect him by acclamation.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT.- I congratulate His Excellency Mr. Constantine Zepos on behalf of the General Assembly and on my own behalf and wish him well in the important and onerous responsibilities that he has just assumed.
The General Committee of the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly has now been fully constituted.
On the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, the General Assembly has just decided that, on the basis of specific requests, observer non-member States should be invited to participate in the general debate in plenary meeting.
I would like to inform members that the Observers of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Holy See, the Republic of Korea and Switzerland have asked to take part in the general debate in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to invite those four Observers to participate in the general debate in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; On the basis of the decisions just taken by the General Assembly on the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, the executive heads
of the United Nations specialized agencies concerned shall also be invited to participate in the general debate in plenary meeting, on condition that each statement shall not exceed 10 minutes.
On the basis of the decisions just taken on the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, interested intergovernmental organizations that have received a standing invitation to participate in the special session and the work of the General Assembly shall be invited to participate in the general debate in plenary meeting. Each statement shall not exceed 10 minutes.
On the basis of the decision just taken by the General Assembly on the recommendations of the Preparatory Committee, a representative of one non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council may address the Ad Hoc Committee on behalf of interested non-governmental organizations. Such statements shall not exceed 10 minutes.
The Preparatory Committee recommended that the General Assembly should take a decision to invite, on the basis of specific requests, other relevant intergovernmental and interregional organizations of an economic nature to participate and speak on an ad hoc basis during the session. Such statements should not exceed 10 minutes.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts those recommendations?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; It is proposed that these organizations may be heard in the Ad Hoc Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that proposal?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; In view of the large number of representatives whose names have already been inscribed in the list of speakers, it is proposed that plenary meetings should start punctually at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
In this connection, I should like to assure the Assembly that I shall be in the Chair punctually at the scheduled time. I sincerely hope that all delegations will make a special effort to co-operate in this regard, as indeed they have done at previous sessions.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Furthermore, it is proposed that, owing to time constraints, the length of statements, with the exception of those by the Heads of State or Government, should be limited to 15 minutes. A white flashing light will oe activated at the rostrum to let the speaker know that the 15-minute limit has elapsed.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly approves that proposal.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; I indicated earlier that statements by executive heads of specialized agencies and by intergovernmental organizations with a standing invitation to participate in the work of the Assembly would be limited to 10 minutes.
ITEM 7 OF THE PROVISIONAL AGENDA
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA (A/S-18/6)
The PRESIDENT.- The draft agenda of the eighteenth special session consists of the nine items of the provisional agenda recommended by the Preparatory Committee and a supplementary item, entitled "Admission of new Members to the United Nations", requested by the Security Council. In order to expedite our work the Assembly may wish to consider the draft agenda in plenary meeting, without referring it to the General Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; Regarding the allocation of items, on the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee the General Assembly has just decided to allocate agenda item 9 to the Ad Hoc Committee; it has also decided that item 9 should also be considered by the General Assembly in plenary meetings under agenda item 8, "general debate".
Furthermore, may I take it that, bearing in mind the General Assembly's practice, it is the Assembly's wish to consider item 10 directly in plenary meeting? It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; By adopting the report of the Preparatory Committee, the Assembly endorsed the provisional agenda contained therein, which consists of nine items.
The draft agenda as it appears in document A/S-18/6 includes a supplementary item, entitled "Admission of new Members to the United Nations", requested by the Security Council.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft agenda as it appears in document A/S-18/6 and now consisting of 10 items.
The agenda was adopted.
The PRESIDENT; With the permission of the General Assembly, I should like to proceed now to the consideration of aqenda item 10, "Admission of new Members to the United Nations", in order to give the new Member the opportunity to participate from the outset in the work of the special session.
AGENDA ITEM 10
ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS TO THE UNITED NATIONS
(a) LETTER FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (A/S-18/3) (b) DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/S-18/L.1)
The PRESIDENT; The Security Council has recommended, in document A/S-18/3, the admission of the Republic of Namibia to membership in the United Nations. In this connection, a draft resolution has been submitted in document A/S-18/L.1. In addition to the countries listed in that document, the following countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution; Albania, Belize, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Mongolia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Saint Lucia and Saudi Arabia. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts the draft resolution by acclamation?
Draft resolution A/S-18/L.1 was adopted (resolution S-18/1).
The PRESIDENT; I therefore have the honour to declare the Republic of Namibia admitted to membership in the United Nations.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the delegation of Namibia to its place in the General Assembly Hall.
The delegation of Namibia was escorted to its place in the General Assembly Hall.
The PRESIDENT? We have just witnessed a truly historic moment; the admission of Namibia as the one hundred and sixtieth Member State of the United Nations. It is a special occasion for the United Nations each time a new State is admitted. The case of Namibia, however, is unique, since its independence is in part the brainchild of the United Nations. Namibia's accession to independent nationhood and its entry in the United Nations is therefore a victory for the international community as a whole; for the people of Namibia as well as for the
United Nations.
It is my honour and privilege on this occasion to welcome the Republic of Namibia into the United Nations. I wish to pay a warm tribute to the entire people of Namibia and in particular to His Excellency President Sam Nujoma and his colleagues of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) , who have waged a historic struggle to vindicate the claim and right of Namibians to self-determination.
This is also a moment to pay a tribute to the United Nations. Our Organization inherited the League of Nations Mandate over Namibia and has since its establishment worked tirelessly to help the people of Namibia achieve its independent nationhood. All of the main organs of the United Nations have played their part - from the General Assembly to the Security Council, the Trusteeship Council, the Economic and Social Council, the International Court of Justice and the Secretariat. When the moment became necessary, in 1966, the General Assembly took the remarkable step of assuming direct responsiblity for the administration of Namibia.
Thereafter, the Council for Namibia and a succession of United Nations Commissioners played a pivotal role in the discharge of the responsibilities of the United Nations for the administration of the Territory. Our appreciation is therefore also due to the Council for Namibia and to each of the Commissioners, the late Mr. Sean MacBride, Mr. Marti Ahtisaari, Mr. Brajesh Mishra and the late Mr. Brent Carlson, who, the General Assembly will recall, gave his life in the course of the discharge of his duties.
A special tribute is also due today to our Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuellar, who, just a few days after his assumption of office, emphasized his determination to work tirelessly for the independence of Namibia. It was, therefore, with great pride, Sir, that we read your report to the Security Council in which you informed the Council that;
"On 22 March 1990 the South African Administrator-General, Advocate Louis Peinaar, left Namibia and was seen off by President Nujoma." Mr. Secretary-General, you have earned the gratitude of the people of Namibia and of the international community for your personal efforts to bring Namibia to independence. In acknowledging your role today, I should like also to commend all the members of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) , particularly your Special Representative for Namibia, Mr. Ahtisaari, his Deputy, Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana, and the Force Commander of UNTAG, General Pren Chand, as well as all those States that contributed personnel and resources to UNTAG.
But I would be failing in my duty today if I did not pay a very special and particular tribute to my own continent, Africa, which has shown such determined solidarity to bring about the results we are celebrating today. The Organization of African Unity and its member States, particularly the front-line States, gave their unstinting support to the struggle of the Namibian people. The front-line States, in particular, paid a heavy price for their commitment to the principles of equality and self-determination in Namibia. For me personally, this long-awaited moment is most gratifying, as I was one of the African Foreign Minister who was lucky enough to help negotiate Security Council resolution 435 (1978). The privilege of being part of the final actualization of resolution 435 (1978) has been, to say the least, most enriching and, indeed, most satisfying for me.
As I said earlier, Namibia will forever remind us of what can be achieved when there is political will among nations. The settlement leading to the independence of Namibia required that political will as well as great negotiating skills on the part of the members of the Security Council, the final Contact Group on Namibia, the Secretary-General and other leading negotiators, such as United States Assistant Secretaries of State Mr. Chester Crocker and Mr. Herman Cohen. It is
(The President) fitting that I should acknowledge today the contribution of all of those people for their roles.
As Namibia joins the United Nations, I should like to make a solemn appeal to all members of the international community to assist and support this new nation. Namibia has shown that the path is open to negotiation for the achievement of a multi-racial society committed to democracy, the rule of law and respect for inalienable human rights, ordered liberties and fundamental freedoms. It is my sincere hope that, as we celebrate the admission of Namibia to the United Nations, we shall recommit ourselves to the immediate, swift and total eradication of the abhorrent apartheid system in South Africa.
On behalf of the General Assembly, and on my own behalf, I should like to reiterate my congratualtions to the new Member State, the Republic of Namibia. I ask the Prime Minister of Namibia to convey to his compatriots our warmest felicitations and best wishes always. Long live the Republic fo Namibia.
I now have the honour and the privilege to call on the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Pérez de Cuellar, who wishes to address the General Assembly on this important occasion.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: It is with considerable emotion and pride that I welcome the independent State of Namibia to membership of the United Nations. In doing so, I should like to say how happy I am that Prime Minister Geingob and Foreign Minister Ben-Gurirab are here today. It is a special pleasure for me to see you, Sir, a distinguished son of Africa, presiding over this moving session of the General Assembly.
Decades of struggle and sacrifice by the Namibian people and its political leadership, and decades of support by the international community, have made this very happy occasion possible. In the course of the process that has ensued, the
world Organization developed a very special bond with the people of Namibia. It is
therefore a source of exceptional satisfaction in this house that they were finally able to exercise their right to self-determination in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and that the new State is now taking its rightful place in the community of nations. Just as, over the past month, the entire world community has rejoiced with the people of Namibia in its accession to independence, so, in the period ahead, the Government of Namibia, led by its President, Mr. Sam Nujoma, must receive the support of the international community in the great task of nation building.
None of us will have failed to note that the constructive atmosphere that attended Namibia's final steps to independence holds significant lessons not only for the region, but more broadly.
The success of the United Nations operation in Namibia has encouraged other parties to call for similar peace-making and peace-keeping assistance in their regions. It is of course an essential part of the responsibility of the United Nations to help resolve regional conflicts. However, I cannot overemphasize the fact that, to do so effectively, the Organization must be given clear mandates, adequate resources and solid and consistent co-operation by all sides.

The independence of Namibia and its admission to the United Nations has taken place at a moment of great and creative change in world affairs. Old confrontations are crumbling and the search for a new harmony is visible in several of the areas that have been most plagued by conflict in recent decades. Opportunities abound. For its part, the United Nations - inspired by Namibia’s admission to our ranks - looks to these emerging global opportunities with renewed hope and confidence.
In conclusion, may I ask Prime Minister Geingob to extend to President Nujoma and to the Government and the people of Namibia our renewed congratulations. I wish to assure them of the continued support and understanding of this Organization.
The PRESIDENT: Several representatives have expressed a desire to speak on this occasion. Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to appeal to representatives for their co-operation in limiting their statements to five minutes. We do have a lengthy agenda before us.
I now have the honour and pleasure to call on the first speaker, His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of the Organization of African Unity.
Mr. MOUSSA (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic).- It gives me great pleasure at this time of momentous events to express, on behalf of the Organization of African Unity and its Chairman, our congratulations to the people and the Government of Namibia on Namibia’s admission to membership of the United Nations.
On behalf of the Organization of African Unity I should like to express our gratitude to the international community for its support for that historic struggle and for its celebration of this important occasion. The Independence of Namibia
has been a cherished cause for which we struggled over a long period of time.
Today the culmination of that struggle marks a glorious chapter of all our efforts at the national, regional and international levels. Every effort was exerted in order to achieve this cherished goal, which is enshrined in the United Nations Charter, namely, to ensure the right of every people to self-determination, and to ensure that all peoples have equal rights.
In celebrating this occasion, we recall with appreciation and admiration the struggle of the people of Namibia, carried out and led with national dedication, determination and efficiency by the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO). We also recall the support given by Africa as a whole, in particular the front-line States, and by the international community at large on behalf of that s truggle.
It is my duty on this occasion to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and to the competent team that assisted him in implementing the United Nations plan up to the achievement of independence by Namibia. We also express our appreciation to the United Nations Council for Namibia for its vital role in that process. There is no doubt that the outstanding performance carried out under the flag of the United Nations will contribute to strengthening belief in the role of the United Nations and its crucial importance in resolving outstanding regional and international problems.
While we are celebrating the fall of the last bastion of colonialism and foreign occupation in Africa, we look forward to the day when we shall see Africa totally free, the day when the people of South Africa will also achieve their undeniable and inalienable rights.
I should like now to read out a message from President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak, Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.
"It gives me great pleasure to extend, on behalf of all Africa, our most sincere congratulations on the admission of sister Namibia to membership in the United Nations. The independence of Namibia, which is a triumph for the principles of the United Nations and the values for which it stands, culminates the great sacrifices made by the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization and President Sam Nujoma. That competent and wise leadership is a source of pride for all Africa.
"The African family takes pride in the admission of Namibia to membership in the United Nations and believes that the independence of Namibia is a supplementary step on the road towards the total independence of Africa and the freedom of Namibia is a consolidation of Africa's freedom. The crucial role played by the United Nations in the independence of Namibia and the strong unwavering support by the international community to the cause of freedom in Namibia is an outstanding healthy sign that now marks the international life today. It also underscores the importance of the United Nations as an instrument of great human value which embodies the spirit of integration and co-operation to advance the cause of peace, development and progress.
. "Africa appeals to the world community to extend every possible assistance to the people of Namibia in order to consolidate Namibian independence and to provide international aid to the projects and programmes aimed at the rebuilding and strengthening of the economy of the newly born State.
"Long live independent Namibia. Long live Africa's march towards a hopeful, valiant and vigorous future."
The PRESIDENT; I call on His Excellency Mr.Noumou Diakite, representative of Mali, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. DIAKITE (Mali) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, the Group of African States at the United Nations, which I have the honour to chair this month, wishes to convey to you its warmest congratulations and great joy at seeing you presiding over the work of this eighteenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to international economic co-operation, in particular the revitalization of economic growth and development of the developing countries.
The admission of Namibia as the one hundred and sixtieth Member of our Organization under your presidency has a symbolic value. You represent a country, Nigeria, which has made the total liberation of the African continent one of the cardinal principles of its foreign policy. An avowed militant for the rights of people to self-determination, you have, yourself, first as Foreign Minister of your country and later as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, vigorously fought against the policy of apartheid of the South African Government and its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The Group of African States at the United Nations bids welcome to the Republic of Namibia and assures it of its total solidarity. This admission to membership, which takes place one month after that country acceded to independence, is the crowning achievement of the long struggle of the Namibian people against foreign domination. It is also the direct result of 30 years of struggle for national liberation waged by the courageous Namibian people, under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) . This is therefore the appropriate occasion to pay tribute to the men and women who fell on the field of honour; their sacrifice enables us today to feel these deep emotions.
(Mr. Diakite, Mali)
In accordance with the goals set forth by the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, Africa in general and the front-line States in particular have unreservedly supported the just struggle of the Namibian people. Africa is pleased with the assistance that the international community has given the Namibian people in its national liberation struggle.
The pressures brought to bear on South Africa by many States Members of our Organization, by the General Assembly, the Security Council, the International Court of Justice, the Special Committee against Apartheid, and the United Nations Committee on Decolonization, together with the struggle of the Namibian people, compelled the leaders of Pretoria to discover the virtues of negotiation, thus making possible the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
The Secretary-General, who knew how to utilize every situation, deserves our full recognition and gratitude. We wish personally to pay a well-deserved tribute to him, as well as to his team of assistants in Namibia and here in New York.
We find enormously comforting the admission of Namibia to the Organization by unanimous vote, since it is true that the young State will need international solidarity to revitalize its economy and to consolidate its independence. We call also for implementation of Security Council resolution 4 3 2 (197 8) of 2 7 July 197 8, which reaffirms that Walvis Bay and the offshore islands belong to the Namibian whole. Given the historic responsibility borne by the international community concerning Namibia, it is henceforth the duty of us all to work to bring about the territorial integrity and unity of the new State.
In conclusion, I wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Sam Nujoma, the first President of the Republic of Namibia. A statesman who has embodied the aspirations of his people, who has been courageous and realistic throughout his long years of struggle, he deserves our admiration.
Mr. .RANA (Nepal).- On behalf of the Group of Asian States, I have the honour to welcome Namibia as a new member in this family of nations. While extending our fraternal felicitations to the people of Namibia, the Asian States share their pride and joy on this historic occasion.
Namibia's road to nationhood and independence has been long and arduous. The Group of Asian States pay the highest tribute to the Namibian people for their great courage, fortitude and sacrifice. Many freedom fighters laid down their lives to achieve the dream that is a reality today. The determination with which the people of Namibia waged their heroic struggle and the the dignity with which they conducted themselves during the transition period have earned them the admiration of the entire international community. Equally praiseworthy was the adoption of a constitution with a full guarantee for a pluralistic democratic society. This will remain a glowing testimony to the wisdom of the Namibian people, as well as to the vision, courage and statesmanship of leaders like President Sam Nujoma.
The United Nations had, since its inception, borne a special responsibility for Namibia. Together with the people of Namibia, we have shared moments of hope and despair. It is no accident that the final victory was achieved through free and fair elections under the supervision and control of the United Nations. The independence of Namibia is an example of what this Organization is capable of achieving given the co-operation of its members.
On this happy occasion I wish, on behalf of the Asian regional group, to pay special tribute to our Secretary-General for the perseverance and skill with which he implemented the mandate entrusted to him by the international community. It was not an easy task, and at times obstacles seemed insurmountable. We wish also to record our deep appreciation to his Special Representative, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, who carried out a difficult task with such distinction. Our appreciation also goes to all those who served in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG)
(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
and discharged their duties with dedication. We applaud the United Nations Council for Namibia, which so ably represented the people of Namibia during the transitional period and assisted in the preparation of nationhood. The Asian countries have consistently supported and been closely involved in this process. The independence of Namibia and its admission to the United Nations is therefore a matter of special satisfaction to the continent of Asia, as well as to my own country, Nepal, which had the honour to co-ordinate the adoption of the resolution that initiated the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia in the Security Council last year.
The emergence of Namibia as an independent and sovereign State is bound to have a profound impact, particularly on the ongoing struggle against the system of apartheid in South Africa. The members of the Asian Group warmly welcome this new nation in our midst and look forward to working in close co-operation with it.
Mr. OUDONKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian).' As Chairman of the Group of Eastern European States for this month, I wish to welcome you warmly. Sir, as President of this special session of the General Assembly and to wish you every success as you guide our work here. It is noteworthy that you, an outstanding representative of Africa, should be presiding over this session, which has just admitted to membership of our Organization the Republic of Namibia, whose people have won their long-awaited independence after more than 100 years of struggle against colonial oppression.
There is little need for me today to recall that the item on Namibia has been on the agenda of the United Nations for more than four decades. During the entire period of its existence, our Organization has consistently advocated immediate independence for the people of Namibia. It is indeed gratifying to see that these protracted efforts made by the international community have been crowned with success with the implementation of the plan for granting independence to Namibia through free and fair elections under United Nations supervision and control.
(Mr. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR) Namibia’s independence was not only the result of the heroic national liberation struggle; it was also the culmination of the peace-making activities of the United Nations and its insistent and persistent efforts to ensure the legitimate rights of the Namibian people.
Settlement of the problem of Namibia is an impressive example of what the United Nations can do by way of resolving regional conflicts. The United Nations has demonstrated in practice that its mechanism for settling situations of conflict and maintaining the peace is an effective one and the most acceptable one today to ensure peace and security in the various parts of the planet Earth. It seems to us that greater use can and must be made of this potential of the United Nations to settle the most longstanding conflict, the Middle East conflict, along with the crux of that conflict, the question of Palestine, and to eliminate apartheid in South Africa.
Here we would pay tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, for his efforts to promote a solution to the problem of Namibia. We would also note the important positive role played by the United Nations Council for Namibia, which for 23 years has been dealing with the many different problems of the Namibian people on a day-to-day basis.
A positive contribution was also made by the Organization of African States, by the front-line States and by all who participated in the 1988 New York agreements, which paved the way to unblocking the situation of conflict in South West Africa. In particular we should like to stress the role played by the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), headed by Sam Nujoma, which for more than 20 years led the struggle for the country's freedom. The people of Namibia demonstrated their appreciation of SWAPO’s work when they expressed their confidence in it during the elections to the Constituent Assembly. We also extend
(Mr. Oudovenko, Ukrainian SSR) our thanks to Mr. Martti Ahtisaari and his team and to General Prem Chand for carrying out their important work in leading Namibia to independence. We would also pay a tribute to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and the countries of Eastern Europe who participated in its work.
As we celebrate the birth of this new State, this new Member of the United Nations, we once again turn our eyes to the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. It would be difficult to imagine an event more significant than the elimination of this last colony in Africa as we approach the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of that Declaration.
Namibian independence is indeed a historic triumph of justice, and further proof of the effectiveness of the new political thinking of today. We express our deep conviction that the Republic of Namibia will make a constructive contribution to the strenghtening of international co-operation, peace and security.
The East European States have always supported the legitimate and just struggle of the Namibian people for independence. Today we would assure the young independent State of our close co-operation with them. We wish the people of the Republic of Namibia every success as they build up their State and develop and consolidate their independence.
The PRESIDENT; I call on the representative of Venezuela, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. ASIILAR (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish); A long period of waiting preceded this happy occasion as we witness the admission of Namibia to membership of the United Nations. Many efforts had to be made to overcome the intolerance and selfishness of a few. The regional group I represent is proud to have been able to contribute to the defence and promotion of that noble cause since
its inception, even before the norms leading to the right to self-determination and
independence of peoples had become firmly established in the minds and practice of some of the colonial Powers	of the time. But	the	wave	of independence that added
so much to the world of the	United Nations in	the	decades of	the 1960s and 1970s
did not include a Territory	that perhaps more	than any	other	had the best
credentials to obtain early	independence. It	was	only	after	a bitter protracted
liberation struggle under the responsible leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), with the support and solidarity of the international community, that Namibia got itself back on the road to freedom.
A little over a year ago we saw with cautious hope the beginning of implementation of Security Council resolution 43 5 (197 8). The coming together of a series of international factors seemed finally to be leading to a solution that would possibly bring about the redress of injustice, which had for so long been awaited by the Namibian people. Today the process of independence has ended and a new nation has joined the concert of sovereign nations.
The United Nations Council for Namibia has ended its work and is fast approaching its dissolution. Throughout its 23 years of work it has tirelessly contributed to the realization of the happy moment that has brought us together here today. Starting as a body with limited political scope, challenged and even underestimated, it went on to become a significant tool that denounced the situation and spread information on everything pertaining to the cause of Namibia. The nature of its responsibilities frequently brought it up against influential elements of the international equation, but it made no concessions with regard to its position of principle and nor did it abdicate the mandate the General Assembly had entrusted to it in resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967.
Together with meeting its political responsibilities, the Council carried out important work in the field of training human resources and providing material
resources to the Namibian nation. Venezuela is certainly proud that over the last decade it has chaired the Committee of the United Nations Fund for Namibia, whose contribution in this area is of singular importance, given the developmental needs the new nation will face. The past leaves marks, and lessons are learned. The future offers challenges and hopes. Still unresolved are aspects having to do with Namibia's territorial integrity, in particular the question of Walvis Bay.
Security Council resolution 432 (1978) recognizes the titles of sovereignty held by Namibia, and it is the international community's responsibility to ensure that that strategic enclave is returned to it as soon as possible without prejudice of any kind. It is important to point out that settlement of the Namibian question will be incomplete until that thorny matter has been resolved. In that regard, the international community's commitment still stands.
Though much has been done to create human resources to meet the imperatives of the social and economic reconstruction of Namibia, the facts show they are not sufficient. Namibia no longer exists only on paper as the subject of academic study by specialized agencies, Namibia now exists, which formulas for co-operation, bilateral or multilateral, must take into account. The Group of Latin American and Caribbean Countries has already taken steps in that direction.
Our Group is pleased warmly to welcome Namibia to the Organization. We are convinced its contribution to our work will demonstrate all the creativity, generosity and solidarity we expect of it.
The PRES ID ENT; I now call on His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson of Sweden, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. ELIASSON (Sweden); To welcome a new Member State to the United Nations is an occasion of joy, indeed an occasion of great pride for the world community.
Today, however, our rejoicing goes beyond the gratification of having seen the birth of a new nation. Another significant step has been taken towards the universality of our Organization. And we have seen the United Nations play a crucial and unprecedented role in the successful conclusion of the process of independence. All this constitutes a truly historic event.
Admitting Namibia as a Member State of the United Nations also marks the culmination of a long and sustained effort in the pursuit of freedom.
The people of Namibia have finally come to the end of their courageous and determined quest for freedom. There have been many sacrifices on the long and arduous road to independence. Today Namibia can proudly take its rightful place among the Member States of the United Nations.
The members of the Group of Western European and Other States congratulate the Namibian people on their great achievement and pay tribute to them for it. We also wish to express our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and all the men and women of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and the Secretariat who have worked so hard and skilfully for the success of one of the most complex and difficult operations ever undertaken by the Organization.
The independence of Namibia is a victory for Namibia and for Africa as a whole. But it is also a victory for the entire United Nations system. The Namibian experience has strengthened our Organization and the very principles of the Charter. In a powerful and convincing way, it proves that even the most
(Mr. Eliasson, Sweden) intricate and deep-rooted problems can be resolved by political means. It proves what can be achieved when the efforts of the parties concerned and the efforts of the world community are bound together by a common objective.
Namibia is, indeed, a symbol of the strength that lies in the will of the people and a symbol of the potential of peaceful change. What better start as a nation could the one hundred and sixtieth Member - or for that matter any Member of our Organization have?
Namibia will no doubt make a great contribution to the work of the United Nations. Many of our Namibian friends know our Organization from first-hand experience. The members of the Group of Western European and Other States warmly welcome the delegation of Namibia. We look forward to working with its members both as old friends and as new colleagues facing the common task of .promoting the noble aims and ideals embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT; The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Hussain Al-Shaali of the United Arab Emirates, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr. AL-SHAALI (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic) ; On behalf of the Group of Arab States, Mr. President, I wish to express our great pleasure in congratulating you on your election to preside over the General Assembly at its eighteenth special session. Your election on this day in particular is a reaffirmation of the trust placed in you by the international community and of your remarkable success in conducting the General Assembly’s deliberations.
This is a historic day in the life and annals of the United Nations. This day, on which Namibia is admitted to membership of the international Organization has particular significance, unlike that of the admission of any other State,
(Mr. Al-Shaali, United Arab Emirates)
because it marks the independence of the last colony on the continent of Africa and represents the culmination of a hard struggle waged by the people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), against the racist colonialism of South Africa. It is also the culmination of the efforts made by the international community, represented by the United Nations and by all the forces of justice and peace which contributed directly or indirectly to the realization of the country's independence. Here mention should be made of the role of the Secretary-General, the African States, the Non-Aligned Movement and other organizations and individuals. What has happened today also reflects the importance of international detente in the settlement of regional conflicts.
we in the Arab Group feel particularly happy today because of our special historical ties with Africa throughout all the stages of the common struggle against colonialism. We congratulate this newly established State on its admission as a full Member of the United Nations and emphasize our support for its achievement of freedom and prosperity and the ability to play its role within the international community in the establishment of international peace and security.
At the same time, we look forward to the day when the people of Palestine achieve its independence and assumes its proper place amongst us in the United Nations, like all other peoples.
The PRESIDENT.- The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Tesfaye Tadesse of Ethiopia, Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Mr. TADESSE (Ethiopia), Chairman of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
(Mr. Tadesse, Chairman, Special Committee of 2 4)
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Special Committee of 24) .• It is a particular pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the Assembly on this auspicious occas ion.
I feel a deep sense of joy in extending a most cordial welcome to the new independent State of the Republic of Namibia. The leaders of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), the combatants of the liberation movement and the people of the new independent State of Africa can look with pride at this meeting of the General Assembly and the justly deserved investiture of the victory won through the toil and struggle they have endured over the past several decades.
Namibia's independence is a source of immense satisfaction and delight to the entire world community and in particular to the members of the Special Committee on decolonization, who over the years have followed closely often frustrating and at
times even discouraging developments taking place in that region.
JSM /edd
A/S-18/PV. 1
51
(Mr,Tadesse, Chairman, Special
Committee of 2 4)
Namibia's independence clearly demonstrates to the world that a colonial people fighting for its freedom cannot be silenced and that, against all odds, a just cause pursued with courage and determination will indeed triumph. The final victory of Namibia is a tribute to the indomitable will of its people, as well as the resilience, foresight and statesmanship of the leaders of SWAPO, the national liberation movement, at the negotiating table as much as on the battlefield.
When I had the honour of representing the Special Committee at the official independence celebration ceremonies at Windhoek, I had the opportunity of conveying to the Government and, through it to the people, of Namibia the Special Committee's warmest congratulations and best wishes for peace, happiness and prosperity in the years to come. But Namibia needs more than the good wishes of all nations. A tremendous effort of national reconstruction will engage all the energies of the entire population, and I need not stress the responsibility of the international community, of the United Nations and its family of organizations, to extend their help most generously and give this new nation all the assistance it needs to rehabilitate its refugees, rebuild its economy and heal the wounds sustained from decades of colonialism and racism. Surely this important task of nation-building requires that Namibia should be ensured continued stability in full unity and territorial integrity, as provided by the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council.
Over the years, as more and more colonial Territories on its agenda have become independent, the Special Committee has taken great pride in contributing to the enlargement of the membership of the United Nations. As we observe the thirtieth anniversary of the Declaration and begin the decade devoted to the eradication of colonialism, Namibia's assumption of its rightful place in our
Organization no doubt provides added impetus to the decolonization process. Rejoicing in this historic event, the Special Committee considers it fitting to call for continued efforts to assist the remaining Non-Self-Governinq Territories so that the United Nations can hasten the achievement of one of its fundamental objectives,universality.	,
In conclusion, I should like to pay a deserved tribute to the Secretary-General for his perseverance against immense difficulties and express our appreciation to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) , and to all others involved in the process, for their valuable contribution to Namibia's independence.
I once again congratulate Prime Minister Hage Geingob, and through him the Namibian Government and people, and wish them success as they set out to build their new nation.
Mr, ZUZE (Zambia), President of the United Nations Council for Namibia; This day marks a special occasion in the history of the United Nations. Today, Namibia, a Territory for which the United Nations assumed direct responsibility more than two decades ago, is being admitted into the community of nations. This brings us a step further towards the realization of the cardinal principle of universality in the membership of the United Nations.
I wish in this regard, Sir, and on behalf of the United Nations Council for Namibia, to say how happy we are to see you, a distinguished son of Africa, presiding over the eighteenth special session of the General Assembly. Your country, Nigeria, together with the front-line States, has for a long time played a significant role in the struggle for the independence of Namibia.
(Mr. Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia)
May I take the liberty to welcome in our midst the Republic of Namibia. I do so cognizant of the fact that the will of the international community to see Namibia liberated has been fulfilled. The Council for Namibia cannot but salute all those who made the independence of Namibia possible. We are happy that at long last Namibia has taken its rightful place in this body. Its participation in the work of the United Nations will indeed enrich our deliberations.
It is with the greatest sense of pride and satisfaction that I extend a warm and sincere welcome to the Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, Mr. Hage Geingob, and the Foreign Minister, my brother Theo Ben-Gurirab. Their presence at this historic session of the General Assembly is clear testimony of the importance Namibia attaches to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Namibia's independence attests to the success of the United Nations. Indeed, it is, to all intents and purposes, the success of multilateralism. And in these days of rapprochement, we cannot but express the hope that multilateral efforts will be crowned with success in other conflict situations.
To the Council for Namibia, this day represents a very historic and joyous moment. Namibia, a child of the international community, has gained adulthood. To many who participated in the work of the Council, it is a dream come true. It is beyond the power of words to express adequately the jubilation that the States members of the Council for Namibia feel on this momentous occasion.
Since the establishment of the Council in May 1967, we have waited for the moment when Namibia would assume its rightful place among the family of nations. For 23 years the Council has engaged in programmes to mobilize international support for, and solidarity with, the struggling people of Namibia, and to assist
(Mr. Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia) the growing number of Namibians who were forced to flee from persecution in their country and seek sanctuary elsewhere.
In the fulfilment of its mandate, the Council consulted broadly with Governments and other parties concerned, throughout the world, to seek greater support for the cause of Namibia and to review all the measures that had to be taken to promote the implementation of United Nations resolutions regarding the Territory. The Council also kept under continuous review the political, economic, social and military developments in the Territory which affected the struggle of the Namibian people for freedom and independence.
Alarmed by the revelations of the rape and plunder of Namibia's natural resources, the Council took specific steps to protect the natural wealth of Namibia by enacting in September 1974 the now famous Decree No. 1 "for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia". To give effect to that Decree, the Council decided in 1985, after years of careful study and preparation, to take legal action in the domestic courts of States against those corporations and individuals involved in the exploitation, transport, processing or purchase of Namibia's natural resources. Since the Council's mandate effectively ended at the time of the independence of Namibia, it remains for the Government of the Republic of Namibia to take whatever further action it deems necessary in the furtherance of
this matter.
(Mr. Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia)
The road to Namibia's independence has been long and arduous. For more than a century Namibians have struggled, by diplomatic, political and all other means at their disposal, including armed struggle, for freedom and self-determination under the leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO). We salute them for their courage, determination and heroism. It was their heroic resistance, bolstered by the support of the international community, that led to their independence under the United Nations Settlement Plan embodied in Security Council resolution 435 (1978). The successful implementation of resolution 435 (1978) has thus brought an end to the colonial situation in Namibia and an end to colonialism on the continent of Africa.
The Territory's independence and its admission to the United Nations are clearly a cause for celebration. Yet we must not forget that the problems of Namibia are far from over. After decades of struggle against the ravages of apartheid and colonialism the crucial tasks of rehabilitation and national development are just beginning. We therefore appeal to the international community to extend its co-operation and assistance to Namibia, either through multilateral forums or through bilateral channels. Namibia will need substantial external help in restructuring its economy and providing the population as a whole with new economic and social possibilities. A comprehensive international aid programme will thus be essential for the country to consolidate its newly independent status, stabilize its finances and generate sustainable growth.
The Republic of Namibia has now joined the United Nations and the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) and will soon formalize its membership in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and a number of other international and intergovernmental organizations. The mandate entrusted to the Council for Namibia by the world
community has been fulfilled, and we have recommended to the General Assembly our
(Mr. Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia) own dissolution. However, we cannot fail to note that Namibia’s sovereignty over Walvis Bay and the offshore islands is still being disputed by South Africa. We therefore urge the Security Council and the General Assembly to reiterate their positions on these important matters and to compel South Africa to abide by the will of the international community and thus ensure the territorial integrity of Namibia.
Namibia's independence has shifted the struggle against apartheid to within South Africa's own boundaries. The Pretoria regime has in recent weeks professed a desire for positive change in its racist policies and has taken some small steps towards that end. But much more needs to be done. The valiant struggle of the people of Namibia conclusively proved the irresistible trend of history that the just struggle of oppressed peoples eventually triumphs. The forces of colonialism, exploitation and racism which relentlessly try to obstruct that historical trend are doomed to failure, and we firmly believe that Namibia's independence has spelt doom for apartheid and has brought closer the day of liberation for South Africa's oppressed people.
As we rejoice today, we must also remember those who gave their very best along the road to independence. The silent soldiers who perished in the struggle paid dearly for the liberation of their motherland. We must also recall those who died while still in our midst, and memory bows for a moment at the names of Sean MacBride and Bernt Carlsson, two of our Commissioners, and of Rego Monteiro, one of our outstanding Secretaries. Let us remember the men and women whom the Council was able to reach and to persuade - the scholars and statesmen, the writers and readers, the trade unionists and the churchmen, and our many shared moments of companionship and camaraderie, of friendship forged in the furnace of a mission sustained by our many individual selves. Let us recall the love and laughter that infused our work, the many personal friendships that the sharing of this cause and
(Mr. Zuze, President, United Nations Council for Namibia) the harmony of our work together afforded. Let us remember how the fire of our determination forged the steel of solidarity amongst all of us, distant though our nations may have been, unhappy as relations between us may have been on occasion. Namibia made us one.
At this solemn moment I wish to extend once again our warm greetings and welcome to Namibia, the one hundred and sixtieth Member of the United Nations. Namibia’s unhappy past is a nightmare and is now forever behind it. Ahead is a dream and a future of glorious opportunities. We wish the Government and people of Namibia great success in the arduous tasks of social and economic development and nation-building, as well as in their efforts to consolidate peace, security and justice in southern Africa.
It is now my distinct privilege and honour to express our deep appreciation to His Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his untiring efforts to bring about Namibia's freedom and national independence. His was a difficult assignment, and we commend him most sincerely. We also recognize the important role played by the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG), comprising thousands of international military, police and civilian personnel who worked ceaselessly to realize Namibia's national independence.
As the old adage goes., "All's well that ends well."
Mr. PICKERING (United States of America): On behalf of the host country, it is a great pleasure to welcome the representatives of the Government of the newly independent Republic of Namibia. We are especially proud to join in sponsoring Namibia’s accession to membership in the United Nations.
The Secretary-General and his Special Representative, as well as all of the personnel of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) and the United Nations Secretariat, have worked tirelessly to help the Namibian people join the
United Nations as an independent and sovereign nation. We congratulate those involved in helping to reach this proud moment.
The road to Namibia’s independence was long and sometimes rocky. However, neither the people of Namibia, not the world community nor my own Government ever gave up hope that Namibia would achieve nationhood with a democratically elected Government. The Administrations of three successive American Presidents worked diligently in the negotiating process and elsewhere to achieve this goal. My Government will support and encourage this new democracy as it establishes a democratic, peaceful and prosperous nation for all of its citizens.
The United States has been engaged in the cause of Namibian independence since the early part of this century. President Wilson's suggestions led to the establishing of the mandate system under the League of Nations, which guaranteed separate territorial identity of the former German colony of South West Africa. Following the Second World War we advocated Namibian independence and opposed all annexation efforts with vigour and determination. The United States played an important role in helping to fashion United Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978), the blueprint for Namibia's independence. We are proud of the mediating role which we played in the negotiations that led to the New York Accords, which enabled the implementation of that resolution, and I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for mentioning several of our American colleagues by name for their contribution to this great effort.
The Namibian people are to be commended for their fairness, patience and perseverance during the transition process. The United Nations-monitored, democratic elections, with 97 per cent of the voting population turning out at the
polls, offer a model for the rest of the world.
Great strides toward democracy are being made these days around the globe, as former closed societies open their doors to popular participation. As these nations set the stage for democracy, they can look to the new Republic of Namibia with esteem, with respect and with admiration as a pace-setter in the conduct of free and fair elections. The last colony in Africa is now a republic, a sovereign State in its own right, with a multiparty democracy.
Namibia's admission to the United Nations affirms its successful quest for freedom and for self-determination. Congratulations to you, Prime Minister Geingob, and to all the Namibian people on this historic day. There is no better way to bring in this new decade of the 1990s than with the birth of a proud new nation and its inclusion in the United Nations as the newest full Member of the Organization.
The PRESIDENT; The Assembly will now hear a statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Hage Geingob.
Mr. Hage Geingob, Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, was escorted to the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT; I have great pleasure in welcoming the Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, and I invite him to address the General Assembly.
Mr. GEINGOB (Namibia) ; The poverty of language makes it impossible for me to express clearly in words how honoured and privileged I am to have been accorded this rare opportunity - indeed one incapable of repetition - of leading the delegation of Namibia to the United Nations for admission.
I stand before you in all humility, Mr. President, you a son of that great country Nigeria, which because of its close association with the struggle in southern Africa came to be known as a front-line State. What a palatable conspiracy of circumstances it is, therefore, to see you presiding over this
(Mr. Geinqob, Namibia) special session of the General Assembly where Namibia is admitted as the one hundred and sixtieth Member of the United Nations. We are immensely indebted to you for your well-known consummate diplomatic skills, which undoubtedly made Namibia’s adnission today possible.
Mr. Secretary-General, allow me to express the Namibian people's appreciation to you personally for your unwavering support for their cause. When elected, you promised to make the Namibian question one of the priorities during your term of office. It is a pleasure, therefore, to note that under your stewardship the biggest United Nations operation ever mounted proved a success and resulted in Namibia's taking its rightful place in the community of nations. I am reminded of one colonial mayor of Windhoek in the 1970s who argued in a television interview that the United Nations had never anywhere in the world carried out any project successfully. For you it must have been a harvest of happiness, therefore, to see the United Nations preside over Namibia's peaceful transition to independence. The United Nations without a doubt faced a lot of resentment from those opposed to change in Namibia, but with the help of the majority of the people of Namibia it pulled off the big one.
It would be a derilection of duty on my part if I did not place on record our appreciation to the Security Council for favourably recommending to the General Assembly to admit Namibia. It was resolution 435 (1978), the Council's brainchild, that led to Namibia's peaceful transition to statehood. It must have felt a great deal of frustration during the 10 years of non—implementation after resolution 435 was adopted, in 1978. But now, with Namibia's independence, the long hours it spent and the patient diplomacy it engaged in on the Namibian question have not been in vain. Many thanks go also to the General Assembly, which has remained seized of the Namibian question since its inception, and particularly since South
Africa's Mandate over Namibia was terminated, in 1966. It is my sincere hope and belief that with its admission today Namibia will cease to be a perennial question on the agenda of the General Assembly.
Let me also seize this opportunity to express our whole-hearted appreciation to the front-line States and the States members of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for having played a vital role in the decolonization of Namibia. We pay a similar deserved tribute to all other countries that stood firm with us in our struggle for freedom and justice. In addition, our tribute goes to the entire United Nations system, particularly the United Nations Council for Namibia.
The new State of Namibia applied for membership of the United Nations under Article 4 of the Charter as, in its view, it fulfils all the requisite conditions for membership. Namibia has a small but vibrant population - of about 1.5 million; it has a clearly defined territory, which consists of the whole of the territory recognized by the international community through the organs of the United Nations as Namibia, including the enclave, harbour and port of Walvis Bay as well as the off-shore islands of Namibia; and its southern boundary extends to the middle of the Orange River. It has a democratically elected executive President and a Government which derive legitimacy from the will of the people. Namibia has the capacity to enter into relations with other States; as a matter of fact, over 80 sovereign States either have expressed interest in or have already entered into bilateral agreements with the Republic of Namibia - a fact which demonstrates the international community's confidence in our young Republic. The people of Namibia desire peace. Therefore, the new State of Namibia pledges to live at peace with its neighbours; it accepts as sacrosanct and will fufil all obligations attendant upon its becoming a Member of the world body.
(Mr. Geingob, Namibia)
The Constitution of Namibia, woven and crafted with meticulous care, is the pride of most Namibians, as it is homegrown and reflects the compromises achieved by Namibia's Constitution-makers in a spirit of give and take. We take justifiable pride in the fact that, second only perhaps to the United States of America, we had the rare opportunity without outside interference, but under the watchful eye of the international community, to sit down and draft our own Constitution.
The foundation stone of that Constitution is the recognition and jealous protection of fundamental human rights. Our Constitution is audacious enough to outlaw the death penalty. It recognizes the rights of children and guarantees political opposition under a mutli-party democracy. It gives me immense pride, therefore, to announce to the General Assembly that on this historic occasion I am heading a governmental, all-party parliamentary and trade union delegation, now also joined by the business community. That is a clear recognition of the political diversity of our society. We are committed to building a democracy in which violent confrontation and the politics of hatred will be things of the past, a democracy in which the concept of reconcfliation is already slowly but decidedly permeating the social fabric and the political lexicon of our society.
Lest I be misunderstood, I wish to place on record that to us, the Government of the day, reconciliation does not mean the continuation of the status guo. We have inherited a skewed economy riddled with imbalances and lopsidedness. The country is racially stratified, with the whites enjoying relative prosperity while the majority of the blacks live in grotesque poverty. The challenge facing us, therefore, is to achieve a healthy balance between political and economic reconciliation. The two go hand in glove, and we are committed to achieving both, not one at the expense of the other.
Globally, not least in southern Africa, the scale of human suffering has escalated by leaps and bounds, at times because of conflict that can be overcome through dialogue and discourse. With regard to South Africa specifically, it is our fervent hope that Namibia's experience will serve as an encouragement to the people of that sister country to end apartheid and bring about a non-racial democratic society.
We are a small nation of limited means but we stand ready to take our place among the nations of the world to contribute positively towards the realization of those most attractive ideals of the human race - world peace and harmony — through the United Nations, the greatest international experiment in peace, co-operation and hope.
The PRESIDENT; On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia for the important statement he has just made.
Mr. Hage Geingob, Prime Minister of the Republic of Namibia, was escorted from the rostrum.
The PRESIDENT; I should like to announce that the flag of Namibia will be raised at a ceremony that will take place immediately after the adjournment of the meeting, in front of the delegates' entrance.
That concludes our consideration of agenda item 10, on the admission of Namibia to membership of the United Nations. Before we begin the general debate, the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, wishes to address the Assembly, and I now call on him.
STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): This special session of the General Assembly has been convened at a particularly appropriate time. For the first time since the Second World War, there is an extraordinary convergence of views on the most critical issues faced by the international community. That augurs well for the deliberations of the General Assembly, which, under your able guidance, Mr. President, will address questions of crucial importance for the economic well-being and situation of the international community. I need hardly say that the success achieved by the present session will have positive and long-ranging effects on international relations as a whole.

Despite the many difficulties we face today, the last decade of this century is full of promise and hope. Thanks to outstanding events that have taken place in the political international arena, especially the renewed process of democratization, the reduction of rivalry between the super-Powers, the improvement in relations between East and West, and the sincere quest for solutions to regional conflicts, the possibility now exists to change forever the basis of international relations which had come to be considered permanent in the post-war period. They clearly point to the possibility of achieving stable global peace. The opportunity of the kind that has now been provided by the dynamics of human affairs had not occurred in our age. It needs to be fully grasped if international security is to be broadened, made truly collective, and given a lasting foundation.
The past decade witnessed political, economic, social, environmental and technological currents that cut across national boundaries. The increased international flow of people, goods, finance and ideas has given real meaning to the term "globalization". It has reduced the mental distance between societies and shown much political discord in the world to be a product of out-worn concepts and attitudes. It has also led to a narrowing of differences stemming from economic philosophies.
It is ironic, however, that along with that creative historical process there has also been a movement in the opposite direction. I refer to the widening of the gaps in economic and social well-being around the world. The developed market economies are enjoying an unprecedented period of expansion, while only a few developing countries have been able to achieve and maintain high levels of growth. But for most developing countries the 1980s brought no genuine economic betterment. Indeed, the economies of many of those countries stagnated or

declined. Some of them were already among the world's poorest. Without a reversal in their downward spiral, those countries, and indeed whole regions, will be even more economically marginalized. Millions will be added to the more than 1 billion people already living in abject poverty. Is it acceptable that, in today's prosperous world, millions of children should die every year from starvation or malnutrition, or that most people in the developing world should not even have safe drinking water?
The developed countries cannot isolate themselves from those realities. The consequences of the economic and social retrogression in developing countries are already touching lives elsewhere. The drug epidemic now threatening the world has been aggravated by the deteriorating situation in the developing countries. The increase in the flow of migrants within as well as among countries has been another manifestation of this phenomenon.


The political maturity that is reflected in the recent developments that I mentioned earlier will, of course, help to bring about a lasting peace, but it alone cannot guarantee peace. Peace needs to be securely anchored in a strong bedrock of economic and social justice world-wide. The United Nations Charter takes full account of this requirement when, in Article 55, it refers to "conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations". It is, therefore, a matter of the greatest concern that, despite the global effects of the deteriorating economic situation in most nations since the early 1980s, no serious effort has been made to initiate a broad-based dialogue on international economic co-operation. This special session provides Member States with the opportunity to correct this anomaly, which indeed amounts to a lamentable failure.
In recent months, Member States have laboured hard to lay a solid foundation for the success of this session. I should like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Constantine Zepos of Greece, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, who has done much to prepare the final document of the special session. All others who have contributed to the preparatory process also deserve our appreciation.
The preparations for this special session prompted, quite naturally, a further discussion of the reasons for the economic slowdown that has beset so many countries in the world. Those who have been unaffected tend to think that economic decline is due essentially to poor domestic management. Those who have suffered economic retrogression are inclined to argue that their misfortunes are the result of international factors that are generally beyond their control. Experience has surely demonstrated that both points of view have some elements of truth. Developing countries, lacking the economic resilience of more advanced societies, cannot prosper in an adverse international environment. At the same time, all countries must pursue sound domestic policies if they are to utilize the
opportunities available. Both conditions are necessary; neither condition alone is sufficient.
Over the past several years, I have noticed an increasing determination, particularly on the part of the developing countries, to strengthen their national economic policies. In many countries, the growth and development process could be helped by a better ordering of priorities, by the introduction of improvements in economic management and by the existence of a standard of administrative efficiency and effectiveness, especially in countries with a shortage of resources. However, it is useless to put stress on such measures without also addressing the fundamental causes of underdevelopment and overcoming the international factors that impede development.
We must recognize that domestic economic measures taken by large countries, or by a number of countries acting collectively, can impinge directly on the well-being of other countries, particularly the smallest ones. For example, the benefits that developing countries can obtain from adjusting their own agricultural prices will be compromised when agriculture in most industrialized countries is heavily subsidized. Similarly, the efforts of developing countries to open their markets and become more outward-looking will be frustrated if international trade continues to be hampered by a wide variety of restrictive arrangements. One of the objectives of this special session should be to chart a course for greater fairness and coherence in global economic policy-making.
In seeking to improve the international economic environment, there are a number of critical issues that must be faced squarely. Governments must create an open and equitable international trading regime. A firm political commitment by major trading countries is needed to ensure that the Uruguay Round negotiations
will enhance the trade and development possibilities of developing countries.

In the matter of commodities, the need for strengthened international co-operation is paramount, particularly in addressing the problems faced by developing countries. There must also be improvements in the flow of technology, so that all countries can make the best use of their physical and human resources, and we must ensure that developing countries have the financial resources necessary to avail themselves of these opportunities.
It is in this last context that we must address the question of the net transfer of financial resources from developing countries. Currently, developing countries are transferring about $30 billion annually to the developed countries. One of the natural results has been a decline in investment, which directly damages those countries' prospects for future development. This clearly runs counter to the principles of international co-operation for development.
Since 1982, international organizations, Governments of both debtor and creditor countries, private-sector banks and economic analysts have been addressing the problem of external indebtedness which confronts more than half the countries represented here. On previous occasions I have expressed my appreciation of the various initiatives, such as the Brady plan, which have been taken to defuse the international debt crisis. However, the fact remains that the total debt of the developing countries rose from some $750 billion at the end of 1982 to almost $1,200 billion last December. This increase was not, as some might suppose, a reflection of the willingness of banks to lend to credit-worthy customers. On the contrary, most of it was lending and borrowing entered into reluctantly by both parties in recognition of the fact that neither had much choice.
It has become obvious that we must remove the exorbitant burden of earlier loans. Present efforts for debt reduction and debt-service reduction must be pursued vigorously, underpinned with larger resources and extended to a larger
number of countries. This will require a major effort, and it is for this reason that I have requested the distinguished Italian statesman, Mr. Bettino Craxi, to act as my personal representative on debt. Mr. Craxi is consulting with all interested parties, and I am certain that his efforts will contribute to an effective resolution of this problem.
One of the lessons of the 1980s, and surely one of the causes of the changes that took place at the end of the decade, was the need to recognize the decisive role of the human factor in the development process. Economic growth has little value unless it can provide adequate food, health and shelter for the world's population. At the same time, in the more complex and interdependent world of today, the development of human resources must be a central feature of efforts for economic development in the 1990s.

Our planet is suffering from the burden we are imposing on its physical superstructure. An ever-expanding population that produces and consumes in ever growing amounts is threatening the very existence of future generations. Underdevelopment and poverty have damaged the environment, as have profligate production and consumption by the rich. Living generations have no licence to endanger the life prospects of future generations. We must achieve a better balance between population growth, resource utilization and the protection of the environment. Tackling this problem is an enormously complex task unprecedented in human history; but we cannot shirk it. The Conference on environment and development to be held in Brazil in 1992 will provide a major opportunity to address this challenge in a comprehensive and unequivocal manner.
To recognize the multiplicity of humanity's current problems is an important first step towards their solution. Mobilizing the resources to meet them is itself another challenge. However, the special session is taking place at a time when Governments around the world are reconsidering the uses to which they put their resources. The reduction in the number of armed conflicts and the relaxation of
political tensions, in particular if reinforced by concrete arms reduction agreements, will provide Governments with an opportunity to reallocate resources from military purposes to pressing economic, social and environmental needs that they all recognize.
For the past two generations the developed countries have spent vastly more on nuclear armaments than on protecting the physical environment. But today the environmental threat looms as large as the nuclear danger. Among the developing countries there are many whose military outlays far exceed what they spend on health and education. Despite the lessening of regional conflicts, world military expenditures in 1989 is estimated to have been close to a trillion dollars — approximately the same as the total external debt of the developing countries.

Continued political efforts, including the expanded use of this Organization's international security and peace-keeping roles, can contain the threat of war. Nevertheless, unless specific measures are initiated substantially to cut world production and trade in arms the benefits from the reduction in tension may prove to be chimerical. Commitments are needed to convert armaments industries to non-defence production and to give higher priority to the economic and social programmes in national budgets.
The restructuring of the political systems and economies that is being carried out by the countries of Eastern Europe should lead in the not-too-distant future to the growth of their markets, thus facilitating exports from developing countries and the greater participation of these countries in the effort of the international community to provide assistance to the developing countries, in particular the least developed among them, in their undertaking to make up lost time. There is reason to be optimistic with regard to active participation by the countries of Eastern Europe in the decision-making process affecting our small and shrinking planet.
At the time of the establishment of the United Nations Governments had a clear perception of the world's future need for international economic co-operation, and hence created the Bretton Woods institutions. Those institutions will continue to serve as solid foundations for co-operation in their spheres of competence.
But much has changed in 45 years. New problems have emerged and new tasks have been added. The time has come for international financial institutions and Governments to reflect on the experiences of the past in order to develop, based on a new vision of the future, more favourable conditions for multilateral development co-operation.
Responding to these challenges and seizing these opportunities will require an
extensive international effort. This special session may not be able to deal with
all the technical aspects of these myriad issues, but we can and should agree on the fundamental principles and measures of international economic co-operation. This would also help us guide the deliberations relating to the elaboration of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth Development Decade, the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the Eighth United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
We shall to some extent be venturing into the unknown. I firmly believe the time has come to be bold. Success requires that we be more forward and outward looking than our cautious human and political nature normally allows. Addressing the complex issues and bringing together the varying views on how to confront the challenges ahead is a daunting task. However, the current mood of rationality suggests that we have progressed beyond sterile ideological debate. We are in a position to agree on ways and means of achieving sustained and equitable economic growth. At the same time we have to address such urgent and fundamental issues as explosive population growth, the environmental degradation of our planet and respect for human rights.
For over 40 years this Organization has been a catalyst for change and transformation in global affairs. It is now being given new and extraordinary responsibilities in world affairs, as envisaged by its founders. We should set ourselves a programme of work for the 1990s, an agreed-upon global agenda. The United Nations in all its parts must remain relevant, efficient and effective. We have a unique opportunity. We should not shy away.
The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I thank the
Secretary-General for his very important statement.
AGENDA ITEMS 8 AND 9
GENERAL DEBATE
The PRESIDENT; We shall now begin the general debate. In accordance with the decision just taken by the General Assembly, the Assembly will also consider agenda item 9.
Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to propose that the list of speakers in the debate be closed this afternoon at 6 p.m.
If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT; I therefore request those representatives wishing to participate in the debate to inscribe their names as soon as possible.
I now call on the first speaker in the general debate, the representative of
Bolivia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of 77.
Mr. GARCIA (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish); Bolivia is honoured to begin the debate at this special session at a time when the topic of the relationship between international co-operation and economic growth and development is coming to the fore.
On behalf of the Group of 77, and on behalf of the Government and people of Bolivia, I wish to extend a welcome to the latest Member of the United Nations, the new State of Namibia. Its creation in the wake of a long struggle against oppression and discrimination clearly stands as a tribute to justice and freedom.
The Group of 77 also stands ready with open arms to welcome into its midst the State of Namibia, which we are confident will contribute to strengthening the Group and provide all of us with an occasion for rejoicing.
The Group of 77, over which Bolivia has the honour to preside, was the main initiator in the bringing about of this special session because we consider it essential that, in the decade we are now entering, yesterday's negative trends with regard to stability, growth and equity be reversed and that we embark upon the twenty-first century following a course that will revitalize the development process, thus in turn achieving a more just balance between nations.
The 1980s has been a traumatic decade for the majority of developing countries. Deterioration in the terms of trade, inflation, the debt crisis, the sudden decline in net flows of external capital and protectionism in the industrialized countries have combined to oblige the majority of developing countries to adopt prolonged and painful programmes of adjustment.
Those adjustment processes have sometimes been the outcome of governmental policy decisions and sometimes the automatic result of overriding economic realities. The effect, however, has been the same in virtually every case; a substantial reduction in consumption, savings, investment, employment and per
capita income accompanied by a decline in the standard of living of the people.
Thus the situation of the 1980s has contributed to widening the gap between the developing and the industrialized countries. The decade of the 1980s, which we in Latin America refer to as the wasted decade, must be put behind us. It has, however, left us with important lessons for the future, and it presents us with the challenge of finding innovative strategies to consolidate stability and advance towards economic growth, but qualitatively better economic qrowth. The efficient allocation of resources, technological improvement and its concomitant international competitiveness must combine with the creation of productive employment and enhancement of the human person as the goal and purpose of development. This all implies a better distribution of wealth, satisfaction of the basic needs of the people, the elimination of critical poverty and making use of the productive potential of human capital.
This strategy of renewal must also include environmental protection through endeavours of the industrialized and developing countries based on shared responsibility. The decade of the 1990s, the decade of hope, must also be a time for consolidating democracy, freedom and ideological pluralism as indispensable steps towards better systems for living.
These challenges will first and foremost require that the developing countries rely upon appropriate policies. The industrialized countries, for their part, must also have policies conducive to an international environment that encourages development.
If any progress was made in this regard during the wasted decade, it is that, by contrast with years past, there is now clear recognition and virtual consensus that appropriate macro-economic management is fundamental. But it is essential that there be symmetry between the actions of developed and industrialized countries if all of this is to be meaningful. There have been large budget
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia) deficits in some industrialized countries, reliance on monetary instruments to control inflation and the application of protectionist policies and unstable foreign-exchange markets, and all of these have contributed to aggravating the crisis of the 1980s.
Appropriate macro-economic management will no doubt have to be accompanied by appropriate development strategies and far-reaching structural change that will enable countries to adjust not only their policies and institutional frameworks but also the attitudes of their peoples.
Respecting the specificity and characteristics of each country, structural changes should seek freer interplay between supply and demand in determining prices, growing openness of the economy, the reduction and gradual elimination of subsidies and protectionist practices, and a new role for the State. The new State must be qualitatively better, seeking to remedy the shortcomings of the market and to guide the development process according to criteria of efficiency and equity.
But all of this is not enough to reactivate development in developing countries. Allow me to list, with no attempt to be exhaustive, only four of the obstacles requiring immediate attention; first, solving the debt problem; secondly, reversing protectionist practices; thirdly, applying policies and instruments that will make the terms of trade more stable; and, fourthly, increasing net flows of capital and making international co-operation more effective.
As to the question of debt, notwithstanding the advances achieved - the Brady Plan, greater flexibility in the Paris Club rules, including the Toronto treatment, and innovative agreements between developing countries - the debt burden continues to strain the investment capacity of developing countries.
Without investment there can be no growth, and without growth there can be no
development. That is why this topic remains the centre-piece in restoring
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia) macro-economic equilibrium and moving towards development. The second topic, relating to protectionism, and the second, relating to the terms of trade, are undoubtedly crucial to achieving change in international economic relations and ushering in stability and economic growth. In this regard the speedy successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round is fundamental. We hope that, together with the foregoing, studies will be undertaken and agreements reached to give greater stability to the prices of the raw materials of developing countries. The fourth topic relates to increasing net capital flows. The drastic curtailment of those flows has turned many developing countries into what may more accurately be described as net exporters of capital. This is an intolerable situation that must be changed immediately.
In this regard, official development assistance should attain at least 0.7 per cent of the gross national product of the donor countries, a target set for the 1970s but never fulfilled except for some commendable exceptions. We must also insist that at least 20 per cent of that amount be for the benefit of the least developed countries.
Likewise it is important that multilateral organs such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and regional organizations play a growing role at this stage in the transition from stability to development. More resources are needed on concessional terms to that end.
With regard to flows of external private capital, we are aware that the pre-condition for restoring those flows to an appropriate level is solution of the debt problem. However, with regard to public credits of a commercial nature, and private credits enjoying public guarantees, mechanisms must be found for their immediate enhancement. One instrument that may foster this process is the promotion of co-financial mechanisms with the World Bank and the regional and subregional financing organs.
Another crucial factor in enhancing capital flows is direct foreign investment. Attracting such investment depends upon an appropriate macroeconomic framework, transparent rules of the game in host countries, and policies and mechanisms in the industrialized countries that encourage investors.
I would not wish to conclude this statement without alluding to the experience of my country, which makes crystal-clear the traumatic effects of the wasted decade, the effort that the adjustment process has meant, and the difficulty inherent in making the transition from stability to economic growth.
At the beginning of the 1980s Bolivia had to contend with a dictatorial setting in which human rights were constantly violated and drug-trafficking had begun to take over the nation. No sooner had the country, at great sacrifice, embarked upon democratic life than it suffered the severe blow of deteriorating terms of trade and the rising cost of debt-service. Through the dislocations produced by this situation, Bolivia fell victim to unprecedented hyperinflation, with a steady decline in per capita income and in the population's standards of living.
However, the country shouldered its burden with maturity and determination. As a result, Bolivia today can point with pride to a consolidated democratic process, for three successive Governments have been elected by the will of the people during the last 10 years and, moreover, have assumed power as a result of agreement among the leading political forces.
Similarly, structural adjustment measures in Bolivia, after inflation had reached levels of more than 24, 000 per cent annually, have made it possible for inflation in the last three years to be reduced to less than 20 per cent a year. Similarly, since 1987 we have reversed the conditions of negative growth in the economy, which for six consecutive years had brought about a reduction in per capita income of more than 26 per cent.
The Government of President Jaime Paz Zamora has decided to consolidate stability and press forward with structural change. To that end, in consonance with the ideas of price deregulation and an open economy, an effort is under way to rationalize and trim the State and give greater impetus to private enterprise. At the same time, our Government takes a view of development which pursues growth together with social improvement.
With regard to lightening the debt burden, we have taken pioneering strides, as shown by our solution to the commercial debt and the imaginative agreements reached with Argentina and Brazil. Moreover, the recent Paris Club negotiations, under which Bolivia was granted "Toronto treatment", have made possible a substantial reduction in debt-servicing costs and significant balance-of-payments relief. We extend our appreciation to the member countries of the Paris Club for their constructive decision. At the same time, I wish to express the deep gratitude of President Paz Zamora and the people of Bolivia to the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, for his invaluable personal endeavours on behalf of my country in obtaining the Toronto treatment.
I cannot fail to mention Bolivia’s commitment to a comprehensive solution to the problem of drug-trafficking, a solution based on the principle of the shared responsibility of consumer and producer countries and on a search for solutions that will make it possible to develop substitute crops enjoying access to markets, while eradicating excessive planting and pursuing drug-trafficking interdiction activi ties.
As will be appreciated, in spite of all those efforts by country, it has had an uphill struggle in reversing the negative trends in economic growth. As a result, Bolivia can project no more than a modest growth of about 4 per cent in gross domestic product over the next three years, which is consistent with
(Mr. Garcia, Bolivia) macroeconomic constraints. It is obvious that, in those circumstances, Bolivia will not see its per capita income restored to the level it enjoyed during the 1970s before the start of the next decade.
What I have said clearly illustrates clearly the urgent need to change the international rules of the game.
The experience of Bolivia and of the developing countries in general shows how deep is the people's yearning for improvement and social change. Let us not forget that a weariness has set in among the developing countries as a result of the continuous sacrifice demanded of their peoples through unremitting processes of adjus tment.
In this context, I must emphasize the importance of global integration, international co-operation and the role of the United Nations in seeking a comprehensive solution to all those problems.
The Group of 77 approaches this session with high hopes, because, as I said at the beginning of my statement, it could be a historic crossroads, defining the future lines of international co-operation to stabilize the world economy, revitalize the development process and narrow the gaps that separate the poor countries from the rich, all of which are essential in order to consolidate ideological pluralism and democracy and in order to set the world on a course to a more prosperous and just twenty-first century.
The PRESIDENT; The next speaker is Mr. Budimir Loncar, Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia, who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. LONCAR (Yugoslavia); It is a pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this important special session.
My very first words and thoughts are addressed to the subject of Namibia. The independence of Namibia and its admission to membership of our Organization is a
great event for the people of this youngest African State, for southern Africa, for the world at large and for the United Nations in particular. With it, the Non-Aligned Movement and the policy of non-alignment have realized one of their basic goals. It is also fitting on this occasion to pay tribute to the Secretary-General.
The coming together of two events - having Namibia as a new Member of the United Nations and holding the debate on international economic co-operation and development - has a deep symbolic meaning.
No one denies the historical fact that colonial times have left behind serious disparities in the world's economic and social development. What concerns us most is that they are widening at an accelerated rate in some areas and regions. The solemn event to which I have referred, which marks the end of a long era, itself dramatically warns us of the importance of this issue.
World developments have reached a crucial stage. We have entered a new historical scene, with a completely different political and spiritual map in its
background.
In the midst of these great changes and positive and - it is to be hoped -irreversible processes, we should figure out the place and role of the developing countries. Indeed, what are the prospects for the vast majority of mankind, who possess tremendous potential and vet, for the most part, are impoverished? This question looms large. The response must be both wise and prompt, practical and comprehensive. This is not impossible. Have we not already opened avenues of understanding? Do they not offer responses to confrontation and antagonism, to divisions based on the ideology and military doctrines of yesterday? Security and development are but two facets of a single whole: world stability.
We posed the same question in this forum 15 years ago. We rightly argued then that the problems of development would become the key issue of international peace and security, and that no partial solutions could be found to development problems. On the other hand, we were obviously not realistic in our belief that declarations could alter the pattern of economic relations in the world.
Global interdependence has become even more pronounced and complex today. The consequences of economic imbalances cut ever more deep, day after day. The focus on the relationships between East and West has been shifting to those between North and South, which have assumed the shape of growing economic dependence.
Economic integration is the dominant feature of our time. Its basic logic is growth and interdependence. Growth should, indeed, be the motto of this and the coming epoch. However, interdependence is not duly perceived on the world scale and in historical perspective. What would, for instance, isolated or restricted growth or development, at the expense of others, the weaker ones, amount to? It is evident that in the long run it would have a disintegrative effect and its main purpose, integration, would become the opposite, disintegration.
We have entered a stage when we can be more optimistic than ever before. There are new notions about the world economy and its reintegration. New options
are emerging on the social and economic scene, and regional co-operation, which is essentially centripetal, should be conducive to wider fields of co-operation and integration. Integration of the most developed countries need not pose a threat to the less developed ones if it is based on the obvious logic of the interdependence of the world economy as a whole. Therefore I note with satisfaction that the Bonn Conference on economic co-operation in Europe recognized that increased economic co-operation within the process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) should not, detract from development co-operation and should include assistance to the developing countries. The fact that the developed countries, especially the European Community and Canada, have made significant contributions along that line inspires the hope that this special session will be marked by the efforts and desire of all to find a common denominator of interests and agree on further action.
Antagonisms, contradictions and the waste of enormous resources on competition and intimidation have given way to other preoccupations. Instead of the balance of power and fears, alternative new values are in the making; a new system of international security, and more reliable foundations of stability. I am sure that this session devoted to international economic co-operation and development can greatly contribute towards identifying where these foundations are to be sought, namely, in the new balance of interests, at the core of which lie the economic and social spheres.
The non-aligned countries have constantly given the same priorities to disarmament and development - to disarmament as the proper way of achieving economic prosperity. We have taken the path of disarmament. Is it not natural then to invest these capacities and potential, and above all, the resources, in development? The point is quite obvious. Development breeds development.
(Mr. Loncar, Yugoslavia) Progress breeds progress. Whichever way we take, this two-wav process completes a full circle. All of this calls for a global strategy, not only for economic development but also for the protection of the environment; for ensuring clean and renewable sources of energy; for dealing with population and social problems; for eradicating poverty; for combating drug abuse, terrorism and new mass diseases.
The existing multilateral mechanisms must be transformed into an instrument adequate to the present and future challenges. It goes, without saving that the United Nations should be the cornerstone of this new structure of international relations.
It is clear that development can result only from a harmonious blend of national efforts and adjustment, on the one hand, and a supportive international environment on the other. In other words, we should all change. But in which direction? In the direction of development for all.
The non-aligned and other developing countries accept the responsibility for their own developments, and they unequivocally confirmed this at their Ninth Summit Conference. They are making tremendous efforts to mobilize human and material resources at a high social cost. They are ready to do even more. In many of them the processes of economic and social reform are already under way. Many have opened the doors to the criteria and standards imposed by the world market. But is it enough? The answer is no, unless, as I said earlier, more favourable international conditions are created. These imply, first and foremost, the following; first, resolution of the foreign-debt problem and a reversal of the negative net transfer of financial resources from developing countries; secondly, free access to markets through the reduction of protectionism, in particular the elimination of tariff barriers, or more favourable treatment for developing countries in areas such as services, trade-related investment measures, and
intellectual property rights within the framework of the Uruguay Round;
thirdly, revitalization of the North-South dialogue on the reactivation of development, as well as on other issues such as combating poverty, improved living condition development of human resources, the environment, communications, scientific and technological co-operation; and, fourthly, a special approach to the solution of problems facing the least-developed countries.
The approach to the issue of North-South dialogue should take into account the interests of all. Solutions should be sought primarily on the basis of mutual benefit, as well as of equality and respect for national independence. New relations require changes to be made in the spirit of international solidarity and social and human justice.
It is only in this kind of world that the developing countries can catch up with the world economic trends that will mark not only the last decade of this century but definitely the early years of the twenty-first century as well. That is why the new international strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade, which is currently being formulated, should ensure a coherent framework for all international activities in the economic field. The existing economic and development institutions and organizations should play an important role in the elaboration and implementation of that strategy.
We are aware that one session cannot meet all expectations. However, if it gets to the core of the problem and provides an answer to at least one question -namely, how to open a development cycle in the interest of all - it may secure the key to all other doors, those leading to world stability and true democratization of international relations, which, in themselves, are inseparable from the economic and social spheres.
After all, have not human freedoms become the supreme value of this decade?
Is not the individual, with his creative potential and dignity, the common
(Mr. Loncar, Yugoslavia) denominator, over and above politics, ideology, religion and race? And yet that same individual is not able to rise above his economic and social environment. That environment can be his chance, but also his ill fate. If human freedoms are our ultimate goal and the individual the main link the human chain, then a chain reaction should be set off in the direction of development, the development of nations, countries, regions, the whole world without exception.
The PRESIDENT.- The plenary meeting will start at exactly 3 o'clock this afternoon, and in view of the long list of speakers, I appeal to members once again to be punctual. I will take down the names of delegations that’are here at 3.10.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p;m.
UNITED
NATIONS
General Assembly
PROVISIOHKL
A/46/PV.44 12 November 1991
ENGLISH
Forty-sixth session GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 44th MEETING Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 8 November 1991, at 10 a.m.
EX£AldRAi>
Mr. SHIHABI
(Saudi Arabia)
Disaster in the Philippines
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization [10]
Report of the International Court of Justice [13]
Progranine of work
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within One week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated ir. a copy of the record.
91-61718 7276V (E)
AK/cam
The MitlM Wil callsd to _ord«r at 10.05 i.a.
DISASTER IN THS PHILIPPINES
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic); I should like, on behalf of the General Assembly, to express to the Government and people of the Philippines our deepest sympathy on the tragic loan of life and material damage cauaed by the recent floode there.
I ahould aleo like to expren the hope that the international community will show its solidarity and respond promptly and generously to any request for assistance.
Mr, PADILLA (Philippines); On behalf of the Government and people of the Philippines, I should like to thank the General Assembly for the sentiments you have just expressed, Mr. President.
AGENDA ITEM 10
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE WORK OF THE ORGANIZATION (A/46/1)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): It is customary for the Assembly to take note of the annual report of the Secretary-General.
If I hear no objection, may I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Secretary-General in document A/46/1?
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 10.
AGKMDA ITEM 13
REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (A/46/4)
The PRESIDENT, The report of the International Court of Justice (A/46/4) covers the period 1 August 1990 to 31 July 1991.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note of the report of the International Court of Justice?
It was so decided.
IhtlKSMi I call on Sir Robert Yewdall Jennings. President of the International Court of Justice.
Sir Robert JENNINGS (President of the International Court of Justice), I am most grateful for the permission that has been given to me, as President of the International Court of Justice, to address the General Assembly. I thought it might be useful at this session, when there is the feel of a new beginning, when the international scene is changing with bewildering rapidity, to take a new look at the role of the International Court of Justice.
After decades of underuse, the Court now has a full docket of important cases, with Parties ranging from Scandinavia to Australia and from Central American to the Gulf. Perhaps I might give the Assembly a brief rundown of the present list of cases, in order to give some idea of the topics and of the Parties involved.
First, the Court will give its Judgment early next week in a case between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal on whether an arbitration award of 1989, concerning their dispute over the maritime boundary, is or is not binding.
Second, beginning next week will be the oral proceedings in a case brought by Nauru against Australia regarding the mining of Nauru's phosphate resources during the period of trusteeship.
Third, progreasing at the same time - for gone are the days of taking one case at a time - is the case between Bl Salvador and Honduras, with Nicaragua as Intervener, brought before a Chamber of the Court, concerning six portions of the land frontier, the legal position of the waters of the Gulf of Fonseca, and questions about islands in the Gulf. This dispute, going back a very long time indeed, has at least once led to armed hostilities.
Fourth, a new case introduced by Guinea-Bissau against Senegal seeks to bring the substance of the question of their maritime boundary before the Court.
Fifth, there is the case brought by Finland against Denmark complaining that a suspension bridge that Denmark proposes to build over the Great Belt will, if completed, be in breach of rights of passage for drilling rigs and drilling ships that pass through those waters from Finland to the North Sea. The Court has already adjudged an application for interim measures of protection in this case and will probably be holding hearings on the substance of the matter next year.
Sixth, there is a case between Denmark and Norway over the delimitation of the maritime boundary between Greenland and Jan Mayen in which a very large area of sea and shelf is involved.
Seventh, the Islamic Republic of Iran has brought a case against the United States concerning the shooting down of Iranian Flight 655 in the Gulf on 3 July 1988.
Eighth, the well-known case of territorial dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Chad, which has at times been the cause of armed hostilities, now comes before the Court as a result of action by both Parties.
Ninth, Portugal has recently brought a case against Australia concerning the continental shelf off East Timor, Portugal complaining of Australian dealings with Indonesia over that maritimo area.
Tenth, there is an application by Qatar against Bahrain regarding the maritime boundary in the Gulf.
Eleventh, the case concerning border and transborder armed actions brought by Nicaragua against Honduras remains on the list but proceedings have been suspended at the request of both Parties.
All eleven of these cases are brought under the Court's contentious jurisdiction. But it would be wrong to assume that the influence of the Court is necessarily limited to the cases appearing on the lists and eventually in the reports; there are also cases that are settled diplomatically when the possibility of resort to the Court as an option is brought up in negotiation.
I should mention that the use of the contentious jurisdiction is now much assisted by the Trust Fund for helping to meet the expenses of poorer litigant governments. This important Fund was created on the initiative of our present Secretary-General, and all the Members of the Court are most grateful for this assistance.
There are no advisory opinion cases before the Court at the moment, but there have been some fairly recently, and I would like to mention that recently, for the first time, the Economic and Social Council exercised its power to ask the Court for an advisory opinion.
(Sir Robert JtnnlMi, President.
International Court of Jmtlc,)
This docket of cases is an impressive list compared with, I think, that of any other time in the history of the World Court. Even so, one is very much aware that a list of 11 cases might not immediately strike a judge ot a typical domestic court as representing an over-busy court.
On this point, I should like to mention that the International Court and domestic courts are not in a comparable situation. First, there are the dimensions of some of the cases we have to hear and decide. The Honduras-El Salvador case is one in which there is a table full of volumes of documents and volumes of arguments and pleadings, which is in itself a very large task to negotiate. Secondly, in most of the cases - in fact, 10 out of the 11 I have mentioned - the Court does sit as a full court of 15 judges, or if there are ad hoc judges, even 16 or 17, who must, every one of them, be allowed to take a full part in the preparation of notes, in the deliberations and in the formal readings of the draft judgment in the two languages of the Court. They must be allowed to do this because they are elected, in accordance with the Statute, to represent the main forms of civilisation and the principal legal systems of the world. To fulfil that requirement, the Court must operate as a college and it takes a good deal of time, as one can imagine, for 15, 16 or 17 judges to take a full part in almost every stage of the decision of a case. Finally, I might perhaps be allowed to mention that every judge does his own research, in every case, into the now vast and complex body of international law materials, for none of us is provided with research assistants, and even secretarial assistance has to be shared. I mention these matters because the Court does feel very busy, and from what happened in the past I think we mry say that it is gratifyingly busy by any
standard.
Glancing at this Hat	of cases,	we can say on# thing with	asaurancei
this ia indeed now a world	court, exhibiting in ita dally work	that quality	of
univeraality which la alao	a feature	of this General Assembly.	I think there
ia every reaaon to believe	that this	new buayneaa of the Hague	Court, which
haa been developing now for some time, ia aet to continue. A reaaon for that belief ia that there la perhapa now a greater underatanding among Governmenta of the role that an international court can and ahould play in their relations with one another. An Important and welcome aymptom of that change ia the ateady growth of the number of declarationa accepting a measure of compulsory jurisdiction under Article 36.2 of the Court's Statute, the so-called optional clause. This development is also matched by the withdrawal of many reservations against jurisdiction clauses in treaties, which ia alao an important and welcome tendency, and by the augmentation of the Court'a general jurisdiction.
But it is not my intention just to report to the Assembly on the relative health of the World Court at the present time, but rather to try to look to the future and see the direction in which the Court perhaps ought to go during this Decade of International Law, whose programme also includes the strengthening of the role of the International Court of Justice. A major problem for the United Nations as a whole must always be the relationship between, on the one hand, political decision and action on the diplomatic plane and, on the other, adjudication on the basis of law by the Hague Court in its role as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. What part, for instance, can and should the Court now play in that important new role of the United Nations which has been called preventive diplomacy? These questions raise some other large questions and I can only attempt here to
< Sir Robert Jean lag,. President, lRt!Ill4112flAlJ
•ketch the future role of the Court in this respect ai I see it in this rapidly changing and evolving United Nation«.
The relatively restricted role played by the Court in the past stemmed, at least in part, from seeing the role and function of the Court as being a quite separate one to be performed over there in the Peace Palace at the Hague. I suppose people in general thought, and perhaps still think, of the Court as a quite separate and self-sufficient means of dealing with any dispute and thus, since it was simplistlcally assumed that wars and threats of wars arise from disputes, ensuring peace among nations. This innocent fallacy was fed by the more sophisticated fallacies of scholars who taught that, since all disputes were indeed capable of being solved by some legal answer, peace could be assured if Governments in dispute could be persuaded always to resort to the Court instead of resorting to force.
The extraordinary thing about this attitude of idealising and at the same time harmfully isolu-ing the role of the World Court is that none of those commentators would for a moment have expected any domestic court within a State to be able of itself to create order in society by the rule of law when isolated from other organs of government such as an executive or legislative branch. For even in a developed society working within the legal system of a State, it may be found wiser and even compelling on occasion, to change anachronistic or outdated law rather than seek to enforce it through the courts. There are, therefore, some situations and even some disputes between Governments which require a political decision by a political body rather than a decision by a court on the b.,ds of existing law. It is a source of constant wonder that so many good people in the past could so long have
supposed that an international court with compulsory jurisdiction was really
(Sir Robert Jenning«. Prtildint, ¡jiiulbuil-Ciuic
possible without complementary and developed competencee veeted in other lindi of International governmental bodice.
Fortunately, developments within the United Nations Itself have now overtaken thie fallacy. Now the General Aasembly, working mainly through the International Law Conmliiion and the Sixth Committee but «ilo through other organo, engages actively and continuously not only in the codification of existing international law but also in its progressive development. And the preventive diplomacy of the Secretary-Gene .’al, the Security Council and Indeed the General Assembly is providing the International Court of Justice with that political context in which It should now be able to perform its proper legal function.
But l«t us be clear that adjudication of dispute, is a process that has certain quite particular characteristics, the nature of which it is important to appreciate if we are to see the proper place of adjudication in the general scheme of the United Nations.
The International Court of Justice, like any court of law set up to adjudicate a dispute, operates by requiring the parties, by a process of written and oral pleadings, to reduce or refine their dispute into a series of specific issues of law or fact, or both law and fact, on which the parties take different views, and upon which accordingly the Court can decide by saying yea or nay, with the decision supported by legal reasoning. This process is easily recognisable by consulting the so-called submissions of the parties in any case and the operative part of a Judgment. In this process of the identification of the essential juridical and factual issues, the dispute is, as it were, refined, reduced and processed so as to make it suitable for judicial settlement, to make it in fact a justiciable dispute.
The issues thus identified and abstracted are decided by the Court by considering them in the light of the applicable law, which is public international law. International law is nowadays a much more elaborated, developed and complete system of law than many people realize, thanks partly to the jurisprudence resulting from the decisions of the International Court of Justice and other legal tribunals, and thanks also to the very important work of the International Law Commission and the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly.
On the other hand, although the process of adjudication means the reduction of a dispute to specific issues of law and fact, it is also necessary to appreciate that there is also in every dispute a more or less
important political content, '¿very decision of a court has political consequences, as well as leqal ones. The former tendency of commentators to distinguish between legal and political disputes, as if they fell into quite distinct categories, had a dangerous artificiality. A court must indeed apply legal rules and be seen clearly to be doing so, for other-wise it forfeits such authority as it has, for its authority arises not from the pronouncements of judges but from pronouncements of what the law is. Nevertheless, a good and useful court will not be ignorant of the political issues involved or of the political consequences of the decision it takes.
The important distinction, therefore, is not between legal and political disputes so much as between legal and political methods of dealing with disputes and indeed also with situations. One does not go to a court with matters in which a political rather than a legal decision is required; to do that there are other bodies, not least the principal political organs of the United Nations itself.
Nevertheless, there are many situations and disputes even of a highly political kind in which both kinds of process - adjudication and political and diplomatic adjustment - can make a contribution. I can best say what I mean by referring here to the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, where it is said:
"Another deficiency in the working of the syst-m of collective security is the insufficient use of the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, the International Court of Justice. Many international disputes are justiciable; even those which seem entirely political (as the Iraq-Kuwait dispute prior to invasion) have a clearly legal component. If, for any reason, the parties fail to refer the matter to
A/46/PV.44
IB
(SlJLJto£ftJLL. JJL	.
¿AtJIJJ9AUi2ABl„&QMl	)
the Court, the process of achieving a fair and objectively commendable settlement and thus defusing an international crisis situation would be facilitated by obtaining the Court's advisory opinion." (A/46/1. d, 8) I want to emphasise this idea of Identifying the "legal component" or components of a larger and perhaps, looked at as a whole, predominantly political dispute or situation. This is where the Court's advisory jurisdiction, whereby it can give a non-binding opinion on the proper law applicable to a legal component of a dispute, could be immensely useful. It may sometimes offer a way of getting things moving. In any case, the clarification of the legal position of a mainly legal component can surely be very helpful. I am not suggesting it would invariably be wise or useful so seek an advisory opinion; that is a matter of juridical and political judgment. But I do believe that to have this option more constantly in mind would have great advantages for the whole process of preventive diplomacy. It is perhaps unfortunate tha,-. a superficial reading of Article 33 of the United Nations Charter, which lists all the possible ways for the pacific settlement of disputes, may give the impression that Parties have simply to choose a method from the list, including the possibility of adjudication. In fact, 1 believe that the Court can usefully play a role, even in highly political matters, complementary to the other methods in that list.
To have the principal judicial organ of the United Nations more often employed with respect to the legal components of situations with which the United Nations is concerned would, quite apart from its possible contribution to solving a dispute or situation, also do immense good for international law. The relevance of international law would thus ba brought homo to people
generally. Such a development must be good not only for the Court but also for the United Nations and for the authority and awareness of international law itself ,
In short, I see the future of the International Court of Justice as becoming much more clearly seen as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations and much more intimately concerned with what is happening here at United Nations Headquarters in New York. I want to see the judicial orgtm and the political organs of the United Nations both working in harness much more than hitherto. This, I must make very clear, is not at all to suggest that I want the Court itself to become more political. On the contrary, its mission is to declare and apply the law, and it will range outside that task at its peril and at the peril of international law. Rather, the aim I have in view is that the Court and the law it applies should be seen much more readily and commonly to be relevant to most disputed situations if only to a legal component of those situations, and that it should be much more readily seen that the Court itself could be used for its proper legal purpose by the Security Council and the General Assembly, and by other bodies entitled to employ the Court's advisory jurisdiction, in matters that are not essentially legal in the overall view but perhaps highly political.
(fikJiiJJtiudagiiiiiliAL International Court of Justice)
The Court ha, demonitrated that, where an advisory opinion la wanted urgently, it Is able to give an answer remarkably quickly. The Court, in the case of the Palestine Liberation Organisation Office In New York, where the General Assembly asked for an advisory opinion on 2 March 1988, was able, after full oral proceedings, to give Its opinion in the following month of April. So, where rapidity is thought necessary and wise, we think we can provide It.
Let me emphasise now most strongly that what I am trying to suggest is not what one used to hear about discovering various ways of finding work for the Court to do. There is now no need for that. The Court is busy with Important cases and indeed its meagre resources of personnel and promises are already dangerously stretched. It is, rather, a proposal that resort to the Court should be seen, not as a process over there in The Hague which can occasionally be aporopriate and useful, but as an integral part of the work of preventive diplomacy in the United Nations here in New York. Such a development must help during this United Nations Decade of International Law to make people generally much more aware that international law is a complete system and that it should be and is regularly applied by the United Nations itself.
Let me now finally turn to an aspect of the Court's competence that stems not only from its own Statute but also from its being the principal judicial organ of the Organization. I refer to the fact that there is no element of the system of international law that is not within the Court's juJzlication to interpret and apply when it is called upon to do so.
The perceived needs of a particular time will dictate emphasis on certain aspects or topics of international law. The needs of our time have meant
(61JL_BQl,tLt_JbUJ	-
International Court of Justice)
rightly that energy, time, passion and politics are concentrated on such matters as the environment, conservation and distribution of resources, human rights and other topically Important parts of International law. It is crucial, however, never for a moment to lose sight of the fact that all these parts of international law depend ultimately on the health and strength of the system of international law as a whole. A right - even human rights - does not amount to much in practice unless it is established and seen to be established as an integral part of the whole system of international law which alone can create effective corresponding obligations in the international community. Some of those special causes are no doubt very important, but the most important special cause of all is international law itself and as a whole.
The International Court or Justice, as the principal Judicial organ of the United Nations, is the organ which supremely represents and enshrines this universal system of now we11-developed and working law. The Court's jurisdiction is in no way limited as to subject-matter. The environment, conservation, human rights, the law of the sea and the rest are without exception within the ambit of the Court's jurisdiction, and the range of topics involved in our present list of cases illustrates the wide spread.
There is of course room for some more specialised or regionc.1 tribunals. But let it not be forgotten that, exactly as in domestic court hierarchies, the principal judicial organ has jurisdiction in all matters; for in the end, the fabric of an effective law must be seen to be one and undivided, and universal in its application,
I am most grateful to have been given this opportunity to report on the stave of the International Court of Justice and to make some suggestions about the direction of its future development. In closing, may I just express the
(Slr Robeit J«nnings, Ptesident, Intimatloua! Court of Justice) warm gratitude of all member,of the International Court of Justice for the splendid support the Court Is now receiving from the General Assembly and Its Committees in the form of advice, encouragement and material resources. All that, I can assure the Assembly, is very much appreciated by all members of the Court.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The discussion of the report of the International Court of Justice gives me a welcome opportunity to make some observations on the Interplay of the principal organs of the United Nations in the field of peaceful settlement of international disputes. It also affords me an occasion to review certain measures that might lead to the strengthening of the complementarity of the respective roles of the principal organs in this important field. It gives me particular pleasure to make these remarks in the General Assembly In the presence of the President of the International Court of Justice.
The International Court of Justice is one of the six principal organs of the United Nations and forms an Integral part thereof. The organic links with the other principal organs of the United Nations are maintained through, inter alia, the annual report on the work of the Court and elections of members of the Court by the General Assembly and the Security Council acting independently but in concert, a unique procedure which underlines the active role of the two main principal organs in deciding the composition of the Court.
That the Court is also the principal judicial organ provides a further bond in the relationship. The General Assembly, the Security Council or other
 organs of the United Nations and specialised agencies so authorized, may request the Court to give an advisory opinion on any legal questions arising within the scope of their activities. In this way, the Court assists the functioning of the Organisation and of the system as a whole. Although few in number, the advisory opinions of the Court have been extremely important in the constitutional life of the Organisation.
For the purpose of maintaining international peace and security and of promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes, the Charter prescribes complementary roles for the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Court and the Secretariat. The primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security is assigned to the Security Council. It has full executive authority ranging from the competence to investigate disputes and to recommend methods of adjustment or terms of settlement to the power of determining the existence of a threat to the peace and deciding on enforcement measures.
The General Assembly has broad functions in regard to any matter within the scope of the Charter to consider and make recommendations on the principles of cooperation in securing world peace, and has the overarching competence to discuss and, under certain circumstances, make recommendations on questions relating to the maintenance of international peace and security.
As for the Court, the Charter provides that legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the International Court of Justice. Thus, the Court, in addition to being the principal judicial organ of the institution itself, is also the principal arm for resolving legal disputes between States. Member States are ipso facto parties to the Court's Statute. Under specific conditions, a State which is not a Member of the United Nations may also have access to the Court.
Here, the function of the Court is to decide. In accordance with international law, disputes of a legal nature submitted to it by States. The Court helps therefore to achieve the objective of bringing about adjustment or settlement of disputes by "peaceful means and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law".
Pursuant to the Charter, each Member State undertakes to comply with the decision of the Court in any case to which it is a party. Recourse may also be made to the Security Council with a view to giving effect to the judgment. In deciding disputes between States and through its judgments, which represent the most authoritative pronouncements on international law, the Court contributes to the maintenance of international peace and security. The record shows that a high percentage of disputes brought to the Court have been satisfactorily resolved. Let me just mention in this regard the North Sea Continental Shelf cases of 1969, the Gulf of Maine Case of 1964 and the Frontier Dispute case of 1986.
The Secretariat, which is another principal organ, executes decisions and facilitates their implementation for the reduction of international tension and abatement of conflicts. To that end, the Secretariat has indeed provided a wide range of services to the parties in conflicts occurring in different parts of the world. To open channels of communication, to establish facts, to supply professional knowledge or expertise, and to develop draft texts are typical examples of such services - all of which have proved very valuable to the parties in search of a solution to the conflict. Here the activities of the Secretariat complement those of the other principal organs for securing international peace.
Article 99 of the Charter specifically authorises the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security. The Intention of the Charter framers was to facilitate the Security Council's tasks under the Charter. This authorisation also provides an important legal basis for the Secretary-General to initiate actions for peace-keeping and peace-muking. All these are meant to complement and strengthen the functions and powers of the Security Council for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Clearly, each of these principal organs is endowed with a distinct role in the maintenance of international peace and security. But these roles are complementary. The independence of Namibia, which was achieved through the engagement of the General Assembly and the Security Council, the use of the Court's advisory jurisdiction, and the effective implementation of policy decisions by the Secretariat, best illustrates such complementary roles performed by the principal organs in bringing about peaceful solutions to international conflicts.
The complementarity in roles of the Court and the Security Council should be better understood and can be further strengthened in the field of settlement of disputes. Even international disputes which are predominantly political in nature often have a legal component. Dispute management can be greatly facilitated if legal components are separated from political issues. Different treatments can thus be applied. A reference to the International Court of Justice of even one legal aspect can produce valuable building blocks which may be useful for packaging the final political solution to the
conflict.
This In no way detracts from the respective functions either of the Council or of Hie Court. On the contrary, it pointe to the utility of greater cooperation.
To undertake contentious proceedings before the International Court of Justice, which are by definition adversarial, may not be feasible or even desirable in certain situations. Advisory opinions, however, may offer a viable alternative, since they are given to a third party - that is, the requesting organ - not to the parties themselves. This reduces publicity and insulates the parties from direct confrontation. Moreover, the opinion being advisory and not binding makes it easier for the parties to agree to this approach. Suffice it to mention here that the Court'e advisory opinions regarding reservations to the 1948 Genocide Convention, it advisory opinion on Namibia in 1971 and the 1975 opinion on the question of Western Sahara have all assisted the political orqans of the United Nations on the settlement of disputes, facilitating an international solution to long-standing problems.
Both the Security Council and the General Assembly have the right to request advisory opinions from the Court, a right which could be exercised with greater frequency. But circumstances may require or the parties may prefer a quiet and discreet procedure which would not involve going through the decision-making process involving the entire General Assembly or the Security Council. This may particularly be the case in instances in which the Secretary-General is entrusted with the exercise of good offices as mediator of a dispute. Therefore, I have on a number of occasions suggested that the
General Assembly should consider the possibility of authorizing the

Secretary-General to request, with the consent of the parties to the dispute, advisory opinions from the Court. The request would come from the Secretary-General and the opinion qiven by the Court would be for his use. The political contents of the case would be de-emphasised and the parties would be able to detach themselves from the request and from the proceedings. This would leave the Secretary-General the flexibility to find the best way to use the advisory opinion in the search for a solution to the dispute.
Before closing, I should like to turn to the topic of furnishing legal and financial assistance to States wishing to settle their disputes. Such assistance represents, in my view, another example of complementary activities of the principal organs for the purpose of promoting peaceful settlement of disputes.
Legal disputes exist in various parts of the world. The high costs incurred in proceedings often constitute a financial obstacle to seeking a judicial settlement through the Court, even though such a pacific settlement of disputes is in accorddance with Article 33, paragraph 1 of the Charter. This financial constraint is particularly apparent in developing countries where multiple needs compete for very limited funds. There are instances where the parties are prepared to resort to judicial settlement but are in need of funds or legal expertise or both. There have also been cases where the parties were willing but unable, for financial reasons, to implement an International Court of Justice judgment. The availability of external resources in such situations can therefore be extremely helpful to States in their search for peaceful solutions through the International Court of Justice for the settlement of disputes.
With this in mind, I established a Trust Fund in 1989 to offer limited financial assistance to States to defray their expenditures incurred in court proceedings. My objectives are to encourage States to make better use of the International Court of Justice and also actively to foster the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Fund has received world-wide support and some 30 States from all regions of the world have made financial contributions. The Fund received its first application earlier this year and an award was subsequently made to a developing country which is seeking a solution to a dispute with a neighbour through the International Court of Justice. A second application is now pending. The present assets of the Fund are, however, very limited. 1 draw the Assembly's attention to this because I firmly believe that the Trust Fund provides a practical way of assisting States in their endeavours to reach a peaceful solution to their disputes.
Recent events underline that the Organisation is capable of being an effective institution not only for the maintenance of international peace and security but also for the making of peace in different parts of the world. Principal organs, including the International Court of Justice, have important and distinct roles to perform in this area. It is through their complementary efforts that the potential of the United Nations will best be used. Member
States should realize this and act accordingly.
Mlj.MQHIAiQ (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): At its forty-sixth session, the General Assembly had the opportunity of hearing the conanents in the Sixth Commitee of Sir Robert Jennings, President of the International Court of Justice, on the Court's growing activity, a trend which, we are pleased to see, is gaining strength, as is apparent from the lucid statement made this morning by the President of the Court.
The dynamic changes taking place In international society have led to broad discussion of the place the United Nations should occupy in the system of relations that can already be glimpsed, as well as of reforms that might lead to the strengthening of that role. The International Court of Justice, as a principal organ, must also be included in this exercise.
Respect for international law has been and will remain a priority for Mexico and the Latin American countries, as their Heads of State and Government indicated in the Guadalajara Declaration of last July, in which they stressed their commitment to strengthening international law as a priority objective to be attained in the current atmosphere of world detente.
Chapter II of the report, concerning the Court's jurisdiction, both in contentious cases and in advisory proceedings, prompts members to give some thought to these matters for several reasons. The figure of 159 States given as parties to its Statute has increased with the admission of new Members to the Organization, which has implications for the Court's future work. Moreover, the report indicates that as at July 1991, 53 States had made declarations recognizing the Court's jurisdiction as compulsory. As early as October 1947, the Government of Mexico, consistent with its foreign policy, formulated its declaration in that regard. In the interest of widening the scope of the Court's jurisdiction, Mexico would welcome initiatives in this
direction that States that have already made declarations may wish to take, inasmuch as we are aware that the judicial remedy Is one among other important forms of recourse for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In hla annual report this year, the Secretary-General once again emphasises, with the force derived from the experience of events in the past year, an Important suggestion with respect to preventive diplomacy, which is reproduced in Chapter II of the Court's report. In it, the Secretary-General - in our view quite rightly - again puts forward for the consideration of the General Assembly, as he has done verbally, the desirability of extending to him the authority to request advisory opinions from the International Court of Justice whenever such opinions would facilitate the process of achieving an objectively just and fitting solution, thus ultimately strengthening the means of defusing possible international crises.
The Mexican delegation wishes to reiterate its strong support for that idea, which would be extremely beneficial to the cause of preventing and resolving international conflicts. Moreover, we wish to draw attention to the favourable attitude towards this suggestion taken by a growing number of States in the course of the debates in the Sixth Committee. The additional information, both legal and political, so clearly provided by the Secretary-General in his statement, prompts the Assembly to act expeditiously.
Mexico deems the Secretary-General's proposal to be consistent with the environment of worldwide change that is inspiring the international community and is gradually leading to a strengthened United Nations role within a pluralistic and democratic framework, in which all States are participating, based essentially on international law and cooperation for development.
(MrJtanUiQJiulcQ)
While the broadening of the advisory functions of the International Court of Justice does Indeed reflect a current interest, it is not merely a response to a current attitude. Rather, It Is backed by years of careful reflection. Now that appropriate conditions exist, we believe this is the time to take measures leading to that objective. The framework for considering the modalities of that decision might well be the present session of the General Assembly or the next session of the Special Committee on the Charter.
Chapter III of the report bears witness to the growing resort to the International Court of Justice in contentious cases. The law of the sea is the main issue in a number of the 11 cases before the Court.
Chapter IV refers to the valuable contribution the Court has made, at the Secretary-General's request, for the celebration of the United Nations Decade of International Law. In this regard, because it is intimately linked to the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, mention should be made of the Court's enthusiastic attitude, as expressed on previous occasions, towards the publication of its Judgments in all the official language, of the United Nations, which, unfortunately, has not been possible as yet, because of budgetary imitations.
Mexico, nevertheless, welcomes the news that it will be possible to translate and publish in all the official languages the summary records of the Court's Judgments and advisory opinions, as a result of which the Court has offered to provide for publication a set of all such summaries dating back to 1949. The availability of this documentation will certainly promote the greater knowledge and dissemination of international law.
(Hr. Montago, Mexico)
Lastly, my delegation wishes to place on record its appreciation of, and support for the Secretary-General’s initiative regarding the trust fund for assistance to States in the settleMnt of dispute, through th, Court. This initiative ha, the merit, inter alia, of reducing economic imbalances between States and of creating a degree of equality among them with regard to the possibility of access to the Court's support aervices,
Mr. YAitEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish)! First of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General and Sir Robert Jennings, the President of the International Court of Justice, for their very Interesting words. From them and from the report of the Court on its activities from 1 August 1990 to 31 July 1991, which has been circulated to ua, we can see that the situation of the Court is highly encouraging, with an increasing number of cases being submitted to it, irrefutable evidence of the growing confidence of states in this high institution. This situation is a cause of particular satisfaction to my country which fervently believes in the need to settle disputes between states by peaceful means, using all the procedures provided for the purpose by the United Nations Charter and other international instruments.
In these new and very encouraging times in international relations it is, as has just been recalled by the representative of Mexico and was stressed at the recent summit of Ibero-American heads of state and government held in Guadalajara, particularly necessary for international society to be based on respect for the rule of law and therefore, as provided in Article 1 of the Charter, disputes between states should be settled in conformity with the principles of justice and international law. One important means to that end is through recourse to the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. Use of the Court presupposes the existence of two conditions: political will and the finanical means of doing so. Political will is particularly expressed in the acceptance of the jurisdiction of the Court, which may be a general acceptance or on a case-by-case basis. In this regard, may I point out, as indicated in paragraph 14 of the Court's report, that Spain hw
(MlxlBitLBAUUJHOiJiiiB) accepted this compulsory jurisdiction when it deposited, on 29 October 1990, its optional declaration aa provided for in Article 36 of the Statute of the Court. But, in addition to the political will, there must be the economic resources for embarking on proceedings which in most cases are lengthy and costly. Two years ago, the Secetary-General had the excellent idea of establishing a trust fund as a means of assisting less developed states in this regard. Today we can note with satisfaction that the fund has begun to work and I am pleased to say that my country has just made a contribution to it.
I said before that the situation of the International Court is encouraging, but in the pursuit of such an ambitious goal as respect for justice and intenational law in international relations, it is also true that we must never become complacent. We must therefore exert constant efforts towards that goal. We believe that the words we have just heard both from the President of the Court and from the Secretary-General show us the road that we might follow.
The Secretary-General, continuing his thinking in this area, has presented to us in his last two annual reports and in his statement this morning a specific suggestion aimed at refining the existing system on the basis of the Charter. He requests that the General Assembly authorize him, as provided for under Article 96 of the Charter, to request advisory opinions of the Court on legal questions arising within the scope of his activities. In our view, we should give serious consideration to the possibilities of acceding to that request and finding the right ways and means of doing so. The text of Article 96 of the Charter provides ample scope for finding a generally acceptable solution that would enable the Secretary-General to use
(Mil YonesBiinuîvu, Spain) the experience and authority of the Court when, in the exercise of his duties, legal questions may arise which require clarification at the highest possible level. We ere convinced that we would thereby be serving the ultimate goal of the Organisation, which is none other than the maintenance of International peace and security under conditions ¿hat may serve the aim of justice and progress for mankind.
Ml.___________KOROMA (Sierra Leone): The Sierra Leone delegation would like to join in welcoming Sir Robert Jennings, the President of the International Court of Justice, to this fourty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly, and to express our gratitude and appreciation to him for his illuminating statement on the ongoing activities of the International Court of Justice and its role in the peaceful settlement of disputes. My delegation would also like to convey through the President to his brother judges its warm felicitations for the outstanding role the Court has continued to play through its judgments, advisory opinions, interim measures and jurisprudence in fulfilment of the objectives and functions of the United Nations and its Charter, in particular in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Much as we all welcome the lessening of tension in international relations it is axiomatic that if the much heralded new world order is to be durable and equitable, it must be predicated on the solid foundation of the rule of law and indeed of internacional law. In this connection, the International Court of Justice will have to play the role that it has played so eminently in the past, upholding the principles of the Charter in terms of the non-use of force in international relations and in terms of the peaceful
settlement of disputes. That the International Court of Justice has lately been performing its role as the principal judicial organ of the International conwnunity and hence Increasingly von the confidence and admiration of the world community, is evidenced by its present Hat of cases and the increasing willingness of Member States to refer their disputes to the Court. Also in this connection, the delegation of Sierra Leoae concurs with the position of the Secretary-General when he states in his report on the work of the Organization that
"The pule of law in international affairs should .... be promoted by a greater recourse to the International Court of Justice not only in adjudicating disputes of a legal nature but also in rendering advisory opinion in the legal aspects of a dispute". (A/45/1, chap. Ill, p, IS) The call by the Secretary-General that this authority be extended to him, with the consent of parties to a dispute, to facilitate the peaceful resolution of conflicts, therefore meets with the approval of my delegation.
(Mr. Ko re ma, _B1mii Leone) My delegation also welcomes the establishment of the trust fund for assistance to States that are disposed to refer their disputes to the Court but that lack the means, financial and human, to do so. However, my delegation would like to enter a caveat: we propose that, in the exercise of this function, advantage should be taken of the personnel available in the developing countries. This will not only promote the universality of the Court, but will also enable the requisite experience to be gained by personnel from the developing countries.
Given the new climate which exists in international relations today. Member States that have not yet accepted the optional clause of the Statute of the International Court of Justice - Article 36, paragraph 2, to which the President of the Court alluded in his statement - should seriously consider doing so, thereby increasing recourse to the Court in cases of dispute, which allows for judicial settlement, and hence strengthening international relations. We have taken note of the information provided by the President of the Court that Member States have indeed taken action in that connection -that is, in increasingly accepting the optional clause of the Statute of the Court•
The Sierra Leone delegation would like once again to proffer its thanks to the President of the International Court of Justice for taking the time to be present among us this morning.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): We have thus concluded our consideration of agenda item 13.
PROGRAMME OF WORK
UHIIKICMI <interpretation from Arabic)i The General Assembly had been scheduled to consider agenda item 30, "Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organisation of African Unity", this morning. However, at the request of a number of delegations, consideration of this item is postponed to a later date, to be announced.
I should like to inform members that on Wednesday, 13 November, in the morning, the Assembly will take up agenda item 39, "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)", and rgonda item 14, "Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency", as well as agenda items 18 (h), "Appointment of the members of the Consultative Committee of the United Nations Development Fund for Women", and 18 (i), "Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences".
In the afternoon of the same day, the Assembly will consider agenda item 142, "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo Imposed by the United States of America against Cuba".
Agenda item 18 (g), "Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit", which had been scheduled for consideration on Wednesday, 13 November, will be taken up on Wednesday, 20 November, in the morning.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.
UNITED
nations
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
5 ’	A/46/PV.62
„17 December 1991
,d 14 W
BHÇMSH
Forty-sixth session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 41st MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 4 December 1991, at 3 p.m.
President:
later:
Mr. SHIHABI
Mr. MIN (Vice-President)
(Saudi Arabia)
(Myanmar)
Current financial crisis of the United Nations; financial emergency of the United Nations: report of the Secretary-General [109 and 110]
Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa [37] (continued)
(a)	Report of the Special Committee against Apartheid
(b)	Report of the Intergovernmental Group to Monitor the Supply and Shipping of Oil and Petroleum Products to South Africa
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
91-61947 7795V (E)
A/46/PV.62 l(a-z)
(c)	Reports of the Secretary-General
(d)	Report of the Special Political Committee
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa [102] (continued)
(a)	Report of the Secretary-General
(b)	Draft resolution
Programme of work
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m,
AGENDA ITEMS 109 AND 110 CUEBENT FINANCIAL CRISIS OF THE UNITED NATIONS; FINANCIAL EMERGENCY OF THE UNITED NATIONS: REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/46/600 and Add. 1) The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): Members will recall that, at its 54th plenary meeting, the General Assembly decided that the report of the Secretary-General on the financial situation of the United Nations (A/46/600 and Add.l) would be introduced in the plenary Assembly under agenda item 109, Current financial crisis of the United Nations, and agenda item 110, Financial emergency of the United Nations, on the understanding that the substantive consideration of those items would remain in the Fifth Committee.
Members were also informed that, in the light of that decision, the Secretary-General would address the General Assembly on the subject of the financial situation of the United Nations.
Representatives wishing to make statements under agenda items 109 and 110 may do so during the consideration of those items by the Fifth Committee, scheduled to begin on Tuesday, 10 December 1991.
Accordingly, I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Yesterday when welcoming the new Secretary-General, I said that the renaissance of the Organization has not yet been reflected in its financial situation. The irony of the contrast between the high expectations rightly placed in the United Nations and the financial indigence to which it has been reduced carries a note of deep regret and perplexity.
It saddens me that I should have to convey this sombre note to the Assembly in one of my last statements. The financial insolvency of the United Nations has confronted it with a crisis which, I must stress, is at once political and budgetary.
The comprehensive account of the financial situation of the United Nations which I gave in the report before you presents a grim picture. As of 31 October 1991, Member States owed the Organization nearly $1 billion in unpaid assessments for both the regular budget and peace-keeping activities.
The momentous events which have recently transformed the world scene have served to highlight the role of the United Nations as an effective instrument for realizing the collective will of the international community in keeping the peace, suppressing aggression and strengthening the basis of stability in international relations. But the Organization's ability to follow up on the demonstration of its capabilities has been severely hampered by want of the minimal financial resources needed to discharge its responsibilities.
In the last year or so, the United Nations has been entrusted with a multitude of tasks. It has launched no less than seven new operations: along the Iraq-Kuwait border, the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission (UNIKOM), in El Salvador, the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL), in Angola, the Second United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II), in Central America, the United Nations Observer Group in Central
America (ONUCA), in Western Sahara, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and in Cambodia, the United Nations Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC). Additionally, an election observation operation was carried out in Haiti, the United Nations Observer Group for the Verification of the Election in Hait (ONUVEH). Incidentally, the political developments following that operation by no means detract from its success.
To add to these, there are currently in place the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) and the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). With the exception of UNDOF, all are inadequately funded. I have had, in the course of the year, to borrow from other accounts to cover the obligations of UNIKOM, MINURSO and ONUCA. Such measures could lead to a real financial disaster for several operations, should the domino effect be triggered.
In addition, a highly complex set of tasks is being undertaken by the United Nations in Iraq pursuant to resolutions of the Security Council adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. Furthermore, the United Nations has been called upon to give top priority to preventive diplomacy to help avert future conflicts and further to reinforce its role in peace-keeping.
Finally, to complete the picture, a vast array of new activities are also being undertaken in areas such as the environment, drug control, human rights and humanitarian relief. And, of course, there is a continuing preoccupation with the traditional economic and social development issues. The Organization is also being advised to strengthen its machinery for large-scale humanitarian assistance.

This unprecedented expansion of the Organization's activities demonstrates the confidence of the international community in the capacity of the United Nations to respond to complex and changing global needs. For its part, the Organization is scrupulously observing the principle of economy. This is proved by the fact that the increased rate for the proposed programme budget for 1992-1993 is no more than 0.9 per cent.
Yet, even as these new responsibilities are being piled on the Organization, no serious consideration appears to be given to how these operations are to be financed. Reliance is being placed on the existing, conventional financing arrangements of the United Nations which have proved, as they are bound to prove, woefully deficient. The combination of escalating responsibilities and the failure to provide the resources to meet them has landed the United Nations in a dangerously precarious financial condition.
Given this situation and considering the difficulties pleaded by many countries in meeting their obligations to the Organization, the United Nations can only lurch from one state of financial desperation to another, unable, for all practical purposes, to meet its current cash commitments, let alone to plan ahead.
Should this threatening financial crisis continue, the Organization may well fail to carry out urgent and important activities, particularly in the areas of peace-keeping and peace-making. Such a failure, for lack not of will or capability but of means, could severely erode the regained confidence which has propelled Governments and the public to turn to the United Nations for the solution to problems that endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, the principal purpose of this Organization. If this were to happen, the losers would include: the peoples of the world who have the right to expect and demand an effective, dynamic and responsive United Nations in these

troubled times; those Member States which have regularly met their legal obligations and paid their contributions on time and in full and have basically served as the financial backbone of this Organization; and the staff who have devoted their lives and careers to this Organization.
I urge the 102 Member States which had failed, as of 31 October 1991, to meet in full their statutory financial obligations to the Organization to ponder these issues with all their implications in mind.

I appeal to them, and especially to those Member States with relatively prosperous economies, to pay now. It is regrettable that the group of countries in arrears include some which should be able to pay and which, for historical, political and constitutional reasons, bear a particular responsibility. It is paradoxical that Member States should fail to fund adequately and on a timely basis the programmes they elaborate, approve, and set deadlines for.
Even though this situation is well known. Member States have no hesitation in asking the Secretariat to undertake new, complex and challenging activities. Yesterday it was Cambodia. Tomorrow it could possibly be Yugoslavia. Can we predict that other situations will not arise? Will these activities be properly funded?
The time has clearly arrived for a fundamental re-examination of the situation and a fresh approach to the problem. It is necessary to consider new and creative ways of, on the one hand, ensuring full and prompt payment by Member States of assessed contributions and, on the other, broadening the resource base of the Organization beyond its traditional narrow confines.
I am convinced that the elements of a viable, durable solution can be found for both the short-term and the long-term. Let me reiterate some suggestions designed for this purpose which I have outlined in my report:
Proposal No. 1: Adopt a set of measures to deal with the cash flow problems caused by the exceptionally high levels of unpaid contributions and inadequate working capital reserves. First, charge interest on the amounts of assessed contributions that are not paid on time; secondly, suspend the financial regulations of the United Nations to permit the retention of

budgetary surpluses; thirdly, increase the Working Capital Fund to a level of $250 million from 1 January 1992 and endorse the principle that the level of the Fund should be approximately 25 per cent of the annual assessment under the regular budget; fourthly, establish a temporary peace-keeping reserve fund, at a level of $50 million, as from 1 January 1992, to meet the initial expenses of peace-keeping operations pending receipt of assessed contributions; fifthly, authorize the Secretary-General to borrow commercially, should the other sources of cash be inadequate.
Proposal No. 2: Establish a humanitarian revolving fund, to be used in emergency humanitarian situations, pending receipt of pledged contributions from donor Governments and others; the fund should be established at a level of $50 million by a one-time assessment of Member States.
Proposal No. 3: Establish a United Nations peace endowment fund, with an initial target level of $1 billion. The fund would be created by a combination of assessed and voluntary contributions, with the latter to be sought from Governments, the private sector and individuals. Once the fund reaches its target level, the proceeds from the investment of its principal would be used to finance the initial costs of authorized peace-keeping operations, other conflict resolution measures and related activities.
As we search for solutions to the financial problems of the Organization, we must recognize that many developing countries are going through painful structural adjustments in their economies. Formidable problems confront another important region of the world going through fundamental change in its economic system. This state of affairs may hamper the ability of these countries to make the contributions they should make and would want to make.

An essential element of any solution, therefore, must be to seek additional sources of funding, particularly by reaching beyond the traditional assessed contributions. I have outlined some of these approaches. Let me revert, however, to my third proposal which is particularly relevant to the financing of peace-keeping and related operations, namely, the peace endowment fund, initially targeted at $1 billion which could become an important framework in the search for a long-term solution.
I should hope that the economically advanced Member States, especially those that bear a particular responsibility because of historical and political reasons for the success of the Organization, would not only pay their assessed contributions but also make generous voluntary contributions to the endowment fund, thus making it possible to reach the initial target of $1 billion within the next 12 months.
The set of measures I have outlined should serve as a good starting-point for an exercise which is both necessary and long overdue: namely, addressing the perennial problem of imbalance between mandated tasks and allocated resources. This problem has plagued the United Nations for all too long, and only threatens to get worse.
Now that the confidence factor - previously invoked for withholding financial support from the United Nations - has been turned around, is it not time also to turn around the financial prospects of the Organization? If a new world order is emerging with the United Nations playing a central part, should we not strive now to equip it for its most necessary and historic role?
I urge the Assembly to work energetically with my successor, Mr. Boutros Ghali, to solve a problem which has vexed and harassed my
predecessors and myself. This would be a most credible way of helping the Organization to fulfil the promise and the vision of the Charter.
The PRESIDENT: I join the Secretary-General in his appeal to Member States to live up to their moral, financial and statutory responsibilities in fulfilling the needs of the United Nations of which they are Members. I think it is one aspect of a failure that should not continue in the coming days, which, it is to be hoped, we shall consider days of success for the United Nations, and I thank the Secretary-General for his eloquent, sincere, honest and meaningful statement.
I call on the representative of Canada on a point of order.
Mr, FORTIER (Canada): I should like indeed to raise a point of order. My delegation agrees that the debate on the specific substantive proposals which the Secretary-General has just made should take place in the Fifth Committee, as you yourself. Sir, have pointed out. However, the financial crisis of the Organization cannot only be treated as another item on our agenda. We cannot pass resolutions and expect the Organization to meet the demands Members are putting on it without paying their bills, and as the Secretary-General said in his landmark statement, this crisis is political, not just budgetary.
On behalf of the delegations of Canada, Australia and New Zealand, I should like to address the issues raised by the Secretary-General in this very broad context here in the plenary session of the General Assembly, and I understand that there are other delegations which would like to follow me to the rostrum, if that should be the wish of the Assenfbly.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The representative of Canada has requested to be allowed to make a statement in the plenary Assembly under agenda items 109 and 110.
Members will recall that the General Assembly, at its third plenary meeting, decided to allocate agenda items 109 and 110 to the Fifth Committee.
Furthermore, as I stated at the beginning of this meeting, the Assembly, at its 54th plenary meeting, on 25 November, decided that the report of the Secretary-General on the financial situation of the United Nations would be introduced in the plenary Assembly under agenda items 109 and 110, on the understanding that the substantive consideration of those items would remain in the Fifth Committee.
The intention was to afford the Secretary-General an opportunity to address the General Assembly on the subject of the financial situation of the United Nations in a plenary meeting. Representatives wishing to make statements on this matter can do so in the Fifth Committee, where these two agenda items will be considered starting on Tuesday, 10 December.
The report of the Fifth Committee on these items will eventually be considered in the plenary Assembly.
In the light of the request by the Permanent Representative of Canada, and taking into account the importance of the issues being discussed, I should like to consult the Assembly on whether the membership wishes to hear statements at this plenary meeting on these two items.
Is there any objection to hearing statements under items 109 and 110 at this meeting?
(The President)
If there is no objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees to hear statements on these items at this meeting, without prejudice to their consideration by the Fifth Committee next week.
it was so decided.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): This decision having been taken, and out of courtesy to the representatives who have already inscribed their names on the list of speakers for the next item on our agenda for this afternoon, I should like to appeal to the speakers on agenda items 109 and 110 to be brief.
Mr. FORTIER (Canada): Mr. President, thank you very much for your decision - and I assure you that I shall be brief.
I have the honour to address the Assembly today on behalf of my own Government and the Governments of Australia and New Zealand.
The subject we address today, the financial viability of the United Nations - a very sombre subject indeed - constitutes perhaps the most significant challenge to the effectiveness of our institution in years ahead. While Member States are constantly urging new activities on the Organization, many of them have proved unwilling to meet even their existing financial commitments to the United Nations. To use a well-known colloquialism, let us put our money where our mouth is.
At the outset, we strongly urge all delegations which have not yet met their obligations for 1991 or previous years to do so before the end of the year. Allow me to assure the Assembly that all three of our countries intend again this year to pay our 1992 assessments to the regular budget of the Organization on time.
From our perspective, a strong temptation might exist to lapse into self-righteousness on this topic. Our three countries can claim that we bear no responsibility for the financial crisis. Australia, New Zealand and Canada have always paid their contributions in full, on time, and on request in advance. We have supported multilateral action through some very depressing times. We do not intend to abandon or qualify our commitment to the United Nations now when it is showing signs of vitality. And we do not intend to engage in posturing on the critical financial issues before us today.
During the Secretary-General's most recent term of office, the United Nations Secretariat has carried out some of the most challenging mandates it has ever been asked to manage. It is a tribute to him and to his colleagues in the Secretariat that they have succeeded in spite of a constant cash-flow crisis. Under his leadership, Member States have come to rely on the Security Council to find solutions to longstanding conflicts. The General Assembly and its subsidiary organs, including those of the Economic and Social Council, are now internationally accepted forums where meaningful discussion of the challenges facing the world community can take place. One would presume that the future for the Organization could not be brighter.
Yet many of those Member States that use the United Nations political arena so effectively and are the most demanding of new services do not seem to be prepared to pay for the Organization.
Most Governments find it difficult to reconcile revenues with financial outlays. When one looks at spending priorities, it is easier to postpone paying the bill for a far-away institution pressing its financial requirements politely than to disappoint frequently shrill domestic constituencies. However, this approach by Member States is proving increasingly unsustainable
(Mr. Fortier, Canada) for the United Nations. So far the Secretariat has managed to serve the basic needs of the Security Council, the General Assembly and the other organs of the United Nations, even though it has been forced to live on a hand-to-mouth basis. This process of improvisation through management by financial crisis is no longer either feasible or sensible, as the Secretary-General has so rightly pointed out.
At the same time, while it is true that the Organization indeed has much to be proud of, Member States, including Australia, Canada and New Zealand, which have supported the United Nations through thick and thin, ask themselves whether their contributions are used as effectively as they should be. Issues of Secretariat reform have been discussed informally amongst a number of delegations. We share a wish to see an end to duplication, lack of coordination among different divisions of the Secretariat, and jealousies amongst the numerous United Nations agencies. Institutions meant to serve Member States are often remote and unresponsive. We remain hopeful that genuine reforms of both the structures and the operational approaches of the United Nations can be fostered. But we recognize that the encouragement of a culture of economy and efficiency in the Secretariat will be a futile endeavour if prompt payment of dues is simply to go on being avoided by many Members.
The United Nations now benefits from unequalled goodwill throughout the world community. We urge all Members to honour this goodwill by supporting the Secretary-General's call to take measures to provide the Organization with the resources it requires to allow it to respond rapidly to all Members'
demands.
The proposals placed before the General Assembly by the Secretary-General warrant our fullest consideration. While they need discussion in detail - and some might need further elaboration - this should not be a cause to delay or defer decisions, at least on the more straightforward and longstanding proposals. Let us aim for a resolution that will be both a tribute to the outgoing Secretary-General and a welcome to his successor.
Without looking at the details of how the various proposals would be put into effect, we are in favour, in principle, of the need to establish a designated start-up fund for peace-keeping and of looking at ways to increase the Working Capital Fund. Our delegations have advocated greater financial flexibility for several years now, particularly because of the greatly expanded demands of peace-keeping missions.
JRS/6
A/46/PV.62
21
(„..Fortier, Canada)
We also think there is merit in the proposal to begin to charge interest on assessments 30 days after payment is due. However, unfortunate recent experience in other organizations leads us to be sceptical about the wisdom of the United Nations borrowing money on the open market. Finally, the proposal concerning a peace endowment fund is innovative. We would need to discuss the concept with members of the Secretariat and other delegations.
How to improve the capacity of the United Nations to respond to humanitarian emergencies and how to provide funds for relief is one of the major issues being discussed at this session of the Assembly and is of keen interest to all three of our delegations. We will continue our active participation in relief operations around the globe, in large part, we hope, through better-coordinated United Nations activities.
In conclusion, we are in complete agreement with the Secretary-General that the United Nations needs secure funding to be more effective. The situation we are now facing is both intolerable and untenable. However, the burden of supplying the necessary funds needs to be shared fairly. All Member States must meet their obligations when they come due. If not, those Member States with the best record of support for the United Nations may come under domestic pressure to delay payment in future so as not to subsidize those Members with a poor record.
Mr, BREITENSTEIN (Finland): I am grateful for the opportunity to make this statement on behalf of the five Nordic countries.
During the general debate at this forty-sixth session of the General Assembly, many speakers welcomed the emerging favourable climate for international cooperation. In your summary, Mr. President, you yourself underlined the importance of the general support that had been expressed by Member States for a strengthened role for the United Nations as a result of
the positive new developments in the world. Yet at the same time, we now face a serious financial crisis in the Organization. The paradox is that we have an organization on which we place increasing demands, particularly in the area of peace-keeping and conflict resolution, but also an organization that lacks the resources to fulfil the role we want it to play. If Member States have the political will to launch new activities and operations, they ought also to have the political will to finance their implementation.
It is obvious that there would be no financial crisis if all Member States paid their assessed contributions on time and in full and if, in addition, the Secretary-General had sufficient reserves at his disposal. Clearly, the United Nations is highly respected and valued by all its Member States. Why, then, do so many of them ignore their statutory obligations? The assessed contributions cannot possibly constitute an unreasonable burden on any Member State. The benefits of membership far outweigh the expense involved.
During this session of the General Assembly the Secretary-General has repeatedly drawn the attention of Member States to the critical financial situation of the Organization. The Nordic delegations would like to express their appreciation to him for his efforts to make Member States pay their assessed contributions and arrears, pertaining both to the regular budget and to peace-keeping operations.
Let me also add that the Nordic countries fully agree with the Secretary-General's statement yesterday when he extended his congratulations to his successor, Mr. Boutros Boutros Ghali, and said something to this effects that he was happy to hand over to his successor a stronger and
healthier United Nations, the only negative aspect being its financial insolvency, a situation which most assuredly was not due to bad management.
The report of the Secretary-General now before us (A/46/600 and Add.l) presents an alarming picture of the financial situation of the Organization. We appreciate the detailed information that has been made available to us on the pattern of payments of each Member State. That information clearly demonstrates the seriousness of the situation, as did the statement that the Secretary-General made just a few minutes ago.
I can say that the Nordic countries welcome the Secretary-General's view on how to address the situation and that we support the main thrust of his proposals. We hope that the urgency of the situation, along with a greater crisis awareness, will be conducive to speedy action. What we need more than anything else is a new spirit of involvement with, participation in, and shared responsibility for the United Nations.
The Nordic countries attach particular importance to the establishment of a peace-keeping reserve fund. The Secretary-General should be provided with the necessary resources to permit him to take immediate action when the need arises. We have long been of the opinion that arrangements should be made to facilitate the start-up of new operations. We therefore support the establishment of a peace-keeping fund at this session of the General Assembly.
We also believe that the Working Capital Fund should be increased to a level of approximately 25 per cent of the annual assessment under the regular budget. We consider this percentage reasonable to ensure sufficient liquidity, especially since the Fund is also used to accommodate unforeseen and extraordinary expenses.
Furthermore, we believe that the three funds, the Working Capital Fund, a peace-keeping reserve fund and a humanitarian revolving fund, would go a long way towards meeting the Secretary-General's well-founded demands for budget reserves. Reserves are a prerequisite of smooth and rational operations and are in line with sound budgetary practices.
The financial problems of the United Nations must, naturally, also be dealt with on a broader scale and in a longer time frame. We believe that the setting of priorities for programmes should be taken into account in this discussion. This is of course a matter primarily to be dealt with in the context of the programme-planning and budget process. There is, however, a link between this process and the financial crisis. The pattern of payments by Member States can be seen as a measure or a reflection of the degree of confidence that individual Member States have in the Organization.
I have presented these views on behalf of the Nordic countries in the hope that a comprehensive solution can be found at this session of the General Assembly to avoid the financial insolvency of the Organization. As Members, we all have a responsibility to ensure that the Organization has the resources required to carry out the tasks that we, collectively, have entrusted to it. The United Nations can operate on a sound financial basis only if the. method of financing is strictly adhered to and respected by all Member States. The only real and lasting solution to the financial crisis is payment by all Member States of their assessed contributions in full and on time and without conditions. The principle of collective responsibility for the expenses of the Organization embodied in Article 17 of the Charter must be upheld. To pay one's assessed contribution is a treaty obligation, not an option.
Mr, VAN SCHAIK (Netherlands): I will speak on behalf of the twelve member States of the European Conununity.
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to make a brief statement on this very important and urgent matter. We listened with great interest to the important statement made by the Secretary-General in which he underlined the very serious financial situation of the Organization. We appreciate the fact that the Secretary-General has addressed the issue at the plenary level of the Assembly.
(feu-n gghaik, Netherlands His statement, as well as his report, will be studied expeditiously, in a positive spirit, and we shall return to it in the Fifth Committee,
Global political developments have made clear to us all that the United Nations is at the dawn of a new era. The demands on the Organization are increasing and the Members' expectations are rising. Member States are exploring avenues to give the Organization renewed vitality and to establish an appropriate structure for the Secretariat.
The 12 member States of the European Community are deeply concerned about the grave financial crisis confronting the Organization. While that crisis has been developing over the years, it should be addressed with the greatest possible urgency.
Aware of these facts, the Twelve are preoccupied about the prevailing situation, as it demonstrates that the very Member States that time and again underline the Organization's importance and in fact do not hesitate to call upon its good offices are allowing its financial situation to deteriorate to the point where its effectiveness risks being called into question. It seems these Member States trust that the Organization, at the last minute, will always be bailed out by those Members, like the 12 member States of the European Community - together they contribute over 30 per cent of the assessed contributions - that honour their obligations to the United Nations and pay their contributions promptly, in full and without conditions.
In this context the Twelve wish to recall that they and other States Members of the Organization have stressed year after year that the difficult financial situation of the United Nations is intolerable and that there is only one solution to it, and let me repeat: that all Member States comply with the obligation to pay their share of the Organization's expenses as
(Mr, Van Schaik, Netherlands) apportioned by the General Assembly. This is not a discretionary matter and is not subject to any conditionality; rather, it is a solemn obligation under Article 17 of the Charter.
Non-compliance with this obligation also calls into question the willingness of Member States to uphold the new budget process established under resolution 41/213. This landmark resolution emphasizes the desirability of efforts to achieve the broadest possible agreement on the financial appropriations. It should be borne in mind that both the current budget and the current scale of assessment based on capacity to pay were adopted by consensus. It would be ironic in such circumstances if Member States fail to honour what is a political commitment, as well as a binding legal obligation.
As to the Secretary-General's longer-term proposals, the Twelve would, first of all, agree to his statement (A/46/600) that non-payment by Member States has placed an unjust burden on those Member States that meet their financial obligations. The proposals before the General Assembly consist essentially of enlarging the reserves. While this might merit serious consideration in circumstances where all Member States meet their obligations, as things stand at present, there is a risk of further increasing the burden on those Member States that already pay promptly and in full. In our view the main problem is the financing of the reserves, rather than their size.
The solution to the immediate financial crisis is straightforward: all Member States must pay promptly and in full. At this time when the community of nations is looking to the United Nations to play a greatly enhanced role in world affairs, the question of improving its financial basis should be addressed. The Twelve are willing to work constructively with the
(Mr, Van Schaik, Netherlands) Secretary-General and the Member States to consider appropriate measures in this regard on the understanding that all Member States fulfil their commitments and obligations to the Organization.
Mr. HOHENFELLNER (Austria): At the outset, allow me to express our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for having personally introduced his report on the financial situation of the United Nations, and thus drawn our special attention to the Organization’s severe financial crisis, which it is indeed facing. Austria shares the Secretary-General's profound concern that the United Nations is on the brink of insolvency and bankruptcy. As he eloquently and clearly points out in his report, the salaries for United Nations staff members may not be paid and the programmes approved and the mandates given by us Member States may not be carried out.
My delegation finds it intolerable that at a time when the Organization is entrusted with new tasks in virtually all areas - environment, development, international drug control, peace-keeping operations - it is not endowed with the necessary financial means effectively to implement these activities. This means not only pure lip-service of some Member States, but also missing what is probably a unique chance for the world community jointly to tackle global and regional problems after the end of the cold war. Moreover, it is not logical and not understandable that the Organization's existence be endangered at a time of enhanced reputation and increased confidence in international public opinion.
The constant burdening of the Organization with more activities to be carried out, while the budget is hardly growing and is even stagnating, places the United Nations in a difficult situation. In this light, it is
(Mr, Hohenfellner, Austria) unacceptable that some Member States do not pay their assessed contributions at the Organization's expense. It is also unfair to those Members that do fulfil their financial obligations in accordance with Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations and, with regard to the peace-keeping budget, places an additional burden on the troop-contributing countries.
My delegation therefore strongly appeals to all Member States in arrears with their financial obligations to fulfil their obligations under the Charter at the earliest possible date. Immediate compliance on the part of these Member States would solve the financial crisis. In this context we wish to reiterate Austria's strong support for the United Nations and its cause. For this reason, Austria is particularly proud to be one of the Organization's host countries. Over the years, Austria has proven its commitment by, inter alia, meeting its financial obligations. Allow me to assure the Secretary-General through you, Mr. President, that Austria will continue to pay its contributions to the regular as well as to the peace-keeping budgets in full and on time. Nevertheless, we agree with the Secretary-General that a viable, durable, long-term solution to the financial crisis, which is a perennial problem, has to be found. We have noted with regret that the new budgetary process established under resolution 41/213 has not borne the fruit expected.,
, Mr. Min (Myanmar), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(Mr, Hohenfellner, Austria) Unfortunately, therefore, the process of taking decisions by consensus on all budgetary matters has not produced the expected benefits, nor has it enhanced the political will of some Member States to pay their share of the expenses that they agreed to pay.
We believe that the proposals put forward by the Secretary-General deserve detailed discussion and thorough examination in the General Assembly. My delegation is willing to cooperate actively and constructively in the search for a durable solution to this crisis.
I should like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for his sincere commitment to this Organization and its goals. Today - such a short time before the end of his term - he has once more proven his commitment by proposing measures to achieve a lasting solution of the severe financial crisis. He deserves our full respect, appreciation and support.
Mr, MONTANO (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): I listened most attentively to the statement of the Secretary-General. I agree entirely with his view that this is a political problem, and one that obviously requires proper treatment and thorough consideration.
As Chairman of the Latin American and Caribbean Group for the month of December, I should like to convey to the Assembly that Group's particular concern about the financial situation of the Organization. However, I should like also to make a formal request that this debate be resumed in plenary meeting before the item is considered by the Fifth Committee. I am aware of the time restrictions, but, having heard very sound statements from various delegations this afternoon, we feel that it is necessary that other groups and other delegations that are not prepared to speak at this time be given an
(Mr. Montano, Mexico) opportunity to make proper, well-thought-out statements, as has been done by those representatives who have expressed the same degree of concern. It is a degree of concern that we all feel.
We would request you, Mr. President, to reply to our formal request that this debate not be concluded today, that it be continued in plenary meeting, with the Secretary-General present - his schedule being taken into account -so that other delegations may be able to express their views on an equal footing.
The PRESIDENT: Subject to the agreement of President Shihabi, the Secretariat will be instructed to arrange a schedule that will provide an opportunity for further statements at an appropriate time next week - perhaps on Tuesday.
AGENDA ITEMS 37 AND 102 (continued)
POLICIES OF APARTHEID OF THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH AFRICA
(a)	REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID (A/46/22)
(b)	REPORT OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL GROUP TO MONITOR THE SUPPLY AND SHIPPING OF OIL AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS TO SOUTH AFRICA (A/46/44)
(c)	REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/46/499, A/46/507, A/46/648)
(d)	REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE (A/46/643)
(e)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/46/L.31)
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR SOUTHERN AFRICA
(a)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/46/561)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/46/L.31)
Mr. SHAHEED (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Any assessment of the events in racist South Africa over the past four decades would bear witness to the grave injustice, racial discrimination, oppression
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic and systematic violence to which the African majority has been subjected under the system of apartheid.
Statistics show that there have been more than 17 million arrests of people from the indigenous population found in areas reserved for the white minority; the dispossession of 3.5 million people of their homes; 80,000 detentions without trial; and up to 40,000 South Africans driven into foreign exile. It is more difficult to measure the destruction of families torn apart by racial reclassification, the ravages of inferior education, deprivation of job skills and the attendant suffocation of self-worth.
During the past few months. South Africa has witnessed several events. De Klerk has assumed a reformist posture by repealing the major laws that institutionalized apartheid. Nevertheless, it is difficult to believe that the odious system of apartheid is about to disappear. The repeal of the Population Registration Act, which stipulated the racial classification of newly born babies according to the colour of their skin, will have no retrospective effects. In other words, the provisions of the Population Registration Act will continue to be enforced on the African majority, who will not benefit from the repeal act until the country has been completely rid of apartheid. Moreover, the repeal of that act will continue to be meaningless so long as the apartheid tricameral Parliament continues to exist.
As for the Land Measures Act, which allowed the Whites, of whom there are about 5 million, to own 87 per cent of the land, through the dispossession of the indigenous population, the repeal act does not envisage the restitution of property to the original owners. On the other hand, the African majority, which has been impoverished by the racist regime, does not have the necessary
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) funds to buy back the land it originally owned, and which should be restituted at no cost.
These aforementioned laws, like all the other laws that institutionalized apartheid, derive their validity from the main law that is the constitution of racist South Africa. That constitution is the basis of apartheid. It will undoubtedly take scores of years to wipe out the odious system of apartheid and racial segregation from legislation, procedures, minds and hearts. Clear evidence of that is to be found in other countries, where racial discrimination, although legally abrogated several decades ago, continues to affect large sections of the populations.
In his second interim report on the implementation of the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa (A/45/1052), the Secretary-General states that the most basic laws of apartheid were removed by
June 1991.
He nevertheless points out that many of the concomitant attitudes and practices, and indeed the consequences of those laws, still persist. Therefore, it is no wonder that Christopher Warren, the correspondent of The New York Times in Johannesburg, should give us this picture of public life in Pretoria in his article of 10 November 1991: (spoke in English)
"The basic laws mandating racial discrimination were repealed in June.
But the structure of a white predominantly Afrikaner Civil Service who put apartheid policies into practice remains intact ... Indeed, a visitor to Pretoria, the administrative capital and a city with a high proportion of Afrikaners, finds whites occupying the offices and answering phones, while blacks mow the grass, fix the roads and make the tea."
(spoke in Arabic)
In the light of this, others are free to believe, if they wish, that the odious system of apartheid died on the 7th of June 1991, but the African majority believes that apartheid will not be buried until the day when that majority can enjoy and fully exercise the right to vote, until the day the country is free from the misery resulting from the policy of apartheid, some of the facets of which I mentioned at the beginning of my statement.
The African majority continues to live, since 1984, in the grip of a wave of violence which has resulted from the hateful policy, practices and structures of apartheid. That wave of violence has taken a toll of more than 11,000 lives according to the estimates of human rights organizations.
There is no doubt that the Peace Accord signed on 14 September last is of course better than no agreement at all even if it was not fully implemented. It is also better than killing innocents because they wear the wrong headband. That Accord was a heavy blow dealt to the racist Government of Pretoria which continues to benefit from fanning the flames of violence. The Government of Pretoria is capable of putting an end to the acts of violence if it so wishes. Up to this minute, however, there is nothing to indicate that the Government has the intention of putting an end to the violence, which has brought untold suffering and misery on the African majority. In some instances, the violence stoked up by the racist Government of Pretoria has reached the level of real massacres which have earned the condemnation of the whole world.
A Sergeant in the South African Army by the name of Felix Andeni has made full confession to the British daily The Independent, on 19 July 1991 to the effect that most of those massacres are in actual fact the work of specialized units in the South African Army. Andeni gave clear details of the activities of the Fifth Intelligence Brigade, wherein he worked from 1989 to 1990. He has also unmasked the fact that the massacre of the train in the Soweto area of 13 September 1990, when 26 passengers were killed, was arranged by the First Unit of the Fifth Intelligence Brigade and, that he personally participated with others in the perpetrations of that awful massacre.
In an article by Mr. Warren in The New York Times of 12 June 1991, other facts were revealed by Mr. Nicho Bassoun, a retired'Major of the Military Intelligence of the South African Army to the effect that he actively was
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) involved in planning and carrying out attacks against the population in and around Johannesburg and the mobilization of the segments of the population who carried out those acts of violence.	j
This was not the end of it. The newspaper The Weekly Mail of
Johannesburg has revealed the so-called Inkathagate scandal when it published copies of documents that proved that the Government of South Africa, with the	j
seeming knowledge of de Klerk himself, finances the organizations which	;
perpetrate acts of violence in the townships.
All these facts reaffirmed the arguments continually made by the African	I
majority concerning the involvement of the Government security forces in the stoking of the acts of violence which are directly a result of the continued existence of the policy and practices and structures of apartheid. It is to be feared that if this wave of violence, which is being stoked up by the Government of Pretoria, were to continue, it would abort all the steps taken towards a settlement in southern Africa that would restore the legitimate usurped rights of the African majority.
We call upon the struggling African majority to close ranks, to join forces and to intensify its efforts to create a strong, unified front against the racist regime of South Africa, which wishes to weaken the negotiating	j
position of the African majority by fanning of the flames of violence We call upon the racist Government of South Africa to put an immediate end to this wave of violence through which it wants to impede the progress of the	’
legitimate cause of the African majority.
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) Since 1974, the General Assembly has consistently condemned the collaboration between Pretoria and Tel Aviv. The Special Committee against Apartheid in South Africa and its international consequences, upon the request of the General Assembly has continued to review the developments of this collaboration and to submit annual reports thereon since 1977. We view the problem of the collaboration between the regimes of Pretoria and Tel Aviv from the standpoint of its effect on the efforts aimed at the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and the threat that this collaboration poses to African and Arab States.
The causes and motives of this collaboration which has been branded by the General Assembly, in its resolution 3151 G (XXVIII) as a sinister alliance, are well known.
The British Independent published on 11 November 1991 an article by Mr. John Cortin entitled "A Sinister Trade Between Israel and Pretoria”, in which the writer tried to explain the motives for this collaboration between Israel and racist South Africa since 1948: (spoke in'English)
"South Africa and Israel, united by the international hostility each has long provoked, have built up, over 25 years, a shadowy, sinister and mutually advantageous network of military connections, the most spectacular of which, collaboration on a project to produce a nuclear
bomb
H
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic (continued in Arabic)
He goes on to ask:
(spoke in English)
"Why did Israel engage in this diplomatically dicey "special relationship"? A former Israeli official told Seymour Hirsch it was because South Africa was rich in raw materials, notably uranium, iron ore and coal, because, as the official said, 'try to do a nuclear test in Israel and all hell breaks loose, and because "they are also European settlers standing against a hostile world,'” ...
(continued in Arabic)
And Mr. Cortin goes on to ask once again:
(spoke in English)
"What has South Africa gained? The much-vaunted South African arms industry would have been a shadow of what it is without Israeli know-how. The Israelis contributed significantly to the development of an effective killing machine that was turned against South Africa's neighbouring States and the opponents of apartheid within the country." (continued in Arabic)
The American writer I have just mentioned, Mr. Seymour Hirsch, author of The Samson Option, affirms that there are six or seven secret military and nuclear notes of understanding between Israel and South Africa.
If we take into account, in this context, the special nature of the two regimes in South Africa and in Israel, it becomes quite evident that their efforts to acquire and develop weapons of mass destruction do not arise from
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) any defensive concept, as in the case of other countries, but, rather, from aggressive, expansionist concepts that aim at entrenching their aggression and imposing faits accomplis with the force of arms.
This sinister alliance between South Africa and Israel continues to grow stronger from one day to the next. Recently, it has become public to an unprecedented degree. On 10 November 1991, De Klerk, accompanied by a large delegation that included Botha, his Foreign Minister, paid an official three-day visit to Tel Aviv, during which he met with top Israeli officials. In the course of the visit, Pretoria's Foreign Minister Botha admitted that the two parties had collaborated in the military sphere up until 1987, since which year, he claimed, "no military contracts had been signed". He also claimed that their "relations were not going to be based on military cooperation but, rather, on industrial, commercial and economic exchanges".
In turn, Tel Aviv's rulers have claimed that they have not signed any new military agreements with South Africa since 1987, when they purportedly froze their relations with South Africa. However, they emphasized their continued commitment to agreements previously signed, agreements that will expire, they claim, at the end of next year. The Israeli newspaper Ha'aretz estimates the annual value of the economic cooperation between the two regimes at approximately $800 million.
At the conclusion of his visit, on 13 November 1991, De Klerk held a press conference at which he refused to speak about the collaboration between the regimes in the nuclear and military fields. With regard to Pretoria's drive to break out of the isolation imposed upon it as a result of its racist
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) policies. De Klerk stated that "there was no contradiction between the establishment of good relations with the Arab world and the relations that have long existed with the Hebrew State". Naturally, the future will reveal the true nature of the agreements signed and the effects of such agreements in promoting further the relations of the two regimes.
In light of the facts concerning the close relationship between Pretoria and Tel Aviv, one is truly bewildered at the audacity of the representative of Israel in deciding to participate in a debate on apartheid. In that debate he made a statement in his usual manner, one filled with deceit, distortion and fabrication on a level that would arouse the envy of a Goebbels. The African majority, the legitimate owners of the land and its wealth, have in his opinion become a mere "community", just as the Palestinian people are "Arab Palestinians" and the occupied Arab territories have become mere "territories". The word, incidentally, was first used in South Africa to distinguished between first-class citizens and so-called "non-citizens". Zionism, whose true nature was defined by General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX), has, in his opinion, become a model to be followed by many liberation movements.
That representative, who for many years has reaffirmed the non-existence of any military relationship with South Africa and maintained that only relatively minimal economic relations existed (A/45/PV.57) yesterday tried, with his usual audacity, to convince us that relations between Israel and South Africa have overnight reached the point at which high-level visits are being exchanged and that such relations are quite natural - disregarding, as
(Mr, Shaheed, Syrian Arab Republic) usual, the many resolutions adopted by the United Nations.
This collaboration of which the representative of Israel now speaks freely cannot be passed over in silence. Its dangers cannot be minimized by the waving of slogans in this forum by the representatives of that racist regime with regard to human rights, equality, justice, democracy and the like. The purely gratuitous sentiments expressed to our African brothers while true support is being given the racist Government of South Africa only serve to reaffirm the inability of that racist regime to break free from the interests that bind it to the racist regime in Pretoria and its inability to participate effectively with the other members of the international community in putting an end to the worst of all crimes against humanity or to commit itself in deed, and not in words, to human rights, justice and equality.
Suffice it to recall here that when, on the night of 20 March 1990 the entire world celebrated the independence of Namibia, invitations were sent out to all States Members of the Organization to attend that celebration with the single exception of Israel. Need we ask the reason for that seeming insult?
In spite of the abrogation of the basic legal underpinnings of the odious system of apartheid, it still exists in practice. The African majority continues to be denied its legitimate rights for purely racial reasons.
As stated in the preliminary report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Southern Africa:
"a complex system such as apartheid, which has created a systematic and institutionalized system of racial discrimination, cannot be abrogated by mere acts of legislation. Much more must be done at the economic, educational and political levels and in regard to administrative structures. South African society as a whole faces the enormous task of fighting the racial prejudice and discriminatory atmosphere that infuse all levels of public life". (A/46/401, para, 36)
In the light of all this, it would be an act of self-deception to think that the situation now prevailing in South Africa indicates the real end of the odious system of apartheid. The African majority still needs to make great sacrifices in order to achieve its legitimate objectives. The cosmetic treatment of the image of the racist regime aims basically at breaking the international isolation imposed on the De Klerk South African Government.
Since De Klerk declared his intention to repeal the apartheid laws, a few countries have hastened to lift sanctions in breach of the United Nations Declaration adopted by consensus on 14 December 1989. The changes that have taken place fall short of the desired goal and cannot be considered as irreversible.
In that regard, we cannot but express our concern at the increasing tendency towards the premature lifting of sanctions, which would only result in easing the pressure on the racist Government of South Africa. This pressure has proven to be indispensible if an end is to be put to apartheid in legislative and practical terms so that a united, democratic and non-racial South Africa may emerge.
That is why Syria continues to hold the view that, more than ever before, the international community must continue its international measures, including sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa. it would appear that the De Klerk Government will continue to drag its feet concerning the dismantling of the racist regime and the achievement of a settlement with the African majority in order to completely break the isolation and to lift the sanctions that have been internationally imposed against it.
Finally, my country, one of the founding Members of the United Nations, reaffirms its support for and solidarity with the struggling African majority in its legitimate fight against the worst crime that can be committed against humanity. We are confident that all forms of racism and racial discrimination are doomed to fizzle out and disappear. The South African writer Nadine Gordimer, a member of the white minority, has discovered that were she to cling to her membership her life would be narrow and practically meaningless. She found her true path by repudiating the policies and ideas of racial discrimination. She has spontaneously given expression to the collective experience of the African majority with all its anguish and all its aspirations. PROGRAMME OF WORK
The PRESIDENT; I should like to inform members that tomorrow afternoon - in addition to considering agenda item 29, "The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security"; agenda item 31, "The situation in Central America: threats’ to international peace and security and peace initiatives"; agenda item 34, "Cooperation between the
(The President)
United Nations and the League of Arab States"; and agenda item 40, "Question of peace, stability and cooperation in South-East Asia" - the Assembly will also consider a report of the Second Committee on agenda item 12, "Report of the Economic and Social Council", as the first item.
AGENDA ITEMS 37 AND 102 (continued)
POLICIES OF APARTHEID OF THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH AFRICA
(a)	REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID (A/46/22)
(b)	REPORT OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL GROUP TO MONITOR THE SUPPLY AND SHIPPING OF OIL AND PETROLEUM PRODUCTS TO SOUTH AFRICA (A/46/44)
(c)	REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/46/499, A/46/507, A/46/648)
(d)	REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE (A/46/643)
(e)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/46/L.31)
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING PROGRAMME FOR SOUTHERN AFRICA
(a)	REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (A/46/561)
(b)	DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/46/L.25)
Mr, WALKER (Jamaica): In 1963, one year after Jamaica gained its independence and became a Member of the United Nations, the Government pledged before the General Assembly that Jamaica would cooperate with its friends in Africa, to the best of its ability, to see the shameful system of apartheid removed from the continent which gave us the majority of our ancestors.
Today, 28 years later, there is now at long last evidence that the patient and persistent struggle of the oppressed majority of the people of South Africa, with the support of the international community, will result in the dismantling of apartheid and the creation of a democratic society in South Africa.
Since President De Klerk took office there has been progress towards a changed society in Africa. The process of change gained momentum with the release of Nelson Mandela on 11 February 1990. We were privileged to listen to this distinguished, courageous and outstanding leader on 22 June 1990 and again yesterday in this Assembly. In July this year, the Government and the people of Jamaica were proud and honoured to welcome Nelson Mandela to our shores. This historic visit enabled us to express our overwhelming admiration and affection for this truly great man and to assure him personally of our strong and continued support for his efforts to end apartheid through peaceful negotiations.
Yesterday, the President of the African National Congress, in a moving and wide-ranging address, outlined for us his vision of the emerging new South Africa, the current political and economic situation in his country, the nature of the further support required from the international community in relation to sanctions and the socio-economic transformation of South Africa, and the prerequisites for demolishing the system of apartheid and achieving a genuinely democratic, non-racial South Africa.
My Government welcomes the developments which have culminated this year in the repeal of legislation that constituted the formal framework and the main pillars of the apartheid system. We have noted the progress made in meeting the requirements of the United Nations Declaration on apartheid adopted by consensus in December 1989. In particular we welcome the agreement signed by the South African Government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees which, we hope, will lead to the resettlement of all political exiles, and in his address Mr. Mandela sought the assistance of the international community.
We regret that progress has been impeded by the excalating violence which could be a serious threat to the process of change and the preparations for negotiations. The violence which mainly affects the black majority has increased despite the National Peace Accord signed by the Government, the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party in September. It is our hope that the Government will honour its commitments regarding impartial investigations into the sources of violence and that violence will not be allowed to frustrate arrangements for negotiations.
The programme of constitutional reform proposed by President d.e Klerk, although still far short of the ultimate objective of full representational democracy, at least provides a basis for beginning negotiations. We welcome the progress being made in preparing for these negotiations. We were pleased with the formation of the Patriotic United Front comprising some 90 anti-apartheid organizations, which at their meeting in Durban in October pledged to work together to seize this moment in history to ensure the speedy establishment of democracy and called for the holding of an all-party congress
to set in motion the process leading to a democratically elected constituent assembly to affect the transfer of power. We are glad to note that the process was taken a significant step further at a meeting in Johannesburg at which the Government, the African National Congress and other political parties completed preparations for the convention for a democratic South Africa to be convened on 21-22 December 1991.
Some countries have responded to the changes that have occurred and to the positive developments that have taken place by the lifting of sanctions against South Africa in varying degrees. We believe that some of these steps are premature and we naturally support the measured and balanced approach adopted by the Commonwealth Heads of Government at their recent meeting in Harare. In recognition of the crucial role sanctions have played in bringing about the changes thus far, they agreed to continue to use effective forms of pressure to assure a successful final outcome to the conflict in South Africa, linking any change in the application of different categories of sanctions to the taking of real and practical steps to end apartheid.
It was agreed that one category - "people-to-people" sanctions in areas such as cultural and sporting contacts, tourism and air links - should be lifted immediately in recognition of changes that have taken place so far. In the area of international sports, one in which Jamaica played a major role in the ostracizing of South Africa, the Commonwealth Heads of Government were encouraged by the recent considerable progress in the evolution of a unified and non-racial sports movement in South Africa. They agreed to continue to encourage these developments and where appropriate to provide assistance. The Commonwealth Heads of Government also agreed that restrictions should be
(Mr. Walker, Jamaica) lifted in particular sports, where it is confirmed that the sport has been integrated, that it has been readmitted by the relevant international governing body and that the non-racial sporting body in South Africa has agreed to participate.
As regards other sanctions it was overwhelmingly agreed that these should be phased out as follows: trade and investment measures should be lifted when appropriate transitional mechanisms have been agreed that would enable all the parties to participate fully and effectively in negotiations; financial sanctions - the most effective sanctions - should be lifted only when agreement is reached on the text of a new democratic constitution, unless contrary arrangements are mutually agreed; and, finally, the arms embargo should remain in force until the new post-apartheid South African Government is firmly established with full democratic control and accountability.
The approach to sanctions taken by the Commonwealth Heads of Government is consistent with that of the Special Committee against Apartheid. In its report, the Committee states that apartheid will be considered dead only after transitional arrangements have been established, a new consitution adopted and a new Government installed after the holding of free and fair elections. The Committee also recommends that the international community should continue to exert pressure on the South African regime, the exact nature of which should be concomitant with developments in the country as collectively perceived. It also agreed that random lifting of sanctions is premature and deprives the international community of its leverage and its ability to promote progress in the negotiating process.
This phase-by-phase approach to sanctions was strongly emphasized yesterday by Mr. Mandela in his address. He stressed the need for continued
(Mr. Walker, Jamaica) international pressure and urged that sanctions should be lifted only in phases corresponding to the actual progress achieved within South Africa.
Seeing that it is the force of international pressure that has helped to bring change to South Africa, let us continue the pressure until we achieve the goal of the eradication of apartheid and the establishment of a free, democratic, non racial and prosperous South Africa,.
Mr. AKSIN (Turkey): We meet again in regular session to consider the item on the apartheid policies of the Government of South Africa. This item has been on the agenda of the United Nations for many years and each year the international community addresses it with renewed enthusiasm and determination. The international community feels that it has a special responsibility to assist the people of South Africa in their struggle against apartheid. The active participation of delegations in this year's debate confirms this observation. Indeed, the international community has been waiting for the day when all South Africans, regardless of their race, will enjoy equality, justice and full political rights and it is determined to contribute to the realization of these aspirations.
Since our last meeting in this Assembly on the subject, important progress has been made in the process of ending apartheid and initiating negotiations on a new constitution. The repeal of the basic laws of the apartheid system, namely, the Land Acts, the Group Areas Act and the Population Registration Act, as well as the amendment of the Internal Security Act, are an important milestone in this process. Even though the practical effects of this repeal may still appear to be limited, the abrogation of these basic laws has deprived the abhorrent system of racial discrimination of its main pillars.
56 (Mr, Aksin, Turkey) The adoption of a new constitution which will open the way to a free, democratic and non-racial South Africa will be the decisive step in dismantling apartheid. All of the political forces of South Africa should take full advantage of the existing possibilities as well as of the support of the international community to transform this country into a genuinely democratic, non-racial society. In this framework, we welcome the holding of a Patriotic/United Front Conference last October. The Joint Approach on the Constitutional Process reached between the African National Congress (ANC), the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), trade unions and other organizations and the convergence of views of the leading political forces on the basic principles of a new constitution are very promising steps. We hope that the meeting of all concerned parties to start negotiations on constitutional issues and on transitional arrangements will be held before the end of 1991. The holding last week of the Preparatory Meeting to the Convention for a Democratic South Africa was the most encouraging step in this direction.
The continuing political violence remains a source of deep concern. Such violence is an important obstacle to the creation of a climate conducive to negotiations on a new constitution and an impediment to the free exercise of political activity. It is a serious problem which will affect the future of South Africa on its way to democratization. The information given by the Secretary-General in his second progress report fully reflects the seriousness of the situation. As many as 3,000 persons have been killed between July 1990 and June 1991 and 45,000 others displaced as a result of violence. Although the Government has announced a series of measures to curb the violence, we believe that the South African authorities should adopt a more resolute
attitude in this regard to ensure the success of the process that has been initiated. The National Peace Accord signed by 22 political parties and organizations, including the South African authorities, as well as the ANC and the PAC, is the most significant development to end the violence. Its effective implementation will be crucial in creating the mutual confidence and trust which are prerequisites for the establishment of a framework for peaceful change.
We are concerned that the release of political prisoners continues to be a source of controversy in the discussions between the political forces of the country. While a large number of political prisoners have been released, there is no consensus on whether all political prisoners have been freed. There is still much that remains to be done in the area of defining political prisoners. The issue of the release of the political prisoners is one of the main elements of the United Nations Declaration on Apartheid of 1989 as well as of the Groote Schuur and Pretoria Minutes. This issue requires special attention and has priority among the subjects that need to be addressed. We believe that the procedure envisaged by the Secretary-General in his report (A/45/1052), which calls for the establishment and checking of one list of alleged political detainees and for referring disputed cases to a panel of independent experts, can be seen as a realistic option.
But the picture is not completely gloomy. We welcome the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between the South African authorities and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees whiclv with its full implementation, will mark the beginning of a new era in,this country. This should lead to the early return of the exiles and refugees.
The international community has always condemned apartheid for being nothing less than institutionalized racial segregation which contravenes all basic and universal human values. We have always underlined that apartheid cannot be reformed but only dismantled. We have called for the realization of this objective by peaceful means. Today, this Assembly can take justifiable pride in seeing that its long-standing calls have found an echo in South Africa and that the creation of a non-racial, democratic and free South Africa is well on the way towards realization.
The Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, was right when he emphasized in his introductory statement that there is an imperative need for the international community to remain seized with the question of apartheid and to remain vigilant in the political process. Even the long list of speakers for our three-day debate demonstrates the abiding keen interest of the international community in the successful outcome of the ongoing political process. We are convinced that the community will continue to support all the encouraging developments leading towards the building of a new society in South Africa which will guarantee all its people the same fundamental rights and freedoms. We also believe that the international community will not fail to congratulate all the parties involved for their realism and the courage they have displayed in pursuing the process of ending apartheid once and for all.
Mr, KHAMSY (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (interpretation from French)s Ever since the apartheid system became a State institution, the United Nations has redoubled its efforts to mobilize international support to
put an end to that obnoxious system practised by the Government of South Africa. The Organization has achieved a historic victory in that struggle for human dignity, justice and freedom when, in December 1989, the sixteenth special session of the General Assembly adopted, by consensus, the wide-ranging Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa, which set forth the principles, programme of action and guidelines for the negotiating process to follow in order to reach a political settlement of the question of South Africa. Furthermore, it is gratifying to note that the Declaration and its accompanying programme of action have been reaffirmed by resolutions, likewise adopted by consensus, in September and December last year.
The basic question now is clearly not whether the apartheid laws in South Africa will disappear or not, but rather has to do with the creation of a unified, non-racial and democratic South Africa where everyone can enjoy the same rights of citizenship and nationality on an equal footing, and where everyone will have the right to participate in the government and administration of the country on the basis of universal equal suffrage.
Today, the possibility of a new South Africa remains more real than ever before. The second progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Declaration of the United Nations, contained in document A/45/1052, encourages us to face the future with a certain degree of optimism which is furthermore confirmed by the words spoken yesterday from this very rostrum by Mr. Nelson Mandela, President of the African National Congress of
South Africa (ANC). Recent events and changes, foremost among which was the repeal of the latest series of laws underpinning apartheid, that is the Land Acts, the Group Areas Act and the Population Registration Act, were important milestones along the road towards the total eradication of apartheid. Important legal structures have been eliminated, according to the South African authorities, which stated that:
"'more than a hundred discriminatory laws and regulations were abolished over the past 12 months’." (A/45/1052, para, 73)
Several measures necessary for a climate conducive to negotiations as well as peace initiatives have been undertaken. More than a thousand, political prisoners were released last year, although hundreds are still in gaol.
According to the agreement reached between the Government of South Africa and the High Commissioner for Refugees, the general amnesty guaranteeing repatriation for political exiles, is now in force. Protection of human rights in a future democratic South Africa apparently is supported by consensus.
Another striking event was the signing of the National Peace Accord on 14 September 1991 to allow the convening shortly of a multi-party conference in an environment of confidence and security. And so, to sum up, there is already a climate of political activity conducive to the convening of such a conference which would involve the participation of all parties and political groups to negotiate a new constitution.
My delegation believes, therefore, that the recent positive changes we have witnessed so far provide a sufficiently solid basis for continuous progress towards the complete abolition of that regime and we wish to reaffirm our full support for all the peaceful efforts that can contribute to the achievement of that ultimate goal.
As is clear from the Secretary-General's report, however, many obstacles lie in the path of salvation. Measures enunciated in the Declaration are taking a long time to be implemented and the process has encountered serious difficulties in recent months. Acts of violence between factions are constantly being committed in the townships and an atmosphere of instability
has been created which is in jarring contradiction with the climate of hope created by the abolition of the apartheid laws. The reports stresses with deep concern that:
"... the wave of violence that engulfed the country during the period became a severe test of confidence and a serious obstacle to the evolving political dialogue." (A/45/1052, para, 6)
While we recognize that the pillars of apartheid have been abolished, the Secretary-General points out that:
"... concomitant attitudes and practices, as indeed the consequences of those laws, do persist." (ibid, para, 8)
He rightly stresses that delays in the implementation of the measures necessary to create a climate for negotiations:
"... particularly with regard to political prisoners and exiles, the perceived ineffectual response to violence and disclosures of secret funding of organizations led to tensions and a crisis of confidence in the government structures." (ibid)
South Africa is now experiencing a period of extreme political fragility. With real prospects for change, this new political situation is not so much the result of the subjective desire of the Pretoria regime as it is the result of objective facts reflected in the struggle waged by the anti-apartheid forces in the country and internationally. At a time when there are hopeful signs that there will be a new era in South Africa, it would, in my delegation's opinion, be an illusion to believe that the lifting of sanctions could lead to any rapid change in this system of Government by the white minority. Heightened vigilance on the part of the international
(Mr, Khamsy, Lao People's Democratic Republic) community is still necessary in bringing pressure to bear on the regime, particularly by means of economic and financial sanctions, until a truly, non-racial society can be established.
My delegation believes that the strict and complete implementation of the provisions of the Declaration adopted at the sixteenth special session of the General Assembly is the only way to achieve that goal.
Mr, LEGWAILA (Botswana): Twenty-two months ago South Africa embarked on a journey it had never thought it would ever embark on. The outset of the journey was dramatic and proclamatory in its suddenness; it was epoch-making and cataclysmic in its implication and import. Was it the death knell of the ogre of apartheid that was being sounded or was it one of those desert mirages Southern Africa is famous for?
In an important sense South Africa is today different from what it was 22 months ago. It is still, in parts, a bitterly divided and strife-torn country and yet it is also a country in the throes of a painful, albeit rather confused transformation, but transformation none the less. The so-called pillars of apartheid, the Group Areas Act and the Land Acts, have been abolished and the Population Act has been subsantially amended and yet apartheid and its consequences remain an entrenched feature of South African society. Understandly so, for whoever said that the mere abolition of apartheid laws is organically analogous to instant and automatic creation of an egalitarian, non-racial society in South Africa?
With the convening last week of an all-party preparatory meeting to prepare the stage for the convening of the convention for a democratic South Africa three weeks hence, we take a lot of comfort in the hope, if not the
(Mr, Legwaila, Botswana) belief, that the negotiating process for a new constitutional dispensation in South Africa is about to begin in earnest. From the vantage point of the United Nations it appears that the leaders of South Africa, irrespective of race, colour and creed, have at long last found some common ground on the basis of which they are now ready - at least they appear to be ready - to walk hand-in-hand into the future as one nation, one people, unriven by destructive considerations of race and racism.
The moment of truth has arrived for all South Africans. Apartheid is not dead just because the Government has abolished the laws that have underpinned its pervasive reign for so many decades. The endemic violence now threatening to bleed the urban areas to death is daily reminding us of this fact - the fact that the roots of apartheid are too deep to rot away instantly at the stroke of a pen.
The final demise of apartheid will occur only under the weight of a new South Africa, when all South Africans, regardless of race, colour or creed, have been enfranchised and thus empowered to design, as free men and women, a political order or system under which they have freely chosen to live. That is why we lay so much store on the character of the transformation from the old South Africa to the new. That is why we are so driven to agitate unceasingly for the urgent commencement of the negotiations for a new democratic constitutional dispensation.
There is no other way to South Africa's salvation than through the crafting of a Constitution that would not merely modify racial domination by the minority but one that would be designed to uproot lock, stock and barrel all vestiges of apartheid from every sphere of South African life.
In this context we are impelled to judge the constitutional proposals announced by the parties to the South African conflict in the past few months. Are these proposals designed to make a clear, categorical and terminal break with the apartheid past, or do they - or some of them - seek to delay or postpone the inevitable and give us half a solution to the South African problem? We certainly hope not.
What we have always sought - what the international community has always sought and struggled for - is the creation in South Africa of a non-racial democracy born of unqualified and undiluted adult suffrage. One of the basic ingredients of the National Party's version of a participatory democracy is freedom from domination. In other words, the National Party, which is the ruling party in South Africa, seeks to negotiate a democratic system that is free from domination even if such a system is based on one-man, one-vote -
on adult suffrage. We have no problem with such a system unless "free from domination", in a one-man, one-vote situation in South Africa, is a code expression for something else - something short of the majority rule we expect in that country.
In a true democracy participation by all in the democratic process is a given. Every adult has the right to vote, to run for office, or to refuse to run for office, to join a political party of his or her choice, or to elect not to join any party at all, and so forth. In other words, we understand every true democracy to be participatory because of the inalienable freedoms of choice, speech and conscience which underpin such a democracy.
Without any prejudice to the right of the people of South Africa to devise a system tailored to their own needs, as defined by them, we are struck by the obsession in the National Party's constitutional proposals with the logical implications of the one-man, one-vote principle in the South African context. The proposal on the character of the Executive Authority envisaged by the National Party bears this out incontrovertibly. The nub of the proposal is that:
"the executive should not be constituted from one party alone, but from members of a number of the major parties".
What is being proposed here is that a new South Africa should be ruled by constitutionally determined coalition governments regardless of the outcome of democratic elections. The presidency should be collective regardless of the outcome of a democratic election. The Constitution must provide for this system of collective or multi-party government, not the elections, as such. The parties are not to decide of their own volition to coalesce to form a
68
(Mr, Lecrwaila, Botswana) government of national unity. It must be demanded of them by the Constitution regardless of the outcome of the one-man, one-vote elections.
We are very conscious of the fact that these are probably only proposals intended for debate before and at the negotiating table. It is to be hoped that they are not set in iron or rock, but are negotiable maximalist positions of a political party in dread of losing power at long last. And yet, it must be stated quite emphatically that there can be no final solution to the problem of apartheid in South Africa without the consummation of majority rule as a logical consequence of the deracialization of the electoral franchise in that country. A constitutional artifice which continues to negate this fact would not last.
We also hope that the three-tier system of government proposed by the National Party that "takes account of the rich diversity of the population of South Africa ..." is more innocent than it sounds. For it would be tragic if taking account of the rich diversity of the South African population turns out to be a contrivance to perpetuate the racial and ethnic compartmentalization of South African society. What a new South Africa needs is unity and cohesion, not continued racial truncation and polarization in a different guise.
While on the whole we are encouraged by the progress that has been made so far in the past 22 months in the tortuous and complex rehearsals for constitutional negotiations, we nevertheless continue to be pained by the unrelenting violence being perpetrated against train passengers and funeral gatherers in the urban areas of South Africa by an assortment of murderous thugs of undetermined identity, we are told. Even as we commend the wisdom of
(Mr. Legwaila, Botswana) the leaders not to be deterred by the violence but to proceed with preparations for negotiations, we must at the same time urge both the South African Government and the black leaders to redouble their efforts to stamp out the violence and to create conditions for negotiations in a tranquil environment. The Government has the primary responsibility to maintain law and order and maintain it efficiently and humanely. Every leader in South Africa also has a duty to contribute to a solution to the violence, for no party can gain from it.
Six weeks ago a Patriotic Front of the disenfranchised was formed by the African National Congress, the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania and others. The Patriotic Front was formed in readiness for the commencement of the all-party negotiations. There is nothing sinister about it. We welcomed it because we believe unity on the part of the victims of apartheid is crucial if the momentous negotiations for a new South Africa are to be orderly, meaningful and successful in the shortest time possible. The Front is certainly not what its detractors say it is - a ganging up of the blacks against the whites. We need unity of purpose among so many fractious political parties if we are to avoid anarchy at the negotiating table. The international community is therefore duty-bound to encourage such unity of purpose.
Finally, the role of the international community in the whole process of negotiation in South Africa cannot be gainsaid. We are not asking the international community to meddle in the negotiations - which are the exclusive prerogative of the South African people - but it is our contention
(Mr. Lecrwaila, Botswana)
that the United Nations and the world community at large cannot abandon South Africans in their hour of need to their own uncertain devices. Support -constructive and non-intrusive support - for the negotiating process at every stage is essential.
It is also important that pressure be maintained throughout the process to nudge the negotiations forward and, in particular, to ensure that the South African Government shall deliver on its commitments to real and meaningful change in South Africa.
On both sides of the South African racial divide there are polarizing fundamentalist forces implacably opposed to the negotiating process for one ideological or racist reason or another. But what is most ominous, President De Klerk, a man of undoubted courage and realism, faces on his side of the racial divide a small but vicious coterie of anti-change die-hards who have vowed to resort to the desperate weapon of violence to abort the birth of a new South Africa in order to preserve apartheid. The international community must leave these desperate elements in no doubt as to the consequences of their actions - President De Klerk should be encouraged to resist them and pressure must continuously be brought to bear on his Goverment not to capitulate to their evil designs.
Mr, KALPAGE (Sri Lanka): The delegation of Sri Lanka is pleased to note the progress made in the past year in the implementation of the Declaration on Apartheid and Its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa, adopted by consensus in the General Assembly on 14 December 1989.
The Secretary-General, in his second progress report on the implementation of the Declaration, has reported that "over the last 12 months the process towards the end of apartheid in South Africa, although halting, remained on course" (A/45/1052, para, 6). However, this activity has been affected by the persisting political violence.
The reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid for the period from October 1990 to October 1991 refer to the overall progress made in
(Mr. Kalpaae, Sri Lanka) South Africa in the process of ending apartheid and towards negotiations on a new constitution. While deploring the violence which has become a destabilizing factor in that process, the Special Committee regards the adoption of the National Peace Accord in September 1991 by the South African authorities, the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party, among others, as having "generated hopes for peace and reconciliation".
In this context, revelations of covert government funding of political organizations and mounting reports of the involvement of elements within the security forces in perpetrating acts of violence must be viewed with grave concern. The full implementation of the National Peace Accord as quickly as possible is much to be desired.
We note with satisfaction the progress made towards creating a climate for negotiations. The release of political prisoners and the return to South Africa of political exiles are important in this regard. Some of the other measures conducive to creating conditions for a climate of negotiations are: the removal of all bans and restrictions on proscribed and restricted organizations and persons, the removal of troops from the townships, the lifting of the state of emergency and the repeal of legislation designed to circumscribe political activity and the cessation of political trials.
In the meanwhile, in order that the people themselves may participate in the remaking of their country, the necessary climate should be created for free political discussion to take place. Freedom from violence, freedom of assembly and freedom of the press are three essential ingredients for free political discussion and activity.
We recognize that since June 1990, the Government of South Africa has enacted important measures towards dismantling the basic laws of apartheid -the so-called pillars of apartheid. However, much remains to be done in the implementation of such legislative measures as have been enacted. This implementation should be effected without delay.
The Declaration on Apartheid and Its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa has set out the guidelines to the process of negotiations in South Africa. The principles envisaged in a new constitution have been outlined. We note that representatives of political organizations have concluded preparations for a formal convention to be held on 20 December to debate the future of South Africa. The December convention holds out the promise that negotiations have really begun for the dismantling of white minority rule.
We have noted the statement made by Mr. Nelson Mandela, President of the African National Congress in this Assembly yesterday. It is our view that sanctions should be lifted in phases corresponding to actual progress towards democratization being achieved within South Africa. In this connection, we recall the sanctions policy against South Africa adopted by the Commonwealth Heads of Government at Harare in October this year. Sri Lanka supports this policy fully.
We agree that South Africa would require the support of the international community in order to implement a programme of socio-economic changes which would contribute to mitigating the destructive consequences of apartheid. Assistance would be required for the resettlement of repatriated exiles. The human resource development needs of post-apartheid South Africa should also be addressed.
The General Assembly of the United Nations has played a historic role in removing apartheid from South Africa. It should now look ahead to the post-apartheid period when, as we all hope, a non-racial, democratic, united and non-fragmented South Africa will be reinstated in the community of nations.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil): As a country whose roots and national soul are to be found in diversity, in the mixture of different peoples and races from all over the world, Brazil repudiates, in no uncertain terms, all forms and manifestations of racial intolerance. The Brazilian Constitution defines the practice of racism as a crime of the utmost gravity, for which no bail can be accepted. Accordingly, at the international level, Brazil has consistently added its voice to the many that, for the last few decades, have denounced and condemned apartheid.
Furthermore, the close ties - historical, cultural, economic and political - that link Brazil to the African continent, and to southern Africa in particular, have contributed to an even more acute perception of the intolerable situation generated by the apartheid system, a system based on the indefensible denial of basic human and political rights to the majority of the people of South Africa.
Last August, my country was honoured by the visit of Mr. Nelson Mandela, President of the African National Congress. It was a memorable occasion. With his unique and impressive combination of gentleness and firmness of principle, Mr. Mandela for ever captured the hearts and minds of the Brazilian people. In September, President Fernando Collor made an official visit to Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Namibia, making manifest the desire of the Brazilian Government to strengthen further the relations of friendship and cooperation with those southern African countries.
Our keen interest and sincere concerns about the rapidly evolving situation in South Africa have still another regional dimension. Since the establishment in 1986 of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic, the countries of the regiop, neighbours from Africa and South America, have time and again expressed the hope that they will be able to welcome into the community of States of the Zone in the near future a democratic, united and non-racial South Africa.
Brazil believes in the purposefulness of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic and spares no effort in helping to advance its objectives. In that connection, my delegation is convinced that the future incorporation into the Zone of a democratic South Africa, free from apartheid, is highly desirable and will significantly contribute to the enhancement of our common endeavours in the South Atlantic region.
It is therefore with high expectations that Brazil has been following the evolution of the political process in South Africa. Up to now, the results have been at once encouraging and insufficient. No matter how tortuous and how beset with obstacles the road may still be for South Africa, there is room for optimism, because the ongoing process shows that the most representative parties have chosen the appropriate way to pursue the quest for a brighter and
a more just future for the country: by peaceful means, through dialogue and direct negotiations.
In the last few months, a series of auspicious developments gave grounds for some degree of understandable expectation: the repeal of some of the basic laws of apartheid, the intense political activity of previously banned organizations, the signing of the National Peace Accord, the holding of the Patriotic/United Front Conference, the agreement between the South African Government and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the process of the return of political refugees and exiles to South Africa, the broad consensus that human rights must be protected and the convening of the convention for a democratic South Africa, to be held later this month. All these are steps in the right direction, the direction of frank and extensive negotiations towards transitional arrangements leading to the elaboration and adoption of a new constitution and ultimately to the achievement of a truly united, democratic and non-racial South Africa, the direction that will bring South Africa back to the community of nations.
Notwithstanding the considerable progress witnessed in South Africa, there can be no doubt that much remains to be achieved and that many obstacles, including legal ones, still hinder the ongoing process of change. The greatest of those obstacles are the persistence of political violence and the delays affecting the release of all political prisoners. The disclosure that public funds have secretly been used to finance selected political organizations is also a matter of concern.
Added to all those aspects, and also in need of being properly addressed, is the question of the deep-rooted socio-economic inequalities afflicting large segments of South African society, which are among the bleakest legacies of decades of segregation and apartheid. Here the international community has
(Mr, Sardenberq, Bragin a particularly important role to play, a role bound to increase as the process of change continues to advance in the way we all hope it will.
The situation in South Africa has undoubtedly undergone important modifications since the adoption two years ago of the consensus Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa (A/RES/S-16/1). It would be premature to celebrate the eradication of apartheid, just as it would be unreasonable to deny that far-reaching changes are clearly on their way in South Africa. What once were perceived as merely dreams are now moving closer to reality, as negotiations, though halting at times, keep moving ahead.
The present process would not have been possible without the concerted efforts of the international community and the untiring efforts of the United Nations. In that context, a special tribute should be rendered to the Special Committee against Apartheid and to its indefatigable Chairman, Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari of Nigeria. Now, as Ambassador Gambari himself so aptly pointed out in his introductory statement "the international community has to remain engaged" in order to continue to monitor and assess future developments in the South African political situation. Moreover, as stressed by a number of South African democratic leaders, it must search for the correct balance between the maintenance of pressure and the encouragement of the process of change, including a carefully considered phasing-out of the sanctions, directly linked to and predicated upon the realization of effective progress on the negotiating front.
Never since the issue of the apartheid policies of the Government of South Africa was first included in our agenda has the General Assembly had the opportunity to discuss it against such a challenging background. The complex and often troublesome process of dismantling the apartheid system has moved forward, and so have the negotiations towards the definition of transitional
(Mr, Sardenberq, Brazil) arrangements and a new constitutional order that will grant equal rights to all South Africans. The progress achieved so far is encouraging. It should inspire the international community to reaffirm its commitment and to redouble its efforts to consolidate irreversible change in South Africa.
Mr, KARUKUBIRO KAMUNANWIRE (Uganda) : Allow me to pay a well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria, Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, for the effective leadership he has given the Committee. My appreciation goes equally to the members of the Committee. They have made a commendable effort to galvanize the international community in the struggle against apartheid and the struggle for liberation in southern Africa. The report of the Committee (A/46/22) gives a good appraisal of developments and will be helpful in guiding the Assembly towards a course of action.
I wish also to express our gratitude to Ambassador Nyaki of Tanzania, Chairman of the Intergovernmental Group to Monitor the Supply and Shipping of Oil and Petroleum Products to South Africa, and to Ambassador Huslid, Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Educational and Training Programmes, for lucidly presenting the reports of their respective Committees.
The United Nations has, over the years, taken a principled stand against racism, of which apartheid is the worst manifestation. The question of apartheid is thus one of the most long-standing items on our agenda. The Special Committee, in particular, has worked tirelessly in mobilizing the international community's support in order to put in place, maintain and strengthen the necessary political and economic measures so as to force the Government of South Africa to put an end to apartheid. These measures, coupled with the liberation struggle of the South African patriots, are the ones that forced the Pretoria regime to embark on the tentative steps that could lead to the dismantling of the apartheid apparatus.
It is important that we continue to make a concerted effort to bring international pressure to bear against South Africa. A disorganized or reckless lifting of sanctions could easily be counterproductive and remove the incentive for the Government of South Africa to negotiate seriously in good faith. Sanctions play an essential part in ensuring the success of negotiations for the dismantling of apartheid. Testerday, Mr. Nelson Mandela, the President of the African National Congress (ANC), articulated the importance of economic sanctions and the desire of the South African people that sanctions be maintained. It is only fitting that the international community heed their call.
It is worth reminding ourselves that our goal or objective in South Africa is the dismantling of apartheid with a view to achieving full respect for human rights and the establishment of a democratic and non-racial South Africa. The Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa, adopted by the General Assembly at its sixteenth special session (resolution S-16, annex), spells out the guidelines for negotiations and a programme of action. It calls on all countries and international
organizations to adhere to that Programme of Action and to maintain existing measures against South Africa until there is clear evidence of profound and irreversible changes in that country.
Since the adoption of the Declaration two years ago, there have been a number of developments in South Africa. Notable among these were the release of Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners, the lifting of restrictions on political organizations and the lifting of the state of emergency. We welcome the repeal of the Land Acts of 1913 and 1973, the Population Registration Act and the Group Areas Act, which were notorious and widely known as the pillars of the apartheid structure. We are happy to see that agreement has been reached and preparations are being made for the holding of multi-party talks which, we hope, will launch the negotiations on substantive issues concerning transitional arrangements and the constitution. These are positive developments that Members should encourage.
We agree with the observation in the Special Committee's report that "there is a tendency to overrate the positive developments and to underestimate the seriousness of the remaining problems". (A/46/22, para, 117)
From the Secretary-General's report it is clear that, while some progress has been registered, the achievement of the final objective is far from being in sight.
There is an urgent need for the Government of South Africa to comply fully with all the provisions of the United Nations declarations and with agreements reached with the ANC contained in the Groote Schuur Minute of May 1990 and the Pretoria Minute of August 1990. The authorities have not fully complied with the requirement of releasing all political prisoners, including
(Mr, Karukubiro Kamunanwire, Uganda) those in the Bantustans. Rather, the regime has engaged in dilatory tactics by releasing some political prisoners as part of the release of prisoners convicted of common crimes. This is unfortunate, for it sets the stage for right-wing extremists to perpetuate violence against the democratic forces and then claim political status for their members.
Uganda is very much concerned at the wave of violence in South Africa, which has caused much loss of lives and suffering among the people. It is clear that this violence has been targeted at ANC members and other democratic forces. This can only be aimed at destabilizing the process of dismantling apartheid that is now in motion. The revelations regarding the involvement of elements of the South African security forces in acts of violence and the partisan position taken by the Government through its secret financial support of some political organizations raise doubts abo.ut its sincerity. It is our hope that the National Peace Accord, adopted in September 1991, will be implemented and help to bring violence to an end. This will make it possible for the South African people to focus on the most urgent task of bringing apartheid to a quick end.
I wish to underscore the special responsibility of the Government of South Africa to put an end to violence. As pointed out in the Special Committee's report:
"Impartial and efficient action by the police might have curbed the violence that continued in Natal province and in the townships of Transvaal province." (ibid., para. 16) Moreover, this wave of violence is a direct consequence of apartheid policies.
The mere repeal of some apartheid laws does not mean that apartheid has been eliminated. This repeal leaves in place the social and economic
structures that apartheid has spent years constructing. Under the various land laws, millions of blacks were dispossessed of their land, uprooted and forcibly sent into barren areas without compensation. It therefore becomes imperative to put in place specific measures to redress these past injustices, including a land reform programme that provides for the restoration of land rights and compensation arrangements for past injustices. These measures should also be accompanied by affirmative actions aimed at emancipating the black majority by integrating it into the mainstream of economic and political activities. Failure to do so can only lay the foundation for the perpetuation of economic apartheid well after the implementation of the political changes for which we are striving. Uganda therefore appreciates the multilateral and bilateral education and training programmes for South Africans who clearly
will play a vital role in post-apartheid South Africa.
We regard it as unfortunate that the tentative steps taken by the South African Government have been used by some as justification for breaking the international consensus on sanctions. The road to the attainment of the goals of the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa is still a very long one. Although there is a glimmer of hope, there are still very many hurdles, and the path is strewn with landmines. We are still at the critical initial stage of the negotiations. It is sanctions that have compelled the apartheid regime to accept the principle of negotiation, and, in our view, it is the fear of sanctions that will keep the South African Government at the negotiating table.
Sanctions should be maintained until the changes are profound and irreversible. But only when the apartheid constitution is scrapped and replaced by one that provides for the participation, on equal footing, of all the South African people will it be possible to regard the changes as profound and irreversible. The introduction of agreed transitional arrangements could indicate profound change, but the unilateral lifting of sanctions only undermines the global effort. The Organization of African Unity Ad Hoc Committee of Heads of State on Southern Africa, which met at Abuja, and the Commonwealth Heads of State and Government, at their Harare Summit, indicated the way forward in respect of this issue. The Harare Commonwealth Summit agreed to link the lifting of sanctions to specific progress in the negotiations and to the adoption of a democratic constitution in South Africa.
The General Assembly must reaffirm its support for the Declaration and must live up to its assertion that sanctions will have to be maintained until our objective is realized. Only such an unmistakable message will keep the South African Government at the negotiating table. Uganda, for its part, will continue, without any equivocation, to live up to this objective.
Mr, BREITENSTEIN (Finland): I make this intervention on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Finland.
We in the Nordic countries have followed with keen interest the developments that have occurred in South Africa over the past 12 months. Fundamental changes have taken place. The Nordic countries commend the important and historic agreement to convene the Convention on a Democratic South Africa for the purpose of discussing South Africa's constitutional future and transitional arrangements to pave the way for the extension of full political rights to all South Africans. These steps deserve the full support and encouragement of the international community.
The Nordic countries regard it as encouraging that the South African Government has fulfilled its promises to abolish the apartheid legislation, exemplified by the Land and Group Areas Acts, the Separate Amenities Act and -the very foundation of the apartheid edifice - the Population Registration Act. Thus, with the important exception of the constitution itself, the formal basis of apartheid has, in reality, ceased to exist.
The simple mention of these laws evokes images of the utter degradation that so many South Africans have endured for so long. How, in the twentieth century, a society could segregate 84 per cent of its population and consign those people to 13 per cent of its land, classify its citizens and their rights according to race and declare public facilities off limits to the vast majority of its people is beyond comprehension.
While never forgetting the cruel past, we should now, together, look ahead to a brighter future for all South Africans. The Nordic countries believe that the process that is under way in South Africa cannot now be
(Mr, Breitenstein, Finland) reversed. Many obstacles remain, but a united, democratic and non-racial South Africa will emerge from the rubble of apartheid.
Since the removal of the pillars of apartheid international attention has begun to shift towards the socio-economic situation in South Africa. Social and economic injustices caused by apartheid remain acute. Social and economic policies that go beyond the repeal of legislation are required. In this regard, however, the priorities will have to be decided democratically by South Africans in South Africa. In this connection the Nordic countries confirm their willingness to support the efforts that are being made in South Africa to secure democratization and to bridge the enormous economic and social gaps that the apartheid system has caused. We in the Nordic countries are monitoring closely the situation in South Africa so that we may be able to assess when it will be possible to repeal those sanctions that are still in force in the Nordic countries.
At a time when South Africa is advancing towards democracy it is most alarming that township violence has taken on such frightening proportions -more than 5,000 people having been killed since February last. The primary responsibility for halting this senseless cycle of violence lies with the South African Government. Reports of alleged involvement by members of the South African police and security forces in the instigation of violence must be thoroughly and impartially investigated.
The Nordic countries welcome the National Peace Accord, concluded in September, on a number of measures aimed at preventing violence. This Accord must be respected by all concerned. All parties and individuals have a responsibility to work for peace. If the violence is not brought under control the process of creating a democratic society in South Africa could be put at considerable risk.
¿Mr, Breitenstein, Finland)
The quest for a better South Africa has come a long way since last year. The Nordic countries hope that at this session the General Assembly will again find it possible to adopt by consensus a resolution on the international efforts to help South Africa along the path to a democratic and non-racial future. It is important that international solidarity in support of the negotiating process that is now under way be again proclaimed with one voice.
Mr. ACHARYA (Nepal): I wish to begin by expressing my delegation's sincere appreciation to Mr. Nelson Mandela, President of the African National Congress, for sharing with us, in his address yesterday, his vision of a new South Africa. I wish also to express our appreciation for the statement made by Mr, Clarence Makhwetu, President of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, to the General Assembly.
This year's General Assembly debate on apartheid is taking place at a time that is crucial for the people of South Africa. With the rapid transformation of international relations, the crumbling of apartheid under its own evil weight is only a matter of time. The question is how soon its end will come. The international community sincerely hopes for the rapid and peaceful transformation of South Africa into a non-racial, democratic society.
(Mr, Acharya, Nepal)
This hope is reflected in the historic consensus Declaration of the sixteenth special session of the General Assembly on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences on Southern Africa. The Declaration has laid down in clear terms the steps that the minority regime must take in order to create a climate conducive to negotiations for ending apartheid. The principles, guidelines and programme of action contained in the Declaration have been reaffimed by resolution 45/176 A and decision 45/457 B.
In recent years, some encouraging developments have taken place in South Africa. Removal of major laws institutionalizing apartheid from the statute books is indeed a welcome development. However, apartheid persists in attitudes and practices. Unless bold measures are taken, the repeal of apartheid laws will have little impact on the socio-economic disparities created by years of institutionalized racism.
The agreement between the South African Government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the return of refugees and political exiles is another recent positive development. We also welcome the release in recent years of some political prisoners. However, many freedom fighters continue to be detained, particularly in the so-called independent homelands. Nepal joins the international community in demanding the release of all political prisoners without delay. We believe that such a measure is essential to the creation of a climate conducive to political negotiations.
My delegation is seriously concerned at the continuing violence in South Africa. Apartheid itself is an extreme form of violence against human life and dignity. Apartheid has institutionalized hatred and fostered violence.
The growing culture of violence seems to have been a sinister ploy to derail the ongoing political process. If allowed to fester, it will have a serious negative impact on the future of a democratic South Africa. Recent disclosures of the secret use of public funds to finance violent activities raises grave concern about the intentions of the minority regime. Even if we are to give it the benefit of the doubt, serious concerns remain with regard to the ability of the authorities to control security forces. We welcome the signing of the National Peace Accord in September of this year. Strict adherence to enforcement of the principles laid down in the Accord is essential for progress in the process of change in South Africa.
Nepal welcomes the agreement between the African National Congress and the Pan-Africanist Congress of Azania on a number of critical political issues. That agreement would strengthen the position of the freedom fighters in negotiations on the future of South Africa. In that context we have noted with satisfaction the convening of the preparatory meeting for the Convention for a Democratic South Africa. We sincerely hope that the negotiations will lead to a non-racial democratic society.
Nepal supports the critical process of advancement towards a peaceful and negotiated end of apartheid in South Africa. The steps already taken are important parts of the process. However, the basic principles enunciated in the Declaration of the sixteenth special session are still far from being realized. Only agreement and action upon modalities for the promulgation of a new constitution, together with transitional arrangements concerning the administration of the country until a hew constitution takes effect, can make the movement towards the dismantling of apartheid irreversible. Until such
(Mr, Acharya, Nepal) steps are taken, Nepal will continue to support the maintenance of appropriate pressures on the regime.
Such pressure will have to take forms of economic sanctions, and adherence to the arms embargo against South Africa imposed by the Security Council. In the meantime, resumption of what is called "people-to-people" links with democratic and unified non-racial organizations of South Africa should be pursued on a carefully selective basis. I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to pay a warm tribute for the statesmanship shown by the leadership of the national liberation movements in their legitimate struggle for the eradication of apartheid by peaceful means. Peaceful transition of South Africa to a non-racial democratic society will inaugurate a new era of peace and prosperity in the southern African region and will be a major step towards strengthening international peace and security.
I wish to express my appreciation to the Special Committee Against Apartheid for its comprehensive report on apartheid. I wish also to express our appreciation to the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa. The work of the Centre Against Apartheid has been commendable. The Special Committee, under the able leadership of Mr. Ibrahim Gambari of Nigeria, continues to be the focal point at the international level on issues of apartheid and South Africa. It has been playing a major role in coordinating international efforts for the ongoing process of broad-based negotiations on the establishment of a non-racial multiparty democracy in South Africa. We fully support the efforts of the Special Committee to maintain international consensus on the subject and to keep the important negotiations on track.
Mrs. RAKOTONDRAMBOA (Madagascar) (interpretation from French): Because of its geographical location and its colonial past, Madagascar cannot fail to be interested in developments in South Africa.
While we were pleased to note the repeal of the legal underpinnings of apartheid, we have also recognized that in practice apartheid cannot be erased overnight. The majority of the population of South Africa, in its daily life, continues to suffer under the yoke of decades of oppressive laws and discriminatory attitudes.
Nevertheless, ways to expedite the eradication of apartheid are now available to the people of South Africa. It is up to the different groups to implement them. Those means are political will in the case of the South African Government, acceptance of change in the case of the white minority and resolve to achieve their goals while preserving solidarity in the case of the liberation movements and the black political parties.
In that context, we have noted with optimism the formation of the United Patriotic Front. The Front is living proof that unity is the best possible weapon for liberation movements in coping with the difficulties inherent in the process now under way and in foiling the manoeuvres of certain groups whose deliberate intention it is to delay and even to prevent the advent of a new non—racial and democratic South Africa.
(Mrs. Rakotondramboa, Madagascar)
Liberation movements and anti-apartheid organizations that have come together in the Patriotic Front have made concessions and accepted compromises. They have demonstrated their political maturity by allowing their nation's highest interests to prevail over their party ambitions. The joint strategy set forth in the Durban Declaration is beginning to bear fruit, as indicated by the solidarity of black workers during the strikes held on 4 and 5 November 1991.
However, an even more important achievement of the united Front is to have accelerated the process by stressing the urgent need to enter into genuine negotiations on the future of South Africa. This brings us to an evaluation of those negotiations.
On 20 and 21 December 1991 the Convention for a Democratic South Africa will be held at Johannesburg with the participation of all groups, including the party of the South African Government. At this very moment a standing committee, which was set up on 29 and 30 November, is taking up the matters to be considered by the Convention.
All political groups - apart from the conservative party - have unanimously recognized the inevitability of negotiations and have agreed to the principles of fundamental rights. Differences emerge when attempts are made to define transitional arrangements and to establish the context for drawing up the future constitution. The liberation movements are calling for a transitional government and an elected constituent assembly; they are also hoping that the international community will participate, arguing that the South African Government, by virtue of its functions, will unavoidably be both judge and interested party. The South African Government, which was at first totally opposed to the idea of a transitional government and constituent
(Mrs, Rakotondramboa, Madagascar) assembly, had based its position on the legality and constitutionality of its status. The South African Government has now stated that it is no longer opposed to the idea of transitional machinery, provided that such machinery be negotiated and determined by the multiparty Conference.	'
Madagascar is inclined to support the Patriotic/United Front, and I would here reiterate the statement made on 4 October in this forum by Mr. Cesaire Rabenoro, the Madagascar Minister of Foreign Affairs, that the United Nations, if it is to be consistent in its efforts to combat apartheid, should offer all the parties its good offices, its mediation and even its arbitration. In our opinion, impartiality is essential if an atmosphere of confidence is to be created among the parties. It will make it possible to remove any possible ambiguities and, at the same time, guarantee the authenticity of the process.
It is therefore up to the South Africans themselves to define their country’s future and to choose the manner in which it is to be realized. As a Member of the United Nations and as a neighbouring country, we hope that they will find a formula that narrows the differences while at the same time harming no group. A gamble, true, but such is the price of consensus.
My delegation remains concerned at the continuing violence in the black communities of South Africa. The signature of the National Peace Accord had given rise to hopes that order would be restored. However, such has not been the case. We urge the Government of South Africa to take firm action to stem the repeated waves of violence that are unleashed in the townships. An honest stand on the part of the South African authorities would help to put an end to that fratricidal struggle. We are all aware of the effects of violence
(Mrs, Rakotondramboa, Madagascar) on the lives of that already disadvantaged sector of the population, and even now we can imagine the effect these massacres will have on the country's collective psychei Thus, we urge all the parties to implement and respect the code of conduct jointly proclaimed at the peace conference. We invite them to work together and in good faith to defeat the forces - whichever they may be - that are responsible for the massacres. It goes without saying that such a climate of civil war is an obstacle to negotiations, slowing the economy and compromising the stability of post-apartheid South Africa.
I should now like to turn to the rather delicate and controversial question of the sanctions imposed on South Africa.
Madagascar favours keeping the mandatory sanctions with respect to an embargo on weapons decreed by the Security Council in 1977. As for the other sanctions, my country, bearing in mind the changing situation in South Africa and the ongoing international changes, tends to favour the selective and voluntary lifting of some of the economic, cultural and other sanctions.
We believe that each Member State should be responsible for judging the appropriateness of lifting selectively applied sanctions and for setting its own priorities and schedule for so doing. Madagascar is convinced that the opening created by the lifting of some sanctions, facilitating more direct contacts with Pretoria, will also make it possible to exert more direct and more positive pressure.
My delegation should like to emphasize that its position on sanctions in no way detracts froth its support for the principles contained in the Declaration on Apartheid and its Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa, and we should like to take this opportunity to reiterate our support for the
(Mrs. Rakotondramboa, Madagascar) liberation movements in their efforts to eradicate apartheid by peaceful means and realize a democratic, non-racial and united society in southern Africa.
My delegation would also like to express its appreciation to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for its efforts to repatriate political refugees and exiles to South Africa. We are convinced that it will carry out its task effectively notwithstanding the difficulties and scale of that undertaking.
We would also like to express our satisfaction to the Special Committee against Apartheid. It is performing the difficult mission of leading the South African majority to democracy, demonstrating tenacity an analytical spirit and objectivity. We wholeheartedly support its appeal to the international community to give its full support to the ongoing process in South Africa, particularly by providing more material, financial and other assistance in order to help offset the crying socio-economic inequalities, especially in the fields of education, health, housing and social services. We particularly support the Special Committee's request that humanitarian aid be increased for the reintegration of political exiles and freed political prisoners.
A South Africa in transition is facing ambiguities and contradictions that impede its progress towards a non-racial democracy and threaten to plunge it into chaos. At the same time, however, that fragile process embodies the aspirations and hopes of an entire people. My delegation remains confident that common sense, justice and law will prevail and that the day is not far off when South Africa will rejoin the comity of nations in which all will acknowledge its rightful role.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.
UNITED NATIONS
A
General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/46/PV.73 30 December 1991
ENGLISH
Forty-sixth session GENERAL ASSEMBLY PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE 73rd MEETING Held at Headquarters/ New York, on Monday, 16 December 1991, at 10 a.m.
ClfifidfiAti
later :
later:
Mr. SHIHABI
Mr. PENNANEACH (Vice-President)
Mr. SHIHABI (President)
(Saudi Arabia)
(Togo)
(Saudi Arabia)
Commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: draft resolution
The situation in the Middle East: draft resolutions
Tribute to Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
91-62031	0107V (E)
AGENDA ITEM 98 (a)
COMMEMORATION OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS, THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS AND THE OPTIONAL PROTOCOLS TO THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS: DRAFT RESOLUTION (A/46/L.49)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The General Assembly, in accordance with the decision taken at Its 3rd plenary meeting, will observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
In this connection, the Assembly has before it draft resolution A/46/L.48. (8pq,9 in Epgllah)
We celebrate today the twenty-fifth anniversary of one of the notable achievements of the United Nations in the field of human rights - the adoption by the General Assembly in 1966 of die International Covenant on Human Rights. That achievement was the culmination of more than two decades of painstaking efforts within the United Nations by delegations as well as by individuals of good will from all over the world to promote greater respect for human rights.
The founders of the United Nations foresaw that it would not be possible to maintain peace without giving due and basic recognition to human rights. That is why they included numerous references to human rights in the Charter, including those in the Preamble and in Article 1 which reaffirm the importance of such rights and make the promotion of their observance one of the central purposes of the United Nations.
(The President)
The adoption of the Covenants lent further substance to those provisions of the Charter and provided the Organisation with Invaluable instruments for the achievement of concrete advances in the realisation of human rights. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to It, as well as the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, were adopted unanimously by the General Assembly on 16 December 1966.
jco/e
(iiuLiuildm)
On,of th,moat inportant provisions of both Covenants is th,right of p«opl«i to self-determination, which today still remains to b,unIvorsally r«alis«d in spit,of th,strenuous efforts by the United Nation,to proaott ita implementation around the world in the 25 yeara since the adoption of the Covenants.
Let us resolve on this auspicious occasion to make every effort to uphold the noble principles and high standards enshrined in the Covenanta, and let ua pledge to do all that ia within our power to ensure that their provisions are effectively implemented both now and in the years that lie ahead.
I now call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Today we commemorate the unanimous adoption by the General Assembly 25 years ago of the International Covenants on Human Rights. Together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Covenants have provided the international community with the international bill of human rights. At this commemoration, we are also reaffirming the vitally important principle that lies at the heart of these instruments namely, that respect for the inalienable rights of all members of the human family and for their inherent dignity is the foundation for freedom, justice and peace in the world. At the same time, we reaffirm our commitment to broader and more effective global implementation of human rights norms.
The codification of human rights standards is a monumental achievement of the United Nations. Inspired by the founders of the Organization, who recognized the inextricable link between human rights and peace, we have provided, through the Covenants, the fundamental legal framework for just and peaceful societies and a just and peaceful world.
The Covenants constitute 
legally binding human rights instruments of global scope and establish standards to which all States should conform. Viewed as an indivisible and Interdependent whole, they encompass the broad spectrum of fundamental rights and freedoms, including civil and political rights as well as economic, social and cultural rights.
Over the course of the past 25 years, the International Covenants on Human Rights have provided a solid foundation for the development of a variety of other international human rights instruments, including those relating to the fight against torture and the promotion of the rights of women, of children and of migrant workers and their families, as well as the fight against racial discrimination and apartheid. These instruments, each representing an Important advance in the realisation of human dignity, rely ultimately upon the concept of universal and fundamental human rights as proclaimed and defined by the Universal Declaration and the Covenants.
To ensure a sustained and active approach in monitoring the implementation of their provisions, the Covenants establish international supervisory mechanisms. These mechanisms - the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic. Social and Cultural Rights - have been playing a crucial role in the promotion and protection of human rights. As a result. States parties regularly review their legislation and their policies and programmes affecting the enjoyment of human rights, and often improve the situation of human rights at the local level. The valuable expertise and jurisprudence developed by the two Committees in the area of human rights implementation has become ore of the pillars of the United Nations human rights programme. The specialised agencies and non-governmental organizations
have contributed very significantly to the positive evolution of the treaty body system and deserve special appreciation for their Interest and support.
As we take stock of the past and look to the future, we cannot but feel a sense of dismay at the tragic realities of the world in which we live, where the tyranny of power, poverty and discrimination too often brutalises human beings. Clearly, In such a world the protection of the weak and the vulnerable requires that the implementation of our human rights instruments assume a quality of moral urgency.
On this commemorative occasion, I therefore strongly appeal to Member States to ratify and fully implement the Covenants and Optional Protocols that have been adopted by this Organisation. I appeal now, in the awareness that a new consciousness of human rights is beginning to pervade the globe. This consciousness requires that the inspiration that went into the writing of our bill of rights be rewarded by a genuine improvement in respect for and observance of it.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on Mr. Kofi Nyldevu Awoonor of Ghana, who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. AWQQNOR (Ghana): Twenty-five years ago, the international community embarked on a crusade aimed at redressing the ills cf our societies through the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
That action, the first ever to codify into international law the general principles contained in che Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by
(MLiJ)maeL<JilliM) the General Assembly on 10 December 1948, set in motion a number of activitlee designed purposely for the recognition of man's Inherent rights. If we Met today in auspicious circumstances, it is because of our recognition that positive developments have taken place worldwide in pursuit of that course embarked upon by the international community 25 years ago. During this commemoration, therefore, we must endeavour to take stock of what has been achieved >n the past 25 years and to exchange ideas on what need to be done in the years ahead in our continuing search for better lives for our peoples.
Since the adoption of the two Covenants, the international community has successfully defined a catalogue of human rights, designed noble goals and managed to set standards for international action and behaviour in the human rights field. In many parts of the world today, we witness movements towards easing tension, identifying priorities and laying foundations for the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights. These movements must be given a boost at the world conference to be convened in 1993 in Berlin.
The Berlin conference is expected to review general compliance with human rights standards and examine ways and means of protecting and promoting human rights still further. It will also consider ways of enhancing the existing United Nations mechanisms and strengthening regional and national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights. We welcome this conference and attach great importance to it. We hope that all United Nations organs and Member States will continue to participate fully and actively in the preparatory work for it.
(MU-AMfiDfiUJlUM)
While we acknowledge and support the world conference, we reiterate the need for the conference to recognise that any advance towards the pursuit ot civil and political rights should have a corresponding drive towards enhancing and guaranteeing the rights to economic and social development. Equating human rights with civil and political liberties alone and ignoring the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights will amount to ignoring the social foundations of all human rights. Peace and stability, at both the national and the international levels, require a fair balance of all the elements that compose human rights. It 1j for this reason that preparations at the regional level are crucial to the success of the conference. In the course of these preparations, all facets of the entire question of human rights must be placed in clear focus.
(Mr, Awoonor, Ghaia)
As we commemorate this anniversary of the adoption of the Covenants, therefore, we need to reiterate our belief - self-evident but confirmed by our checkered experiences - that human rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed and elaborated in the various international legal instruments, will be meaningless and remain elusive if the majority of the world's humanity continues to languish in poverty.
Today, the global poverty curtain has risen higher, sealing off vast portions of our globe in the darkness of misery and human degradation. Vast areas of the world remain racked by disease, illiteracy and hunger. These areas, largely limited to the former colonial territories and the once cruelly exploited portion of the new world, remain stagnated ,nd arrested in a horrendous time-frame of dismal existence, while the rich parts of the world whirl through scientific and technological advances, with enough money left to experiment with new space weapons and dreams of galactic colonies on the Stars. If the present drive towards the full enjoyment of human rights is to be particularly meaningful, we must defin,' an alternative to our current reality, in which millions of women and children die needless deaths and where populations are reduced to crawling human skeleton- due to sheer hunger. In our view, the new world order must be constructed on ardent leaps of faith in man and the will that those who have - and have it in abundance - shall, in redeeming their own humanity, guarantee that these zones of human misery be alleviated through the injection of a massive dose of compassion and monetary relief. The moral imperative that fundamental human rights must be accorded to all citizens of the world should be the same force that propels us to recognize that poverty is an abhorrent assault on each one's basic right to
life itself.
(Hij__A)ffi£RejLu_fihAM)
Human right, should also be predicated on th, recognition of equality at the individual, national and International level. To promote human rights, let us also pay attention to the actions in the international economic arena that will give each nation the capacity to respect human rights. The various disabilities from which developing countries suffer include the debt burden, a punitive market that takes away money from the poor and imposes a load of conditionalities that accompany assistance, even though there exists no complementary gesture from the global economic system in support of their efforts. The international community should address these issues in its collective efforts to promote human rights the world over, in poor and rich nations alike, whether in the advanced nations where acts of brutality are frequently organised against minorities and immigrants, or in developing countries where all manner of persecution exists against ethnic or dissenting minorities.
As we commemorate this twenty-fifth anniversary, therefore, we must recognise that in spite of our tremendous achievements in the field of human rights, the international community is still confronted with the great task of the promotion of those concepts. The United Nations and we Member States must, therefore, pledge to continue the search for the formula which will enhance our joint and individual efforts in the mutually reinforcing fields of human rights, development, peace and the attainment of the dignity of the human person without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion and in due recognition of the self-evident truth of the equality of all men and all
States.
The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Arabic): I call on Mr. Mohammad Abulhaaan, the permanent representative of Kuwait, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): It is a great honour and pleasure for me to speak on behalf of the Asian Group of States in the United Nations on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights. This is a sacred occasion which asstunes new importance with the increasing interest in the world, at both the official and popular levels, in man and his natural rights. The seeds cf human rights were planted in 1945 when they were set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, which states as one of its objectives: "to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women ..." Twenty years later, on 16 December 1966, the General Assembly approved the adoption of the International Covenants on Human Rights, thus guaranteeing a wider basis for its noble objectives. Undoubtedly, the commemoration of this twenty-fifth anniversary deserves celebration here at United Nations Headquarters and in all Member States.
Despite some shortcomings and violations, genuine progress has been achieved in the field of human rights. It is now agreed that an awareness, and indeed a cultural movement, have been created for human rights in most States of the world. We must all be grateful to the United Nations for its effectiveness in monitoring and assessing the implementation of the principles of human rights.
(HixJbulhaiW-Kuwit)
Furthermore, dedicated non-governmental organisations and faithful individuals have played a laudable role in encouraging this cultural movement on human rights. It is difficult to overestimate the value of their efforts to which many individuals in the world owe their freedom, and Indeed their lives.
In addition to the United Nations and non-governmental organisations contributions, the media's role has been crucial in combating abuses aad barbarity. S<'ch concerted efforts make it difficult for any Government to ignore the need to protect human rights. It is not easy to say that the random use of force against civilians has ended. Unfortunately, people in many parts of the world remain deprived of their rights and the use of force has not yet become the exception to the rule. Therefore, we must work to ensure commitment to the Universal Declaration on Human Rights in a more disciplined manner.
On this occasion, the Group of Asian States wishes to express its satisfaction with the United Nations role in encouraging the protection of human rights wherever and whenever such rights are put at risk.
In an era when there is a renewal of ,rust in the Organisation, just as was the case in 1945 when the Charter was signed, respect for human rights has become a k'’ -’“ment in the search for international peace. We are convinced that the violation of human rights and the maltreatment of civilian populations endanger peace and security. In order to maintain peace and security it is fitting for the United Nations to continue to legislate in the field of international declarations of rights. Naturally, there may be conflict between national sovereignty and the interpretation of the instruments of human rights.
(Mr, M>ulha,n. Kuwait) Obstacles no doubt exist. However, the time is not far when peace, security, the respect of human rights and national sovereignty will not be seen as contradictory. Indeed, they will be seen as fundamental elements of law and therefore elements that promote one another.
Our celebration today deserves a warm welcome from us. The Asian group of States wishes to add its voice to other groups in support of the efforts being made to ensure respect of this international declaration.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the Permanent Representative of Mexico, Mr. Jorge Montano, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. MONTANO (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, I wish to say how pleased we are at the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols - instruments that complement the San Francisco Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This is an excellent occasion for us to review the overall picture of human rights, which id one of contrasts. While we have been witness to the culmination of a stage of the colonial era and the accession to independence of many States, which have increased the membership of the United Nations, and while we have seen the flourishing of democratic regimes, we need to be aware that inequality on the basis of race, nationality or sex has not been eradicated, nor has the system of apartheid and the colonial domination over some peoples and territories. The progress achieved thus far should encourage members to continue their efforts to deal with the situations that have yet to
be resolved and ne, ses that arise, without distinction on the basis of geography or level ot development.
The countries of our region bulieve that the enforcement of economic, social and cultural rights is indivisible and Interdependent in nature, and should be viewed overall, together with the full enjoyment of civil and political rights. It has been discouraging for ua to seo that progress towards peace has not found a counterpart in the sphere of international economic relations and that the profound economic crisis in the region is impeding the efforts towards modernisation and démocratisation made by many of our societies. This is a real threat to political stability and therefore to full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The Covenants have inspired the development of new international instruments, as can be seen in the different conventions, inter alia, on the rights of the child, of migrant workers and their families and of women, and they have also inspired such new subjects as the right to development. In this way, the international community has viewed human rights as an Integrated set of conditions without which a life in dignity of the individual in society and of societies in the international community is not possible. Therein resides the importance of the International Covenants on Human Rights, and we should apply them in their full scope.
The 1993 World Conference on Human Rights, to which Latin America and the Caribbean attach the utmost importance, will enable us to assess the progress made since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to identify the impediments to further progress and ways to overcome them. It will provide an opportunity to review the mechanisms that have thus far been the cornerstone in the defence of fundamental freedoms, including the
V46/W,7J
IS
(MriJlQJitsiQjLJlsika)
International Covananta on Human Rights, and to make recommendations for conditions that would enable all the peoples of the world to enjoy these rights.
In view of the inequalities and injustices affecting the human rights regime, it is essential to base our work on the doctrine of international law. In so far as there is greater consistency between the implementation of international instruments and the efficiency of the organs entrusted with administering them, the United Nations will be able to strengthen and perfect the system for the protection of human rights.
In this regard, greater confidence in the Organisation's system of defining and protecting human rights presupposes greater support for the International Covenants in this field. While the current state of signing and ratification of the Covenants is encouraging, it is clear that over the course of time and out of their own conviction, a larger number of States should accede to these Covenants. It is, however, particularly discouraging to see that countries that participated actively in the development of the Covenants are not parties to them and, furthermore, that they claim to be guardians of the observance of these Covenants in third countries.
It is clear that the system for the protection of human rights inspires and guides the international community's actions in search of change. Let us take advantage of this unifying element that gathers together those who are struggling for a more democratic society and for just economic, social, civil and political reforms for the benefit of mankind. Resolute support by the international community for the International Covenants on Human Rights will no doubt be decisive in enlarging and strengthening the framework in which the rights that have been proclaimed can be exercised as a shared ideal.
Th,current situation of international relatione provide, an excellent opportunity for us to ensure broader observance of human rights. In this regard, we must continue to fight to ensure that the principles of humanitarian law and the genuine expiration to help create condition, conducive to respect for, and the full exercise of, political and civil rights, and of economic, social and cultural rights may prevail over any other consideration or interest.
Mr, BURAVKIN (Belarus) (interpretatlon from Russian): In the calendar of commemorative dates this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of th, International Covenants on Human Rights occupies an Important place. For all those who cherish the ideals of equality, justice and democracy, those historic documents ar, of particular value.
This Is especially evident now, when, in the sphere of international activity, confrontation is being replaced by genuine cooperation and when the outmoded myths and stereotypes of the cold-war era are collapsing, one after another. Today, dialogue and the search for mutually acceptable solutions aimed primarily tt establishing the most favourable conditions for human life and activity ar, what th, international community is consciously concentrating on.
Th, nature of the recent development of cooperation between States enables us to take an optimistic view of the future. We are convinced that the international community now has a solid foundation on which common endeavours in this area can be successfully built, aud that foundation is provided by the International Covenants on Human Rights. Those documents hold the enormous potential of the universal human values which serve to unite all States and peoples regardless of their social, economic or political structures. Is precisely now, when international cooperation on human rights is rising to a radically new level, that it becomes far more important to universalize the standards enshrined in those international documents and make them applicable everywhere.
The International Covenants on Human Rights are essentially the normative embodiment of those values which reflect the centuries-long experience of the development of world civilization as a whole. They are the recognition of the
VM/PV.7J
22
(Mr, Buravkin. Bal arm)
binding nature of universally scooted moral norms. It is, of course, e fact that there are different approachea to the concept of human rlghta and different interpretations of the norms enshrined in the International Covenants and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Kach country draws on its own historical experience and on the specific sum of its own humanitarian and cultural ideas. That fact, however, by no means rules out but, on the contrary, presupposes the nesd for active dialogue, constructive discussion, the search for truth and, lastly, the exchange of positive experience for the appropriate and universal application of norms in ensuring human rights.
The significance of this area in guaranteeing a peaceful life for the world'a peoples is beyond doubt. Commitment to the Covenants and accession to them by all countries are key factors for the dynamic development of international cooperation in the field of human rights. By its very nature, that field requires a universal structure in order to safeguard the rights of the individual. That is why one of the major tasks of the international community is to promote the accession of as many States as possible to the International Covenants and to other documents of the greatest importance In the field of human rights. That would, in a major and objective way, promote the attainment of the necessary level of implementation of international standards and the establishment and strengthening of guarantees for each person's exercise of his inalienable rights.
It is clear that enhancing the authority and effectiveness of the Covenants does not lie solely in a quantitative increase of the number of States parties to them: the system of commitments cannot operate effectively without mutual confidence on the part of States that those commitments will be
EF/5	A/46/PV.73
23 (Mr, Buravkin, Belarus) strictly and fully implemented. Strengthening openness and trust in the field of human rights and enhancing the activity of the control bodies established on the basis of the Covenants must play an important role in giving mankind a life of dignity. In the final analysis, that promotes the démocratisation and humanisation of the entire system of International relations.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now call on the representative of the Netherlands, who will speak on behalf of the States members of the European Community.
Mr, VAN SCHAIK (Netherlands): On behalf of the European Community and its twelve member States, we wish to join all States Members of the United Nations in celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the two International Covenants on Human Rights.
Twenty-five years ago, on 16 December 1966, the States Members of the United Nations adopted the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. They recognized that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying civil and political freedom, freedom from fear and want, can be achieved only if we create conditions under which everyone may enjoy his or her civil and political rights, as well as his or her economic, social and cultural rights.
With the adoption of the Covenants, the process towards establishing an international bill of human rights, which bore its first fruit in 1948 with the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, finally came to its conclusion. That was a historic event, which embodied in binding international instruments the obligations of States to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
(Mr. Vu Schalk. Mtth«rImada)
Th,newly adopted Covenants also established supervisory mechanises to monitor their implementation. Furthermore, the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Bights established a complaints procedure for Individuals claiming to be victims of violations of rights set forth in the Covenant. Thus, the idea of the accountability of Governments for their compliance with international obligations in the field of Iman rights became a reality instead of merely an abstract ideal. There is no justification for Governments to argue that criticism for their failure to implement international human-rights obligations constitutes interference in their internal affairs.
In the years which have elapsed since the adoption of the Covenants, much has happened. Non-governmental organisations have played an active and catalytic role in this respect. We welcome the fact that a large number of States have become parties to the Covenants and that some are in the process of doing so. Today in particular, we call on all States which have not already done so to ratify, or to accede to, those instruments.
In the past 25 years, new initiatives have been taken to perfect the system which was adopted in 1966. In 1985, for instance, the sessional working group of the Economic and Social Council was transformed into the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Thus, supervision of the implementation of that Covenant was placed at the same level as supervision of the implementation of the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which was an important step forward in giving equal status to the two categories of human rights.
(Me lYtaSchalANs	)
With respect to new standard-setting since the adoption of the two Covenants, we should like to single out the Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Bights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (General Assembly resolution 44/128), as it was a concrete addition to the Covenant Itself.
(Mr, Van Schalk, Matiurlftoda) It was adopted in 1989 and entered into force this year. This constituted a major step forward in the field of human rights. We therefore encourage those States that are able to do so to become parties to the Second Optional Protocol. States that have not formally abolished the death penalty should consider refraining from implementing this severest form of penal sanction.
Over the years, the Supervisory Committees of the Covenants have developed into well-respected authoritative bodies that scrutinise reports by States parties on the implementation of the Covenants and make general comments on specific articles, which is a very useful practice.
Nevertheless, the system that was established is not flawless. Some countries had great difficulty In presenting reports on time or presented Inadequate reports. The burden on many States grew through the expansion and overlapping of reporting obligations, due to the adoption of new human-rights Instruments. Insufficient resources prevented the treaty bodiea from functioning effectively. And, last but not least, the Secretariat, for reasons of Insufficient staffing, was unable to provide the treaty bodies with the administrative and technical support they required. That is the reason for our concern that proliferation of new standarda has to be avoided or limited to those situations where the need to draft new instruments is commanded by a broad consensus of the international community.
The General Assembly reaffirmed last year that it is responsible for the proper functioning of the human rights treaty bodies. It also reaffirmed in this connection the importance of ensuring the effective functioning of systems of periodic reporting by States parties to the human-rights instruments and the importance of securing sufficient financial resources. The European Community and its member States remain firmly committed to furthering this goal.
Since 1966 we have witnessed significant political changes in the world. The ideological battles that played a dominant role at the time of the adoption of the Covenants have now virtually disappeared. This makes it all the more possible to approach with an open mind the issue of the relationship between civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights. The new political climate also allows for cooperation geared to paying more attention to the implementation of economic, social and cultural rights.
Another positive development is the trend towards démocratisation in all regions of the world. We welcome the growing recognition in the international development debate of the vital relationship between democracy, human rights and development. Respect for human rights, the rule of law, and political institutions that are effective, accountable and enjoy democratic legitimacy constitutes in our view an indispensable prerequisite for dynamic economic development and the equitable distribution of resources.
Let me conclude this statement by looking to the future. The European Community and its member States are confident that the United Nations World Conference on Human Rights, to be held in 1993 In Berlin - symbol of the triumph of people in a peaceful struggle for human rights and democracy - will give a boost to universal respect for human rights. We attach great importance to this Conference, which, among other things, will review and assess the progress that has been made in the field of human rights. It will also examine ways and means of protecting and promoting human rights still further, including enhancement of the existing mechanisms of the United Nations and strengthening of regional and national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights. We express the hope that this Conference will be a milestone in the history of the United Nations, as the adoption of the Covenants was back in 1966.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): 1 now call on Mr. Nouhad Mahmoud of Lebanon, who will speak on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
Mr, MAHMOUD (Lebanon) (Interpretation from Arabic): It gives me pleasure to make this statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States, which Lebanon has the honour of chairing for this month, on this solemn occasion, the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenants on human rights, be they social, economic, cultural, civil or political rights.
Since the General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration on Human Rights in 1948, resolution 217 (III), this noble objective has become a common ideal of the international community. The right of peoples to self-determination and to struggle against occupation, apartheid, racism and all forms of racial discrimination has become the subject of multilateral legal international instruments in the form of conventions, declarations or codes of conduct that have all entered into effect.
Since the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV) on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, the right to self-determination and the right of peoples to decide their own future freely have become two basic conditions for the enjoyment of basic freedoms and human rights. It is of great importance that serious steps are being taken to reaffirm the concept of international protection of human rights and to give a new dimension to international cooperation in order to increase awareness of and respect for human rights and thus ensure that peoples enjoy their cultural, political, economic and social rights.
The States Members have committed themselves to the implementation of and respect for the noble objectives contained in these Covenants as an expression
(Mr, Mahmoud, Lebanon) of their faith that these objectives are the minimum necessary to ensure the dignity of citizens in their countries. The beautiful words we have heard, the noble objectives and the lofty goals embodied in our observance of this anniversary today must encompass all people on the face of the earth, wherever or whoever they may be, without any distinction as to race, religion or creed. They cover freedom of thought and freedom of expression and embody the principles of justice, equality and self-determination.
Unfortunately, when we look around us, despite the fact that twenty-five years have passed sines the adoption of these two Covenants, we find that we have not yet been able to put an end to the grave violations of human rights in various parts of the world. There continue to be some racist regimes in the world that ignore those rights and trample them under foot in complete disregard of thir legal and international commitments. Casting a glance at what is happening in South Africa or in occupied Palestine makes it clear beyond any shadow of doubt that the occupying authorities there continue to ignore and disregard the most rudimentary principles of democracy, justice, freedom and equality, and continue to deny the right of self-determination of peoples stip lated in the United Nations Charter.
AW/bls	A/48/W.7J
31 (Mr. Mahmoud, Lebanon)
Proceeding from this, we believe that any violation or disregard of these Covenants by the regimes of South Africa and Israel constitutes a defiance to mankind as a whole. That cannot be tolerated. The continued military occupation of Arab territories constitutes an obstacle in the face of the right to self-determination and is a violation of human rights, foremost of which is the right to freedom. Freedom is the secret of human creativity, without which no human being can enjoy the rights of every human being. Therefore, it has become necessary, more than ever, for the international community to discharge its responsibility and to put an end to occupation and inhuman practices, in addition to forcing Israel to put an end to Its settlement policies. In particular the various condemnations adopted by different International bodies are no longer sufficient to face up to such practices.
On this occasion, we call upon the international community to do its utmost to force Israel and South Africa to strictly abide by the provisions of the international covenants on human rights and without any further delay, in order to ensure peace and security and respect for the provisions of the United Nations Charter. These provisions aim basically at protecting mankind from the scourge of war, displacement and oppression.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm the commitment of our countries to the Covenants and principles which ensure respect for human rights and basic freedoms, without distinction as to sex, race or religion. Our countries reaffirm their intention to spare no effort, in cooperating with other countries and peoples, in order to implement these Covenants and conventions in accordance with the international arrangements for monitoring their implementation. The achievements of these noble common objectives of mankind
( HnJlatoQMrttkinM ) cannot coma about without the awareness of the international connunity and the keen interest of all peoples on earth in the protection of human rights and the translation of the principles of the international Covenants into reality so that all peoples of the world may enjoy security, peace and natural respect for human rights.
Mr, 3USLID (Norway)t On this solemn occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of the International Covenants on Human Rights, I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway.
History has proved that the objectives of peace, security and development require respect for human rights and the rule of law. This calls for universality and collective action.
By accepting the United Nations Charter, States also accept that human rights violations are a legitimate concern of the United Nations - indeed, a necessary one if the Organization is to fulfil its purposes and preserve its credibility.
This concern must be universal and even-handed. It must extend equally to all violations, wherever they occur and under whatever political, social or religious system. In other words, efforts by the United Nations to protect and promote human rights do not constitute interference in the internal affairs of States.
Today - 25 years since the Covenants were first adopted - more than 60 States Members of the United Nations are still not parties to those instruments. Only a minority of the Member States have acceded to the Optional Protocols to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Once again
<HrJiuiLLiLJfiim>
•• urge all States which have not yet bacon,parties to those Instruments to reconsider their position and to take appropriate measures to remove any remaining obstacles to ratification or accession.
United Nations action in the field of human rights haa yielded considerable results. The Covenants hav,broadened, strengthened and deepened the commitments of Statss parties. Still, the action of the Covenant bodies -as they themselves are only too awave - could become more effective. All in all there is an urgent need to strengthen the United Nations human righta machinery by increasing the level of resources available.
The Nordic countries believe that efforts must now be concentrated on ensuring universal adherence to and scrupulous Implementation of the provisions of the Covenants. This issue should also be addressed as the main objective of the World Conference on Human Rights.
The recent achievements of popular and democratic movements in a number of countries which had ratified the Covenants long ago have demonstrated that ratification does not in itself amount to implementation. The implementation of the fundamental principles of human rights as codified in the Covenants is the responsibility of all States and must, I repeat, ba a main priority of the 1990s.
As we rejoice in the triumph of the ideals of human rights over many systems that are guilty of massive and systematic violations of human rights, we must, however, at the same time, be aware of the fact that hatred, aggression, intolerance and social and economic injustices remain fertile ground for human tights violations.
An anniversary commemorating the International Covenants on Human Rights should not be observed without payiiig due homage to the defenders of human
(Mr, Huslld, Norway) rights, including non-governmental organisations and their crucial contributions to th, lofty causa served by the Covenants: the cause of human dignity. Were it not for the unselfish dedication of non-governmental organisations and other defenders of human rights, there would no doubt be much less progress to celebrate. We honour those defenders of human rights who have paid the highest price - their lives - for this noble cause. Our thoughts and our solidarity are with those who at this very moment languish in detention or are otherwise deprived of exercising their fundamental rights.
Finally, the Nordic countries would like to express their hope that the draft declaration (A/46/L.48) we have presented on this occasion can be adopted by the General Assembly by acclamation. In our view, this step would constitute an appropriate confirmation by the world community of the universal commitment to protect and promote the human rights embodied in the Covenants as a common heritage of mankind.
Mr, O'BRIEN (New Zealand); I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the Governments of Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
The elaboration of an international bill of human rights - that is to say, the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and the two international human-rights covenants we are celebrating today - represents one of the great achievements of the Organisation.
In the wake of the devastation and tragedy of the Second World War the need to promote and protect human rights was very much on the minds of those drafting the Charter of the Organisation to save succeeding generations from those same scourges. The United Nations Charter thus ushered in a new era in which social justice and freedom from fear and want were acknowledged to be not just fundamental to the dignity and worth of the human person but also prerequisites for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We pay tribute today to the wisdom, foresight and humanity of those who drafted the two Covenants. As the first comprehensive and binding international treaties in the field of human rights they are milestones in the process of achieving the Charter's objective of the universal enjoyment of human rights. They give concrete meaning to, and eatablish effective mechanisms for, the implementation of the undertaking in the Charter
"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and wotth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women" and "tc promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom." Virtually every State has adhered to at least one international human-rights instrument, and nearly two thirds have accepted the comprehensive Covenants we are celebrating today. We have indeed come a long way from the days when slavery, the divine right of kings or the inferiority of women, of
(Mr. O’Brien. New Zealand) particular races or of the poor were considered to be part of "natural law". The very fact that all Member States acknowledge that discrimination on the grounds of race, sex or religion is not acceptable, that we all reject torture, that the will of the people is regarded as providing the legitimacy of governments, demonstrates the Impact of the international standards contained In the Covenants.
On this occasion we must also pay a tribute to all those who have worked tirelessly since ths adoption of these two instruments to try to turn the legal commitments into everyday realities. We include here the independent experts whom Member States have entrusted with the task of monitoring compliance with the two Covenants. The impact of their review of national law and practices cannot be understated. Our three countries know this from our own experience in providing regular reports and engaging in the consequent discussions with the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Ecoiomic, Social and Cultural Rights. The individual-complaints mechanism in the First Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides additional protection for citizens of our countries. Australia has recently joined Canada and New Zealand in becoming a party to the Optional Protocol.
Like the Nordic countries, our three countries believe it is particularly aPPr°Priate that the work of the non-governmental organizations also be acknowledged on this occasion. They play a vital role in assisting and providing the information to the monitoring bodies and Governments in the reporting process.
This is an occasion to look forward and consider ways in which collective efforts could further enhance implementation of the two Covenants. This remains one of the principal challenges of contemporary international affairs.
( llU_EJBKlftlU_J!lX_ZlAlAAd )
As the Secretary-General said in hia annual report to the Assembly three months ago - the last of his illustrious mandate - there Is now a heightened Interest In achieving a universal régime of human rights, a greater awareness that this is one of the key foundations of abiding peace. The two Covenants provide a solid basis on which to proceed. The legislative process is largely over. The challenge is to turn the standards in the Covenants Into a reality for all.
Our three countries look forward to the day when all States Members of the Organisation will be party to these two Instruments. We hope that the World Conference on Human Rights in 1993 will provide momentum for the universal accession to these two basic human-rights instruments and that States will try to complete the necessary legal steps to be in a position to accede to these instruments on or before that occasion. We also hope that States will consider acceding to the Optional Protocols.
The effective functioning of the treaty bodies is fundamental to the achievement of the enjoyment of the rights set out in the two Covenants, and this is thus a challenge that the United Nations rust continue to address.
There are also still conceptual debates about the implementation of the Covenants. We are all aware of the debate that one set of rights is more important than the other or that the enjoyment of one set of rights is conditional on the enjoyment of the other.
We hope that this occasion, by encouraging us to reflect on the history and intent of these two Covenants, will help us move beyond sterile debate of the past. The two Covenents were elaborated together. They are complementary. The starting point for both is the understanding that:
(Mt, O'Brim, In Z,aland) "th, ideal of free human beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can only ba achieved if conditions ar, created whereby everyone may enjoy his'' - or her - "economic, social and cultural rights, as well as his" - or her - "civil and political rights." (General Annbly uii UUiiiLlMdffllljLLJa	>
These two abiding aspirations are constant and are as truly pertinent today as they wars 25 years ago. On th, on, hand, there is the desire for individual freedom and a democratic order «.nd, on the other, the desire for Improved standards of living.
With that understanding, let us move forward together over th, next 25 years and beyond to find practical means to realize the achievement of all human rights embodied in these two Covenants. We must move with energy and common commitment on all fronts, protecting and promoting all the rights set out in both Covenants.
Mr. ERDOS (Hungary) (interpretation from French): It is my honour today, on the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the two International Covenants on human rights, to address the General Assembly on behalf of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary. This occasion affords us an opportunity to reflect on the significance of those Covenants for the community of nations and, in particular, for the countries of Central Europe.
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, as well as the Optional Protocol, were adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 1966 under political conditions that were radically different from those that prevail today. Upon their entry into force ill years later, we could begin to
V46/W.7J
40
apeak of th, existence of an international legal basis for human rights, which Included the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two Covenants. That group of documents served as a basis and a legal framework for a comprehensive system of human-rights instruments that could then be developed further. As a result, today we must not confine ourselves to extolling the merits of the two Covenants, which are necessarily marked by the effects of the difficult compromises of their day, but we should also emphasise the positive Influence they have had on subsequent legislation In the human-rights sphere. Thus, for example, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights itself has been enriched by a second Optional Protocol on the Abolition of Capital Punishment, which entered into force on 11 July of this year.
< Mli-EXdiilxJHWOOAXI)
Despite the participation of nearly 100 countries that are parties to the Covenants, the universality of these two instruments seems to us to be still fairly remote. But today, the International community is no longer inclined to tolerate Governments overtly or more covertly opposing the provisions of the Covenants. Such attitudes are not only a violation of major international Instruments, but also represent a challenge to the community of nations. We can rightfully say that the Universal Declaration and the international Covenants today represent a code of conduct that includes not only a recognition of the legitimate nature of concern and an international stand in the face of violations of human rights, but also a political and moral obligation to oppose such violations. The United Nations must act so that nothing, no pretext or principle of inter-State relations, can be invoked to justify, conceal or deny violations of the fundamental rights of individuals, communities and peoples.
In certain geopolitical situations, the Covenants can acquito specific aspects and significance. In Central Europe, for example, at the time of their adoption the Covenants were considered almost as forbidden fruit and they had only a rather limited effect on the situation relying to citizens' rights. But eventually, over the years, this state of affairs and the frustration that accompanied it eroded more and more and were replaced by a growing need and ever more committed efforts to work for individual rights and freedoms. It is no exaggeration to say that the true authority and prestige of the Covenants were established by citizens themselves who became aware of their rights and opportunities. For millions of these citizens in Warsaw, Prague, Bratislava or Budapest, initiatives and actions reflecting their snared democratic aspirations and thuir love of liberty have become ever more frequent and natural.
The road that led from the first timid steps to the democratic and pacific turning-point and to free elections was not an easy one. We were living in an era in which • simple reference to fundamental rights and freedoms was readily characterised as anti-governmental action, an era of realpolitik, an era when some types of scaffolding still seemed unshakable.
In that context, we cannot pass over in silence the historic merits of the process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which has turned out to be one of the most effective means for breaking through the glacier in the East, for opening breaches in the ramparts of closed societies of the region and thue for accelerating their collapse. The initiatives of civilian society, the dissident movements independent of power, the famous Helsinki groups were all involved in making today's political landscape in the eastern part of Europe so different. One of the driving forces behind these events was precisely the Helsinki Final Act of 1975, which is based in turn on United Nations documents relative to human rights, including the International Covenants.
One of the most important messages of the changes that have taken place in Central Europe is that economic, social and cultural rights are difficult to interpret and implement without civil and political rights, and that there can be no genuine viable alternatives for development without the integral participation of the individual and without respect for his human rights ana freedom of choice. Wc are aware that political changes provide only a framework for the full exercise of economic, social and cultural rights. But the existence of democratic machinery in a State of law offers us the possibility to overcome economic difficulties in order better to fight against social injustice and the manifestations of intolerance that have traditionally accompanied it.
(Hr, Erdos, Hungary)
The other message that was confirmed by these events is that it is perfectly possible to ensure, through peaceful means, the victory of the rights contained In the Covenants, Including the right to free elections. These cannot be a goal In themselves, for respect for the popular will must also prevail in post-electoral times and organically Integrate itself into the dally lifo of the entire society.
It is the degree to which International instruments are Implemented that gives them their genuine importance. In this context, we welcome the activity of the bodies established by the Covenants. The entire set of United Nations control machinery in the area of human rights - a set based on the provisions of the Covenants - is a double-purpose tool that simultaneously sounds a warning and renders assistance. Its sole objective is the re-establishment of the rights of individuals and communities. For this machinery to operate in a satisfactory manner, it is indispensable that the positive cooperation of all States and the necessary human and financial resources be ensured. We are confident that the World Conference on Human Rights planned for 1993 in Berlin will make a contribution, inter alia, to completing verification of the implementation of the rights set down in the Covenants.
One of humanity's greatest challenges in the twentieth century has been that of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all. After the great upheavals of the end of our century, we seem to be in a better position - more open and less rigid - for completing our great common struggle for the survival of our civilization and the defence of its values.
Mr, IREHKES (Austria): Today we ¿ire commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Those intruments, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, form the basis of United Nations activities and efforts to guarantee and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. All human rights and fundamental freedoms, as contained in the International Covenants, are indivisible and Interrelated, and the promotion and protection of one category of rights should never exempt or excuse States from the promotion and protection of the other.
The implementation and further development of existing human rights standards require a solid basis, an international legal framework of a universal character. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its two Optional Protocols, as well as the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and their implementation mechanisms
constitute such a fundamental basis.
All States Members of the United Nations should do their utmost to strengthen the universal character and applicability of the Covenants and their Optional Protocols.
Full protection of human rights is essential for the maintenance of peace and security. The Secretary-General, in his Human Rights Day message, stated that
"heightened consciousneas of human rights has created a new international recognition of the need to reconcile the fundamentally important principle of the sovereignty of States with the need to protect and enhance human rights. The world can no longer tolerate massive and systematic violations of human rights and indifference to human suffering. These affronts to humanity must be urgently countered with corrective action, especially where peace is threatened." (Press release SG/SM/4667)
All States that have not yet done so should become parties to the International Covenants and should consider acceding to the Optional Protocols to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
An important - indeed, essential - role is allocated to the two Committees established under the Covenants: to supervise and support States parties in the full implementation of those instruments. Despite the increasing number of ratifications and accessions to international human rights treaties, as well as the entry into force of new instruments in this field, the effective functioning of treaty bodies established pursuant to United Nations human rights instruments is a pressing problem and should be a
continuing concern of the United Nations.
Existing United Nations procedures and mechanisms have to be further strengthened, and new and innovative approaches are necessary to close the wide qap between aspirations and reality in the field of human rights. Austria will take the initiative and submit a proposal for such a new mechanism to the upcoming session of the Commission on Human Rights.
On the occasion of the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the International Covenants on human rights we should evaluate in a frank and honest manner ways and means to ensure that democracy, human rights and development are provided for all without distinction as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin or other criteria.
Dramatic changes have taken place in the world. States can no longer deny their citizens the full enjoyment of fundamental human rights and freedoms. Therefore, expressing concern for human rights situations and protecting persons subject to massive and systematic human rights violations can no longer be interpreted as interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States.
Much remains to be done to implement even the most fundamental rights and to ensure the proper functioning of the United Nations human rights machinery. All States Members of the United Nations have an obligation to contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights. That obligation should not be seen as a burden, but as a challenge and a duty vis-à-vis their own citizens and the international community. Austria stands ready to contribute its share, together with all other States represented here today, to the establishment of a universal culture of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): The Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution A/46/L.48.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt that draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/46/L.48 was adopted (resolution 46/81).
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I declare concluded the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
AGENDA ITEM 35 (continued)
THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST: DRAFT RESOLUTIONS (A/46/L.49, L.50 AND L.51) The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I remind representatives that the debate on this item was concluded at the 57th plenary meeting, held on 27 November.
In connection with this item the Assembly has before it three draft resolutions, issued as documents A/46/L.49, A/46/L.50 and A/46/L.51.
I call on the representative of Cuba to introduce the three draft resolutions.
Mr. ALARCON de QUESADA (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I have the honour, on behalf of the sponsors, of introducing the draft resolutions contained in documents A/46/L.49, A/46/L.50 and A/46/L.51 under agenda item 35, "The situation in the Middle East".
I wish to note that Afghanistan, Malaysia and Cuba should be listed among the sponsors of all three draft resolutions; Bahrain should be added to the list of sponsors of draft resolution A/46/L.50; Pakistan and Indonesia should
EMB/10
Â/46/PV.73
4,-50
(MLJUiimJtJkmilixJjilii) be added to the list of sponsor,of draft resolution A/46/L.51; Sudan should not appear among the sponsors of draft resolution A/46/L.50.
The sponors ar,of the opinion that the draft resolutions which I have the honour of Introducing are of the greatest importance given the present conditions in the Middle Bast and in the light of the changes in the international situation and the events in the region since the forty-fifth session and of the situation still prevslllng in the Middle East today.,
, Mr. Pennaneach (Togo), Vice-President, took the Chair.
(MtAlMMia .fiUMft	)
The situation that Israel has created in the area has been the subject of many resolutions - resolutions of the General Assembly and resolutions of the Security Council. Unfortunately, the repeated appeals made to the occupying Power not only to return the occupied territories, including Jerusalem, but also to refrain from any action, such as the establishment of settlements in those territories, that could impede the attainment of a just and lasting peace, have fallen on deaf ears.
During the past two years, on more than one occasion, the Security Council has been called upon to consider violations of the most diverse types committed in the occupied territories by the occupying Power. In spite of the difficulties in its path, the Council has adopted a number of resolutions that clearly demonstrate that Israel continues its policy of violation and ignores the appeals of the international community. In this respect, we cannot fail to mention that the Security Council continues to apply a double standard, on the basis of which it has adopted a broad range of resolutions such as those that impose enforcement measures against certain States - especially when such action has been in the interests of some of the permanent members - but has afforded absolute impunity in respect of the actions of others who, like Israel, are recognized violators of international law.
While it is essential to recall all the norms and principles of law that are violated by the occupying Power, it is of perhaps the most vital importance to underscore that Power's continued violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The Palestinian people, whose legitimate representative is without doubt the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), continues to be subjected to the harshest attacks. We have an unquestionable
(Mr, Alarcon de Quesada, Cuba) duty not only to work for Its protection but to secure for It the full and unimpeded exercise of its sovereign rights. The draft resolution! that I have the honour of introducing reaffirm clearly that the question of Palestine is st the very heart of the conflict In the Middle East, but they also clearly establish that peace in that reqlon is indivisible and must be based on an integral, just and lasting solution to the conflict, under the auspices of the United Nations and through measures that ensure Israel's complete and unconditional withdrawal from the Palestinian territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and from the other occupied Arab territories, including the Golan Heights, whose annexation by the occupying Power is totally illegal and should be considered null and void and without any legal validity whatsoever.
Furthermore, the texts of the draft resolutions underscore the illegality of Israel's decision to imposo its laws, jurisdiction and administration on Jerusalem. They underscore the fact that this decision is null and void and, therefore, without any validity whatsoever.
In the context of the draft resolutions that the Assembly has before it, we also stress the need for all States to refrain from giving political, economic, financial, military or any other assistance to Israel while the Israeli regime continues its illegal occupation of Ijlestine and other Arab territories, continues to subject the populations of those territories to acts of terror, and continues practices aimed at perpetuating the occupation of those territories and at consummating their annexation by the State of Israel. Lastly, the sponsors wish to reiterate the importance of these draft resolutions in the context of events affecting the situation in the Middle
(IlbJdllMlLJLlhaUdL East. Whereas, on one hand, efforts are being made to find a negotiated solution to the conflict that has gripped the region for decades, on the other hand, paradoxically, we clearly see that Israel's prectlces, Including Its discriminatory practices against the indigenous population of the Palestinian and other Arab territories that it occupies, continue to violate the legitimate rights of the inhabitants of those territories, just as the expansionist policy that it pursues continues to be a threat to Its neighbours and, therefore, to the maintenance of peace and security In the region.
This is why, while not failing to take into account the events that have taken place in the region - the draft resolutions Include changes that can easily be seen if the drafts are compared with the Assembly's resolutions of last year on this item - we the sponsors, in the texts that I am now introducing, have clearly reflected our positions. These texts reflect the stand taken by the General Assembly and by the Security Council on Israel's policies and practices, which comprise an essential and negative aspect of the situation in the Middle East.
It remains for me only to put these texts before the Assembly and, on behalf of the sponsors, to recommend their adoption as resolutions. I should like, however, to point out that the sponsors do not want the General Assembly to take any action at this stage on the draft resolution contained in document A/46/L.50, but reserve their right to request its adoption at some later point durinq the current session.,
, The President returned to the Chair.
Mr. AWAD (Syrian Arab Republic) (Interpretation from Arabic): My delegation reaffirms at this stage the request to defer the vote on draft resolution A/46/L.50 of 12 December 1991 and submitted to the Generel Assembly concerning the occupied Syrian Golan Heights while reserving the right to submit it again during the current forty-sixth session In the light of the results of the peace process.
On the other hand, the Syrian delegation considers that resolution 46/47 F, which was adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 1991, satisfies Syria's wish at this time for clear positions of support on the part of Member States regarding the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan and the fact that the jurisdiction and laws imposed by Israel on the Golan from 1967 to the present are null and void. In that context, the Syrian delegation would like to express its thanks and deep appreciation to the 152 States which have voted in favour of resolution 46/47 F.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): We shall now proceed to consider two draft resolutions.
We shall first hear speakers in explanation of vote before the voting. May I remind delegations that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. BAS BACKER (Netherlands): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the twelve member States of the European Community.
Our views on the principles that need to be applied to solve the conflict in the Middle East were set out in full in our statement in this debate on 26 November. The Twelve have serious reservations about draft resolutions A/46/L.49 and A/46/L.50. We hope now that the deferral just requested for the
(MuBfliJacki Gl’,tliirliui(J,)
vote on draft resolution A/46/L.50 may lead to a resolution acceptable to all of us.
We welcome the substantial improvements in this year's test, draft
resolution A/46/L.49, but remain concerned about the lack of balance and about the fact that this draft resolution does not reflect basic principles which we consider essential for a solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. We are, however, glad to support the third draft resolution under this item, A/46/L.51, and In this regard wish to recall the importance we attach to Security Council resolution 478 (1980).
HuJBMfiPIi The Assembly will now take action on the two draft resolutions before it.
The Assembly will take a decision first on draft resolution A/46/L.49.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour! Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brasil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Capo Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mall, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Van iatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:	Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gei iany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Sweden. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
htllilBlM' Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Bellas, Benin, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire. Dominica, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Greece, Grenada, Jamaica, Japan, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Spain, Togo, Ukraine, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Uruguay
Pratt resolution A/46/L.49 was adopted by 93 votes to 27, with
37 abstentions (resolution 46/82 A).,
The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from Arabic)) As I indicated before, the General Assembly will defer action on draft resolution A/46/L.50 to a later date.
We turn now to draft resolution A/46/L.51.
A recorded vote has been requested.
In favour) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, ChaJ, Chile, CiJna, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti. Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
, Subsequently, the delegations of Angola, Cameroon and the Congo advised the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Paki-tan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippine . Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevia, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and ths Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Princlps, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Srl Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against, Israel
Abstaining, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, United Statea of America
Bia(t n,glnUgiLA/L5ijfM.adgpted l?L.mjfflt9Lta..L glth 4 abstentions (resolution 46/82 B).,
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I shall now call on representatives wishing to explain their vote. May I remind delegations that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of the United States of America on a point of order.
Mr, WRAMPLEMEIER (United States of America): The two resolutions just adopted deal with important aspects of the search for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East. However, as my Mission has repeatedly explained when this item has come up for decision in previous years, the only realistic means of achieving a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem is through direct negotiations between the parties concerned.
, Subsequently, the delegations of Angola, Barbados and Cameroon advised the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.
taiMJULu)
Under the co-sponsorshlp of the United States and the Soviet Union, the parties to this conflict met in Madrid on 30 October and launched direct bilateral negotiations aimed at achie. Ing a just, lasting and comprehensive Middle East peace settlement.
Those negotiations resumed in Washington on 4 December and are still under way at this time. Of the draft resolutions befote us today neither even takes note of this important and unprecedented development. At the same time, these two resolutions, A/46/L.49 and A/46/L.51, fall to affirm the guiding principle of the Peace Conference: that it must be up to the Governments and peoples of the region to shape the future of the Middle East.
Although some particularly objectionable paragraph, have been removed, and we take note of delegations' efforts in that regard, the United States voted against draft resolution A/46/L.49 because the text makes no reference to the peace talks which are currently under way between the parties. It deals with many of the matters which are at present under consideration in the peace process and must be resolved through that peace process. Moreover, we consider that the language and tone remain unbalanced in its condemnation of one party to these negotiations.
United States)
As has been our practice in the past, the United States abstained in the vote on draft resolution A/46/L.51. We believe that the status of Jerusalem must be determined through negotiations among the parties concerned and as part of the comprehensive peace process.
Mr. GUVEN (Turkey) (Interpretation from French): During the general debate Turkey explained its position on the situation in the Middle East and. In accordance with that position of principle, we voted in favour of draft resolutions A/46/L.49 and A/46/L.51.
We wish, however, to make certain comments on draft resolution A/46/L.49, which has just been adopted. In the first place, we noted with appreciation the considerable efforts of the sponsorn of the draft resolution to clarify certain paragraphs which in the past had drawn criticism from delegations. However, the draft resolution makes no reference to the peace process initiated by the Madrid Conference and to the bilateral Washington negotiations. In our view, therefore, it is an incomplete text. Turkey attaches great importance to the success of the peace process and would have preferred having that important event duly reflected in the draft resolution.
Regarding paragraph 11 of the same draft, which refers to the relations between Israel and a third country, my delegation believes that the views expressed do not fall within the purview of the General Assembly.
Mr. AWAD (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The firmative vote of the Syrian Arab Republic on draft resolution A/46/L.49 does not signify recognition of Israel which does not recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and continues to occupy the Syrian Arab Golan and other Arab territori s in violation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the norms of international law.
Mr. PODTSEBOB (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): This year's discussions in the General Assembly of a range of questions concerning a settlement In the Middle East are taking place in a qualitatively new atmosphere, an atmosphere of qrowinq hopes for a political solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. That atmosphere arose from the persistent efforts of many countries, including the fruitful interaction between the Soviet Union and the United States, and the readiness of the parties directly involved in the conflict to sit down at the negotiating table. A month ago, a negotiating process, which can and must be further developed, was launched in the capital of Spain, providing a unique opportunity to achieve a comprehensive and just settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and bring a long-awaited peace to that land, which has suffered so much. That hope has been strengthened by the emergence of the first practical steps, in particular the successful conclusion of the Madrid stage of the Peace Conference on the Middle East and the transition to bilateral negotiations between Israel and the Arabs.
At present the Soviet Union and the United States, as co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference, are continuing their interaction and partnership to advance efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive and just settlement in the Middle East. In those circumstances, we consider it extremely important to coordinate most carefully any actions at the national and international levels with the new re lities which emerged on the day of the opening of the international Peace Conference in Madrid.
We believe that the General Assembly should at this session refrain from taking fixed positions on the substance of questions concerning a Middle East settlement and should wait to see what practical results the opening of the
(Mr. Podtserob, USSR) peace process will yield. In that connection, wa welcome the decision of Syria to defer a vote on draft resolution A/46/L.50.
Adoption at this session of the traditional set of resolutions on this issue, which contain numerous confrontational provisions, would not, we believe, be in keeping with the spirit of the times and in the interest of promoting the success of the negotiating process.
With that in mind, the Soviet Union, as co-Chairman of the Peace Conference, abstained in the vote ou draft resolution A/46/L.49. Of course, such an approach does nut represent any departure by the Soviet Union from its position of principle concerning the problems of the Middle East.
Mr, TAKHT-RAVAHCHI (Islamic Republic of Iran): While voting in favour of the two draft resolutions adopted uoder agenda item 35, my delegation would like to express its reservations regarding those paragraphs of the draft resolutions which render recognition to the Zionist regime.
Mr, HAJNOCZI (Austria): Austria explained its position on the situation in the Middle East during the debate on this item. Our position is well known and has been consistent over the years. We share the basic concerns and agree with many, but not all, elements expressed in the draft resolutions before us. In particular, my delegation cannot support those elements which would not only aggravate the existing situation but also impede the search for peace.
Therefore Austria, while supporting draft resolution A/46/L.51, was
compelled to abstain on A/46/L.49.
Ms■ CANAS (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Argentine Republic abstained in the vote on draft resolution A/46/L.49 because we are convinced that in the present circumstances the adoption of decisions by the General Assembly definitely does not contribute to creating the most appropriate context for the peace talks taking place between the parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
In that context. I should like to reaffirm at this point the importance my country attaches to the peace process that began in Madrid under the sponsorship of the United States and the Soviet Union, providing a unique opportunity that undoubtedly reflects the aspiration for a future of peace and harmony between the two peoples.
At this time I wish to underscore and support the positive efforts made by the sponsors of draft resolution A/46/L.49 to change their text in order to e? minate ideas and language not conducive to the objective of a just and definitive solution to this painful conflict. In that connection, we consider it imperative that our Organization should, through its decisions, keep pace with the positive changes taking place on the international scene. Only in that way will it be able to face the conflicts that still exist and those that may yet arise.
Mr. AMER (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of draft resolutions A/46/L.49 and A/46/L.51 concerning the situation in the Middle East, which have just been adopted.
(Mr. At, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
Nevertheless, my delegation would like to place on record its reservation regarding every paragraph in these resolutions that may imply, directly or indirectly, recognition of the Zionist entity in occupied Palestine.
Mr. MONTANO (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish): The Mexican delegation's votes during the consideration of the item on the situation in the Middle East have always been motivated by a desire to support the principles and initiatives aimed at achieving an indivisible peace based on a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflict afflicting that region.
We have invariably held that a settlement of the problems of the Middle East should have as a starting point strict implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, in particular Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In this context the Mexican Government has been following most carefully the development of events in the Middle East, and in particular the negotiating efforts under way now. In fact, the peace process that began on 30 October in Madrid is firmly supported by the Mexican Government.
My delegation views the texts submitted this year on the situation in the Middle East for consideration by the General Assembly as an important effort towards conciliation through the elimination of ideas and language alien to the spirit that should prevail in such a delicate and crucial stage of the negotiating process. We believe that this effort must continue, in conformity
with the positive changes taking place in the peace process.
Our votes on the draft resolutions contained in documents A/46/L.49 and A/46/L.51 are consistent with our unwavering support for the principles that should govern a negotiated solution. We agree that the provisions of international law and the various relevant decisions of the Security Council must be respected.
We also regard as a positive aspect of the peace process now under way the willingness of the parties to engage in dialogue and set aside prejudices and antagonisms that disregard. . the political reality of the situation in the region. We are convinced that the quest for a negotiated solution based on the implementation of existing United Nations decisions and principles of international law will ensure the strengthening of peace and security: the fundamental aspiration of the peoples of the Middle East.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): We have concluded this stage of our consideration of agenda item 35. TRIBUTE TO JAVIER PEREZ DE CUELLAR, SECRETARY GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS
TM PRESIDENT! We have consecrated this hour for a solemn occasion in which our distinguished Secretary-General and I will have the chance to say a few words on the occasion of his imminent retirement from his important post. My good friend Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, the Secretary-General, distinguished representatives: The hours and the days are passing so quickly, and soon, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, you will come to the end of 10 years of distinguished service as Secretary-General of the United Nations: 10 years full of events and rich in achievements, 10 years during which these events and achievements, and your great efforts, will be associated with your name. Here in New York, at the United Nations, you will be warmly remembered and fondly missed.
(Ihi_fiuldm)
At this hour I stand to pay a sincere tribute, on behalf of all the members of the General Assembly and on my own behalf, to a distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Peres de Cuellar, soon to retire after having sorved the United Nations with great distinction, devotion and dedication over the past 10 years - to an eminent statesman who is leaving the Organisation with a distinguished record of accomplishments that have greatly enhanced the prestige and the international authority of this world body. He has earned the full appreciation and admiration of the international community.
Over the past 10 years during which Mr. Perez de Cuellar has placed himself at the service of the United Nations, I and the entire membership of the Organization have been able to appreciate those qualities for which he has become so well known: dignity and generous leadership, wisdom and the courage of his convictions. His unfailing devotion to the purposes and principles of the United Nations has been one of the mainstays of our Organization in its struggle to endure, and indeed to succeed, in the face of the great challenges of our time. His role in maxing the image of the United Nations what it is today will long be remembered.
Mr. Perez de Cuellar, you have our best wishes for a rich and active new life as the elder statesman of the nations united. I have no doubt that the United Nations will continue to call on your unrivalled experience in the years to come. To you and to your family, may I on behalf the General Assembly extend our best wishes, adding the assurance that, whatever you may choose to do, all of us here at the United Nations will always remain your close friends, and the hope that we shall continue to benefit from your wise counsel ind experience. Thank you very, very much.
,/«/PV.7J 69-70
(IiJLPl,lUWlt)
(spoke in Arabic)
It gives im great pleasure to call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I thank you for your kind and generous words.
Two weeks ago, in this very Hall, I felt deeply touched by the spontaneous gestures of acclaim and the generous remarks about me made by the distinguished representatives of the different regional groups. For all of these let me express my profound gratitude.
This is not the occasion for me to dwell on the world situation or the state of our Organisation. I have done so amply in recent months. As it is unfolding at present, ths state of the world eludes all facile judgements. For many years the cold war was a reality which concealed a host of other
realities that are far more ingrained in the human condition.

Now that these realities are visible, we cannot pretend that we did not notice the signs of them before, nor can we defend ourselves with old prejudices and assumptions. The traditional concepts which sustained the philosophies of hegemony or domination or spheres of influence, and which were by no means confined to any particular Power or group of Powers nor to any particular ideology, look increasingly flimsy. We are face to face with a new and varied generation of problems.
This in turn affects the evolution of our Organization. Review, reform and renewal which sometimes dictate a drastic overhaul are part of the life of any organization; they should be more so in the case of the United Nations which has to deal with unpredicted - and unpredictable - turns in international life. The Organization needs restructuring, no doubt, if it is to keep pace with the times. But the change that was obstructed by the cold war is not going to be the work of a single day. Nor can it be viewed as a purely managerial or administrative affair. Deeper questions will be involved in it. Some of these are of such a fundamental nature that they require thought of the same depth and scope as was devoted to the formulation of the mandates of the United Nations and the specialized agencies at the time of their establishment. I would venture to assert, with the conviction born of 20 years' association with the United Nations, that any structural reform of this Organization needs to be accompanied by a determination on the part of its Member States to support it, and to make use of its mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of the countless political, economic and social problems that are its daily round.

There is much talk at present about fitting the United Nations for the demands of the next century. This reflects a much-needed forward-looking approach. However, I am not sure If we yet have a precise Idea about what shape those demands will take. Searching questions are being posed about the traditional notions of sovereignty. The expanding areas of common concern suggest new avenues of multilateral action. All these Issues will be accentuated in the coming years. Every inspection of the anatomy of the Organisation has to take that into account. The utmost care will need to be exercised lest the international life to which we aspire be organised on bases that will prove to be unstable. The Organisation cannot be put into a mould from which it cannot extricate itself in order to answer the expectations of different groups of States, the affluent and the disadvantaged alike.
This caveat, however, does not cloud my vision of the future of the Organisation. I have said before that the United Nations enters the post-cold-war era as an element of continuity, of constancy in the midst of flux. Continuity and constancy can be provided only by adherence to principles, and there is no agency in the world which can compete with the United Nations in developing agreed understandings of principles and ensuring their consistent application. It is, of course, fatuous to suppose that the era now unfolding will mean the end of power politics. One thing, however, is certain. The more power politics is detached from principles that are honestly stated and generally accepted, and the less it responds to the legitimate aspirations of people, the more evanescent and less constructive will be its accomplishments.
I envision the United Nations, therefore, as the central agency for upholding the rule of law, and thereby providing the necessary equilibrium and

the necessary defence against anarchy. For this, it will need the faithful support of all Member States. It will need cohesive management, qquipped with the necessary powers and resources, undistracted by pressures from outside and unthrottled by over-legislation. It will need to be rescued from the financial bankruptcy which dogs it at present and from uncertainty in the future. Besides the issues affecting peace and security, this is one of the issues of most concern to the Organisation. Empty words will have to be discarded and replaced by programmes - programmes clearly set out, reliably financed and scrupulously carried out.
Recent developments in Europe have underlined the universal vision and applicability of the Charter of the United Nations - an overarching document that embraces all members of the human family and the nations into which they are joined. Beyond that it is worth recalling that the Charter was not cast in stone and is, therefore, an appropriate guide and instrument In times of great flux, such as the present. As I have had occasion to observe again recently, the work of the United Nations will remain the facilitation of peaceful and constructive change, not the perpetuation of the status quo. Indeed, no one should doubt that the United Nations can - indeed, must - play a role to the maximum of its potentiality in the process of change that will continue to affect each and every continent.
The United Nations will in particular need to address itself more seriously to the great divide in the world today, the divide between the rich nations and the poor. This, along with the universalization of the human rights regime, is a fundamental issue of the new age. It is a political issue because I see no separating wall between economic frustration and political discontent. When I ask myself the question as to what should dominate the
concerns of the United Nations in the coming years, the answer comes easily; an agenda of justice. I feel that the United Nations will acquit itself before the bar of the human conscience when deprived societies and oppressed peoples can turn to it not out of futile hope but with the confidence of obtaining redress. Equally, it will vindicate the trust of other peoples and societies only if it succeeds in drawing up and implementing plane of action to solve global problems that are beyond the reach of Governments individually. This is the focus of my vision of the United Nations.
As I prepare to be relieved - indeed, liberated - from the burdens of my office, I feel enriched by the experience. I have enjoyed working with my senior colleagues in the Secretariat and I feel proud of the competence and integrity displayed by the entire staff of this House throughout my tenure. These have been years that have witnessed a great transformation of our Organisation; they have been testing years. Not even once did the Secretariat fail to carry out with efficiency a mandate, however unforeseen, that was entrusted to it, nor did it ever hesitate to enter uncharted territory, and to improvise when that was necessary. That it cheerfully bore additional burdens and physical hardships, even in the face of denigration and criticism, is evidence of a spirit of internationalism and dedication which, I believe, is a priceless asset to the international community.
In the intergovernmental sphere, I have been blessed with happy collaboration with the leaders and representatives of States gathered here. Together, we have surmounted obstacles and been able to change the bleak atmosphere of doubt and listlessness that surrounded the United Nations at the time of my induction, and to create one of confidence and dynamism.


These experiences and memories will remain with me in the years to come.
From this day on, I will make myself the preacher of a new faith based on peace and justice for all peoples, and this will be my way of contributing to serve the United Nations.

The PRESIDENT: I sincerely thank the Assembly, and I chare members' regard and affection for the Secretary-General. Again, 1 wish him good luck, happiness and succeaa In his future endeavours.
The Motina rose at 12.30 o.B.