The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, I thank you for your kind and generous words.
Two weeks ago, in this very Hall, I felt deeply touched by the spontaneous gestures of acclaim and the generous remarks about me made by the distinguished representatives of the different regional groups. For all of these let me express my profound gratitude.
This is not the occasion for me to dwell on the world situation or the state of our Organisation. I have done so amply in recent months. As it is unfolding at present, ths state of the world eludes all facile judgements. For many years the cold war was a reality which concealed a host of other
realities that are far more ingrained in the human condition.

Now that these realities are visible, we cannot pretend that we did not notice the signs of them before, nor can we defend ourselves with old prejudices and assumptions. The traditional concepts which sustained the philosophies of hegemony or domination or spheres of influence, and which were by no means confined to any particular Power or group of Powers nor to any particular ideology, look increasingly flimsy. We are face to face with a new and varied generation of problems.
This in turn affects the evolution of our Organization. Review, reform and renewal which sometimes dictate a drastic overhaul are part of the life of any organization; they should be more so in the case of the United Nations which has to deal with unpredicted - and unpredictable - turns in international life. The Organization needs restructuring, no doubt, if it is to keep pace with the times. But the change that was obstructed by the cold war is not going to be the work of a single day. Nor can it be viewed as a purely managerial or administrative affair. Deeper questions will be involved in it. Some of these are of such a fundamental nature that they require thought of the same depth and scope as was devoted to the formulation of the mandates of the United Nations and the specialized agencies at the time of their establishment. I would venture to assert, with the conviction born of 20 years' association with the United Nations, that any structural reform of this Organization needs to be accompanied by a determination on the part of its Member States to support it, and to make use of its mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of the countless political, economic and social problems that are its daily round.

There is much talk at present about fitting the United Nations for the demands of the next century. This reflects a much-needed forward-looking approach. However, I am not sure If we yet have a precise Idea about what shape those demands will take. Searching questions are being posed about the traditional notions of sovereignty. The expanding areas of common concern suggest new avenues of multilateral action. All these Issues will be accentuated in the coming years. Every inspection of the anatomy of the Organisation has to take that into account. The utmost care will need to be exercised lest the international life to which we aspire be organised on bases that will prove to be unstable. The Organisation cannot be put into a mould from which it cannot extricate itself in order to answer the expectations of different groups of States, the affluent and the disadvantaged alike.
This caveat, however, does not cloud my vision of the future of the Organisation. I have said before that the United Nations enters the post-cold-war era as an element of continuity, of constancy in the midst of flux. Continuity and constancy can be provided only by adherence to principles, and there is no agency in the world which can compete with the United Nations in developing agreed understandings of principles and ensuring their consistent application. It is, of course, fatuous to suppose that the era now unfolding will mean the end of power politics. One thing, however, is certain. The more power politics is detached from principles that are honestly stated and generally accepted, and the less it responds to the legitimate aspirations of people, the more evanescent and less constructive will be its accomplishments.
I envision the United Nations, therefore, as the central agency for upholding the rule of law, and thereby providing the necessary equilibrium and

the necessary defence against anarchy. For this, it will need the faithful support of all Member States. It will need cohesive management, qquipped with the necessary powers and resources, undistracted by pressures from outside and unthrottled by over-legislation. It will need to be rescued from the financial bankruptcy which dogs it at present and from uncertainty in the future. Besides the issues affecting peace and security, this is one of the issues of most concern to the Organisation. Empty words will have to be discarded and replaced by programmes - programmes clearly set out, reliably financed and scrupulously carried out.
Recent developments in Europe have underlined the universal vision and applicability of the Charter of the United Nations - an overarching document that embraces all members of the human family and the nations into which they are joined. Beyond that it is worth recalling that the Charter was not cast in stone and is, therefore, an appropriate guide and instrument In times of great flux, such as the present. As I have had occasion to observe again recently, the work of the United Nations will remain the facilitation of peaceful and constructive change, not the perpetuation of the status quo. Indeed, no one should doubt that the United Nations can - indeed, must - play a role to the maximum of its potentiality in the process of change that will continue to affect each and every continent.
The United Nations will in particular need to address itself more seriously to the great divide in the world today, the divide between the rich nations and the poor. This, along with the universalization of the human rights regime, is a fundamental issue of the new age. It is a political issue because I see no separating wall between economic frustration and political discontent. When I ask myself the question as to what should dominate the
concerns of the United Nations in the coming years, the answer comes easily; an agenda of justice. I feel that the United Nations will acquit itself before the bar of the human conscience when deprived societies and oppressed peoples can turn to it not out of futile hope but with the confidence of obtaining redress. Equally, it will vindicate the trust of other peoples and societies only if it succeeds in drawing up and implementing plane of action to solve global problems that are beyond the reach of Governments individually. This is the focus of my vision of the United Nations.
As I prepare to be relieved - indeed, liberated - from the burdens of my office, I feel enriched by the experience. I have enjoyed working with my senior colleagues in the Secretariat and I feel proud of the competence and integrity displayed by the entire staff of this House throughout my tenure. These have been years that have witnessed a great transformation of our Organisation; they have been testing years. Not even once did the Secretariat fail to carry out with efficiency a mandate, however unforeseen, that was entrusted to it, nor did it ever hesitate to enter uncharted territory, and to improvise when that was necessary. That it cheerfully bore additional burdens and physical hardships, even in the face of denigration and criticism, is evidence of a spirit of internationalism and dedication which, I believe, is a priceless asset to the international community.
In the intergovernmental sphere, I have been blessed with happy collaboration with the leaders and representatives of States gathered here. Together, we have surmounted obstacles and been able to change the bleak atmosphere of doubt and listlessness that surrounded the United Nations at the time of my induction, and to create one of confidence and dynamism.


These experiences and memories will remain with me in the years to come.
From this day on, I will make myself the preacher of a new faith based on peace and justice for all peoples, and this will be my way of contributing to serve the United Nations.