The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from Spanish):
This special session of the General Assembly has been convened at a particularly appropriate time. For the first time since the Second World War, there is an extraordinary convergence of views on the most critical issues faced by the international community. That augurs well for the deliberations of the General Assembly, which, under your able guidance, Mr. President, will address questions of crucial importance for the economic well-being and situation of the international community. I need hardly say that the success achieved by the present session will have positive and long-ranging effects on international relations as a whole.

Despite the many difficulties we face today, the last decade of this century is full of promise and hope. Thanks to outstanding events that have taken place in the political international arena, especially the renewed process of democratization, the reduction of rivalry between the super-Powers, the improvement in relations between East and West, and the sincere quest for solutions to regional conflicts, the possibility now exists to change forever the basis of international relations which had come to be considered permanent in the post-war period. They clearly point to the possibility of achieving stable global peace. The opportunity of the kind that has now been provided by the dynamics of human affairs had not occurred in our age. It needs to be fully grasped if international security is to be broadened, made truly collective, and given a lasting foundation.
The past decade witnessed political, economic, social, environmental and technological currents that cut across national boundaries. The increased international flow of people, goods, finance and ideas has given real meaning to the term "globalization". It has reduced the mental distance between societies and shown much political discord in the world to be a product of out-worn concepts and attitudes. It has also led to a narrowing of differences stemming from economic philosophies.
It is ironic, however, that along with that creative historical process there has also been a movement in the opposite direction. I refer to the widening of the gaps in economic and social well-being around the world. The developed market economies are enjoying an unprecedented period of expansion, while only a few developing countries have been able to achieve and maintain high levels of growth. But for most developing countries the 1980s brought no genuine economic betterment. Indeed, the economies of many of those countries stagnated or

declined. Some of them were already among the world's poorest. Without a reversal in their downward spiral, those countries, and indeed whole regions, will be even more economically marginalized. Millions will be added to the more than 1 billion people already living in abject poverty. Is it acceptable that, in today's prosperous world, millions of children should die every year from starvation or malnutrition, or that most people in the developing world should not even have safe drinking water?
The developed countries cannot isolate themselves from those realities. The consequences of the economic and social retrogression in developing countries are already touching lives elsewhere. The drug epidemic now threatening the world has been aggravated by the deteriorating situation in the developing countries. The increase in the flow of migrants within as well as among countries has been another manifestation of this phenomenon.


The political maturity that is reflected in the recent developments that I mentioned earlier will, of course, help to bring about a lasting peace, but it alone cannot guarantee peace. Peace needs to be securely anchored in a strong bedrock of economic and social justice world-wide. The United Nations Charter takes full account of this requirement when, in Article 55, it refers to "conditions of stability and well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations". It is, therefore, a matter of the greatest concern that, despite the global effects of the deteriorating economic situation in most nations since the early 1980s, no serious effort has been made to initiate a broad-based dialogue on international economic co-operation. This special session provides Member States with the opportunity to correct this anomaly, which indeed amounts to a lamentable failure.
In recent months, Member States have laboured hard to lay a solid foundation for the success of this session. I should like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Constantine Zepos of Greece, Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, who has done much to prepare the final document of the special session. All others who have contributed to the preparatory process also deserve our appreciation.
The preparations for this special session prompted, quite naturally, a further discussion of the reasons for the economic slowdown that has beset so many countries in the world. Those who have been unaffected tend to think that economic decline is due essentially to poor domestic management. Those who have suffered economic retrogression are inclined to argue that their misfortunes are the result of international factors that are generally beyond their control. Experience has surely demonstrated that both points of view have some elements of truth. Developing countries, lacking the economic resilience of more advanced societies, cannot prosper in an adverse international environment. At the same time, all countries must pursue sound domestic policies if they are to utilize the
opportunities available. Both conditions are necessary; neither condition alone is sufficient.
Over the past several years, I have noticed an increasing determination, particularly on the part of the developing countries, to strengthen their national economic policies. In many countries, the growth and development process could be helped by a better ordering of priorities, by the introduction of improvements in economic management and by the existence of a standard of administrative efficiency and effectiveness, especially in countries with a shortage of resources. However, it is useless to put stress on such measures without also addressing the fundamental causes of underdevelopment and overcoming the international factors that impede development.
We must recognize that domestic economic measures taken by large countries, or by a number of countries acting collectively, can impinge directly on the well-being of other countries, particularly the smallest ones. For example, the benefits that developing countries can obtain from adjusting their own agricultural prices will be compromised when agriculture in most industrialized countries is heavily subsidized. Similarly, the efforts of developing countries to open their markets and become more outward-looking will be frustrated if international trade continues to be hampered by a wide variety of restrictive arrangements. One of the objectives of this special session should be to chart a course for greater fairness and coherence in global economic policy-making.
In seeking to improve the international economic environment, there are a number of critical issues that must be faced squarely. Governments must create an open and equitable international trading regime. A firm political commitment by major trading countries is needed to ensure that the Uruguay Round negotiations
will enhance the trade and development possibilities of developing countries.

In the matter of commodities, the need for strengthened international co-operation is paramount, particularly in addressing the problems faced by developing countries. There must also be improvements in the flow of technology, so that all countries can make the best use of their physical and human resources, and we must ensure that developing countries have the financial resources necessary to avail themselves of these opportunities.
It is in this last context that we must address the question of the net transfer of financial resources from developing countries. Currently, developing countries are transferring about $30 billion annually to the developed countries. One of the natural results has been a decline in investment, which directly damages those countries' prospects for future development. This clearly runs counter to the principles of international co-operation for development.
Since 1982, international organizations, Governments of both debtor and creditor countries, private-sector banks and economic analysts have been addressing the problem of external indebtedness which confronts more than half the countries represented here. On previous occasions I have expressed my appreciation of the various initiatives, such as the Brady plan, which have been taken to defuse the international debt crisis. However, the fact remains that the total debt of the developing countries rose from some $750 billion at the end of 1982 to almost $1,200 billion last December. This increase was not, as some might suppose, a reflection of the willingness of banks to lend to credit-worthy customers. On the contrary, most of it was lending and borrowing entered into reluctantly by both parties in recognition of the fact that neither had much choice.
It has become obvious that we must remove the exorbitant burden of earlier loans. Present efforts for debt reduction and debt-service reduction must be pursued vigorously, underpinned with larger resources and extended to a larger
number of countries. This will require a major effort, and it is for this reason that I have requested the distinguished Italian statesman, Mr. Bettino Craxi, to act as my personal representative on debt. Mr. Craxi is consulting with all interested parties, and I am certain that his efforts will contribute to an effective resolution of this problem.
One of the lessons of the 1980s, and surely one of the causes of the changes that took place at the end of the decade, was the need to recognize the decisive role of the human factor in the development process. Economic growth has little value unless it can provide adequate food, health and shelter for the world's population. At the same time, in the more complex and interdependent world of today, the development of human resources must be a central feature of efforts for economic development in the 1990s.

Our planet is suffering from the burden we are imposing on its physical superstructure. An ever-expanding population that produces and consumes in ever growing amounts is threatening the very existence of future generations. Underdevelopment and poverty have damaged the environment, as have profligate production and consumption by the rich. Living generations have no licence to endanger the life prospects of future generations. We must achieve a better balance between population growth, resource utilization and the protection of the environment. Tackling this problem is an enormously complex task unprecedented in human history; but we cannot shirk it. The Conference on environment and development to be held in Brazil in 1992 will provide a major opportunity to address this challenge in a comprehensive and unequivocal manner.
To recognize the multiplicity of humanity's current problems is an important first step towards their solution. Mobilizing the resources to meet them is itself another challenge. However, the special session is taking place at a time when Governments around the world are reconsidering the uses to which they put their resources. The reduction in the number of armed conflicts and the relaxation of
political tensions, in particular if reinforced by concrete arms reduction agreements, will provide Governments with an opportunity to reallocate resources from military purposes to pressing economic, social and environmental needs that they all recognize.
For the past two generations the developed countries have spent vastly more on nuclear armaments than on protecting the physical environment. But today the environmental threat looms as large as the nuclear danger. Among the developing countries there are many whose military outlays far exceed what they spend on health and education. Despite the lessening of regional conflicts, world military expenditures in 1989 is estimated to have been close to a trillion dollars — approximately the same as the total external debt of the developing countries.

Continued political efforts, including the expanded use of this Organization's international security and peace-keeping roles, can contain the threat of war. Nevertheless, unless specific measures are initiated substantially to cut world production and trade in arms the benefits from the reduction in tension may prove to be chimerical. Commitments are needed to convert armaments industries to non-defence production and to give higher priority to the economic and social programmes in national budgets.
The restructuring of the political systems and economies that is being carried out by the countries of Eastern Europe should lead in the not-too-distant future to the growth of their markets, thus facilitating exports from developing countries and the greater participation of these countries in the effort of the international community to provide assistance to the developing countries, in particular the least developed among them, in their undertaking to make up lost time. There is reason to be optimistic with regard to active participation by the countries of Eastern Europe in the decision-making process affecting our small and shrinking planet.
At the time of the establishment of the United Nations Governments had a clear perception of the world's future need for international economic co-operation, and hence created the Bretton Woods institutions. Those institutions will continue to serve as solid foundations for co-operation in their spheres of competence.
But much has changed in 45 years. New problems have emerged and new tasks have been added. The time has come for international financial institutions and Governments to reflect on the experiences of the past in order to develop, based on a new vision of the future, more favourable conditions for multilateral development co-operation.
Responding to these challenges and seizing these opportunities will require an
extensive international effort. This special session may not be able to deal with
all the technical aspects of these myriad issues, but we can and should agree on the fundamental principles and measures of international economic co-operation. This would also help us guide the deliberations relating to the elaboration of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth Development Decade, the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the Eighth United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
We shall to some extent be venturing into the unknown. I firmly believe the time has come to be bold. Success requires that we be more forward and outward looking than our cautious human and political nature normally allows. Addressing the complex issues and bringing together the varying views on how to confront the challenges ahead is a daunting task. However, the current mood of rationality suggests that we have progressed beyond sterile ideological debate. We are in a position to agree on ways and means of achieving sustained and equitable economic growth. At the same time we have to address such urgent and fundamental issues as explosive population growth, the environmental degradation of our planet and respect for human rights.
For over 40 years this Organization has been a catalyst for change and transformation in global affairs. It is now being given new and extraordinary responsibilities in world affairs, as envisaged by its founders. We should set ourselves a programme of work for the 1990s, an agreed-upon global agenda. The United Nations in all its parts must remain relevant, efficient and effective. We have a unique opportunity. We should not shy away.