The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have read with great attention the report of
the Fifth Committee on this item and I wish to express my appreciation of the thorough and positive manner in which that Committee has dealt with the many important issues which it has considered under this item. 
I wish, however, to place before the Assembly my concern on one very basic point. This relates to the reclassification of General Service staff and related categories, on which I have already had occasion to speak before the Fifth Committee. 
I find myself in a difficult situation, essentially because thousands of staff members - drawn, after all, from the Member States of this Organization - find themselves in an even more difficult one. On the basis of assurances given under my authority and in good faith they had expected the results of the reclassification exercise to be implemented this year, but they now find that this implementation is being deferred until the General Assembly meets again. The perplexity and unhappiness of those staff members is increased by their knowledge that their colleagues in other parts of the United Nations system in New York have seen their regradings implemented. 
This is an unhealthy situation, and whenever there is any such situation we should try to put an end to it as soon as possible. I note the reasons which have prevented the Assembly from considering this matter at its current session. I am also extremely appreciative of the recommendation of the Fifth Committee that the principle of retroactivity to 1 January 1985 be maintained, thus protecting the legitimate expectations of the staff and confirming my own assurances in that regard. 

In looking for a solution to this problem I have noted the recommendation of the Fifth Committee in draft decision I of its report that the Assembly defer consideration of this issue until its forty-first session. I would hope, in this regard, that the Assembly could consider another possibility, namely, not to close consideration of this item but instead to keep it open, which would permit the Fifth Committee to consider this matter and reach a final determination on it as soon as it has before it the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the observations of the International Civil Service Commission. I leave that suggestion in your hands, Mr. President and those of the Assembly.