118.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Just before the short suspension of the meeting, in a talk by Telex this morning, General Bull reported that on the morning of 10 June he had met with Mr. Sasson of the Israel Foreign Office. Mr. Sasson assured General Bull that UNTSO observers would have freedom of movement and that Israel liaison officers would be provided for them. Mr. Sasson suggested
that United Nations observers should visit settlements on the front lines with Syria in connexion with the observance of the Security Council cease-fire. Mr. Sasson asked that United Nations observers should be sent to Kuneitra to confirm that Israel’s forces were not in Kuneitra and were not advancing on Damascus, General Bull undertook to make every possible effort to observe the cease-fire both in the border settlements in the Kuneitra area and elsewhere.
119.	A few moments later, General Bull transmitted another message to me. The text reads as follows:
“Following message received from Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission, Damascus:
“ ‘The situation report at 0901 hours GMT 10 June. All observers and staff being called into Mixed Armistice Commission house area. This on the advice of the Syrian delegate who says he cannot accept responsibility for United Nations military observers and staff outside the Mixed Armistice Commission house area.’ ’’
I do not know yet the exact implications of this message as far as the freedom of movement and effectiveness of the observers of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission is concerned.
120. I have just now received a few additional reports. One cable is from General Bull; the time of dispatch was 1009 hours GMT and the text reads as follows:
“Message from Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission received via Tiberias control centre at 0944 hours GMT. Air raid seems to be over but alert still going on.”
121.	The last cable report from General Bull was dispatched from Jerusalem at 10.10 a.m. GMT. The text reads as follows:
“The present situation is very confused. This is my assessment in the light of available information:
“1. UNTSO observers have reported that bombing and hostilities continue along the eastern ridges of Lake Tiberias shores in Syria, as well as on the eastern bank of Jordan River, north of Lake Tiberias, and that Damascus has been bombed by Israel Air Force.
“2. There is a strong indication that Kuneitra has been taken by Israel troops but it is impossible for UNTSO to confirm.
“3. Our observers in Damascus have been confined in Mixed Armistice Commission house at the request of the Syrian authorities for reasons of safety.
“4. Our observers in Tiberias cannot function effectively because they have no freedom of movement.
“5. No reply received regarding return of UNTSO Government House.”
