203.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have hesitated to ask for the floor at this late hour. I feel, however, that I should mention briefly to the Council the situation concerning observation of the cease-fire in the Syrian sector.
204.	As the Council is aware, the United Nations military observers in the Syrian cease-fire sector have continued to report throughout the recent period of hostilities, and eight observations posts are still operating in the area. On the morning of 24 October, I discussed the cease-fire observation in this sector both with the Deputy Foreign Minister of Syria and with the Permanent Representative of Israel. I also requested the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to contact the military authorities on both sides concerning the possibility of adjusting the existing observation arrangements to the current situation. The Chief of Staff has formulated a plan for this purpose which could be carried out quickly and would not, for the moment at any rate, require additional observers.
205.	It is my understanding that the reaction of the Syrian authorities to this plan is favourable and that the Israeli authorities have undertaken to give their reaction by tomorrow morning.
206.	Should both parties concerned agree to this readjustment of the existing observation operation, I assume that the Security Council would have no objection.
207.	As I have the floor, I should like to refer briefly to a point raised by the representative of the Soviet Union earlier in this meeting.
208.	I have already informed the Council of the measures immediately taken by me and by the Chief of Staff of UNTSO, General Siilasvuo, to implement resolution 339 (1973).
209.	I wish to assure the representative of the Soviet Union that there was no lack of activity either at UNTSO headquarters in Jerusalem or at United Nations Head-quarters in New York. As I stated in my report to the Council earlier in this meeting, as soon as the necessary Egyptian liaison officers were available, United Nations observation teams set off from Cairo.
210.	Our difficulties in immediately setting up an observation system arose from the conflict situation in the area and the fact that the cease-fire called for by the Security Council was not being observed. It is extremely difficult in such a situation to station rapidly small groups of military observers effectively to observe a cease-fire the geographical framework of which has not been defined and is not known and which is in any case is not practically in effect.
211.	As I have reported, seven teams of observers are now attempting to establish a system which can carry out effectively the mandate of the Security Council from (the Egyptian side, and a similar arrangement is being set up on the Israeli side. The difficulties and dangers which these observers face should not be underestimated. I hope, however, to be able to report in the near future the increasing effectiveness of the observation operation.
