93.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In reply to the questions posed by the representative of France, I have the following observations.
94.	With respect to his first question, relating to paragraph 1 on page 2 of my report to the Security Council, we have no further information from General Bull regarding the recurrence of bombing, as I have stated in my report.
95.	The second question related to paragraph 2 on the same page, concerning firing from east to west, that is, firing from Syria to Israel. We have no further information from General Bull indicating that the firing was repeated or that there was a recurrence of firing,
96.	With respect to the third question relating to paragraph 4 on the same page, all we know concerning the occupation of Kuneitra by Israel forces is contained in my report, namely that Israel claims that its forces occupied Kuneitra prior to the cease-fire. There was no other version from the other side.
97.	I have to report to the Council also that there is no further report of any other air incident over Syria, or for that matter over Israel.
98.	In continuation of my answer regarding paragraph 4 on page 2, I have to report that the United Nations military observers were not in Kuneitra when that town fell to the Israelis, so we have no means, at least for the moment, of checking whether Kuneitra fell to the Israelis prior to the cease-fire or after the cease-fire. The United Nations military observers are not in a position to report on this point, at least for the moment.
99.	Regarding the question posed by the representative of France on the matter of incursions into Syria, we have no definite information from either the Chief of Staff of UNTSO or the Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission. But according to general information that we have, based on the previous report, the incursion in some places is about twelve miles deep inside Syria.
100.	Regarding the last question, pertaining to the sufficiency, or otherwise, of the staff of General Odd Bull, I will transmit this question immediately to General Bull. But as I indicated in my report to the Council yesterday [see 1353rd meeting], the efficiency and promptness in reporting of the United Nations military observers in the area
depend primarily on freedom of movement; and of course the security factor is also a very important consideration.
101.	Concerning the possibility of redeployment of other members of the United Nations military group from other areas, I shall also immediately ask General Bull about his observations. For the moment, however, my feeling is that freedom of movement and the security factor are more important for his purpose of carrying out his present responsibilities than is the enlargement of the force. Then too, I wish to report to the Council that General Odd Bull has not so far asked for additional staff.
