The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Since the Last meeting of the General Assembly I have made two further reports, on 11 and 16 March 1988, respectively, in which I have provided information concerning the evolution of the situation arising from the implementation by the United States of the legislation contained in the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, as it affects the maintenance of the present arrangements in New York for the Palestine Liberation Organization Observer Mission. The two reports are factual in nature and speak for
themselves.
In the light of these latest developments, I feel it is my duty to reiterate my strong conviction that the dispute which has been engendered by the legislation in question is one that must be resolved within the framework of the Headquarters Agreement. My concern in this regard goes well beyond the present legislation and relates to the integrity and viability of international agreements in general and the Headquarters Agreement in particular. The approach which I have taken is, in my view, the only one that is consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and resolutions 42/210 B and 42/229 B, which were adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 1987 and 2 March 1988, respectively.
The International Court of Justice has been requested by the General Assembly to give an advisory opinion on the procedural obligations of the United States under the Headquarters Agreement. As members of the General Assembly know, the Court has fixed time limits for the presentation of written statements and oral hearings which are clearly designed to accelerate the Court procedure. For my part, I fully intend to meet these accelerated time limits. The opinion of the Court will clarify the legal issues as regards the applicability of the Headquarters Agreement to this dispute and the relevance of section 21 of that Agreement to its resolution.
As we reconvene today, I trust that our deliberations will once again be marked by the seriousness which characterized our last discussion of this item. I trust also that the message of the General Assembly will be clear and that it will contribute to a solution of the problem before us in a manner that is consistent with international law, and the Headquarters Agreement in particular.