The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In two reports that I have made to the General Assembly on the matter before it, dated 10 and 25 February 1988 respectively, I have provided a factual and full account of the efforts I have undertaken as the chief custodian of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement to ensure that the present arrangements in New York for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which was granted Permanent Observer status by the General Assembly in 1974, are maintained.
As Member States will be aware, I and my colleagues have been deeply involved in such efforts since well before the adoption of General Assembly resolution 42/210 B on 17 December last. Our efforts were redoubled following the adoption of that resolution and have been undertaken at every level of the Government of the United States. It is a matter of considerable regret to me that these efforts have thus far failed to bring about a solution to the problem and that it has proved necessary to reconvene the General Assembly for this purpose.
I believe that the reports I have issued are self-explanatory. I should like, however, to take this occasion to state once again the position of substance I have taken in my contacts and communications with the host country.
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PIO) is an invitee of the United Nations by virtue of General Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and the United States is, as a consequence of the Headquarters Agreement, under an obligation to permit duly accredited PLO personnel to enter and remain in the United States in order to carry out their official functions. This is the position I have taken from the very beginning, and it is endorsed in resolution 42/210 B. It is my hope that even now it will prove possible for the host country to reconcile its domestic legislation with its international obligations in such a manner as to ensure full respect for the spirit and the letter of the Headquarters Agreement.
However, should the host country consider that it must give effect to the legislation, then I trust that it will recognize the existence of a dispute between the United States and the United Nations and agree to the utilization of the dispute settlement procedure provided for in section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement, so that the dispute can be definitively settled in a reasoned and lawful manner.
Let me say in closing that the question the General Assembly is taking up today has immediate and profound importance for the United Nations as a party, together with the united States of America, to the Headquarters Agreement, which governs the functioning of the Organization in the United States. The integrity and viability of the Headquarters Agreement, I should recall, has until now withstood the test of more than 40 years of practice.
That being said, I should like to urge that attention remain focused on the particular issue which has led to the reconvening of this session of the General Assembly. That issue relates to the substantive and procedural obligations of the host country under the Headquarters Agreement. It is my hope that the debate in this Assembly will be conducted having regard to this specific issue and with the measured deliberation that the subject-matter warrants.