235.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In the light of the statements just made at this meeting, I feel it incumbent upon me to set the record straight with regard to certain facts.
236.	In the statement relating to the cease-fire which I issued in the early evening of l0 August and circulated to the Security Council as document S/5879,6/ I  stated that the cease-fire called for by the President of the Security Council and by the resolution of the Security Council of 9 August, is in effect, I was able to make that statement because of the favourable responses received from the President of Cyprus on the morning.
of 10 August and from the Prime Minister of Turkey in the afternoon of that day.
237.	Reports received today from the Commander of the United Nations Force in Cyprus indicated that firing has come to an end both on the ground and in the air. It was reported, however, that early in the morning of 11 August a number of Turkish RF-84F aircraft flew over Xeros and Lefka in north-west Cyprus, and a single jet plane flew over Lefka in a northerly direction at a height of 1,200 feet. There was no firing by any of these aircraft.
238.	As to incidents occurring after the Security Council's decision of 9 August, but before receipt, on 10 August, of the favourable responses from the two parties, I am informed that, at 8 a.m., local time, on Monday, 10 August, two Turkish jet aircraft made three runs over Polis, firing in the course of two of them. Only an estimate of the casualties was possible, but they were not thought to be in excess of ten. I have no knowledge of the statement I have just heard attributed to an officer of the United Nations Force in Cyprus.
239.	The United Nations Force in Cyprus has reported that, after midnight of 9 August—that is, during the early hours of 10 August—two motor torpedo-boats were seen by the United Nations investigator to be lying in the harbour of Kokkina. An aerial reconnaissance was made over the area at 4.30 a.m., local time. In the increasing daylight, the reconnaissance craft located one destroyer, two motor torpedo-boats, and one trawler-type fishing vessel, steaming north from the Kokkina-Mansoura area at 15 knots, fifteen miles north of the Cyprus coast. The investigator believed that no landings had been made, but that supplies had most certainly been unloaded.
240.	I am also informed that sporadic firing took place at around 6 a.m. on 10 August, the firing coming from both sides, which the Commander of the United Nations Force in Cyprus believes could be attributed to the fact that Information about the cease-fire had not reached all of the outposts. This firing subsequently died away on both sides.
241.	The Commander of the Force states that he has no information about a Greek aircraft bombing the village of Kokkina on the morning of 9 August, since there were no United Nations troops in that area at the time.
242.	As to the reference that has been made to the time taken by the United Nations investigator in reaching Kokkina, I need say only that there was no delay. The Commander of the Force was informed of the report concerning the Turkish vessels only shortly before midnight. He immediately sent instructions to the Commander in the area to proceed to Kokkina to investigate. The message had to reach the officer in the area, who then travelled by car to Kokkina, through several Greek Cypriot road-blocks. He travelled at night a distance of twenty miles, through both Greek and Turkish Cypriot lines, but
has reported that he encountered no unusual difficulties or delays on either side. In the circumstances, the officer's arrival at Kokkina by 3 a.m. seems to me to merit commendation.