204.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have just received two reports from General Odd Bull. The first one was
dispatched at 0305 hours GMT from Jerusalem, and was referred to in my report to the Council dated 11 June.3 It reads as follows:
“(a) Details of the bombing incident, which has been reported earlier, as provided by Chairman of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission, are as follows: ‘Two aircraft identified as Delta-wing too high to observe marking. Bombs were definitely dropped. Heavy antiaircraft put up as result. Impact south of Damascus estimated seven to ten kilometres. Estimated ten to fifteen heavy explosions heard. No smoke or dust observed due to intervening buildings. Absolutely not sonic boom. These aircraft observed by experienced air force United Nations military observers and were assessed as bombers and not photo-reconnaissance aircraft, due to flight angle of sun. Senior Syrian delegate reported that there were six aircraft in group although only two were observed by United Nations military observers.’
“(b) No other breaches of cease-fire observed.
“(c) Mr. Sasson”—of the Israel Foreign Office— “categorically and repeatedly denied bombing by Israel aircraft. He stated that such allegation should not be permitted to distort picture of calm prevailing after cease-fire time.
“(d) Steps taken to achieve observance of cease-fire on either side have been reported. Additional information is as follows: (i) United Nations military observers from Damascus deployed and remained overnight at Sasa, where teams of two will deploy at first light on 11 June
toward Kuneitra. (ii) Simultaneously, team from Tiberias will deploy eastward to Kuneitra, which is invested by Israel forces”-that is, occupied by Israel forces-“and re-establish Kuneitra control centre.”
That is the end of the first report.
205.	The second report from General Bull was dispatched at 0447 hours GMT and reads as follows:
“Message reporting details of observed cease-fire breaches: (a) Deployment of United Nations military observer team from Tiberias to Kuneitra has been delayed pending the decision of Israel Minister of Defence regarding this movement. Decision expected approximately 0800 hours GMT, 11 June. b) United Nations military observer team which remained overnight at Sasa moved toward Kuneitra at daylight and at 0330 hours GMT reported to Damascus to have passed village of Fania. No further information available.”
That is the end of the second report.