196.	The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, with reference to the request of the representative of the Soviet
Union, I have the following observations to make. First of all, as I indicated earlier in my short intervention, I received a report from General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of UNTSO, that he had lost contact with his observers in several areas because of the unsettled conditions there.
197.	Secondly, in order to facilitate the collection of information, the essential condition is that the parties concerned must give all possible co-operation to the observers. So far, to my knowledge, the necessary cooperation has not been forthcoming. Therefore, I would request the parties primarily concerned to render all possible co-operation and assistance to the United Nations observers in the discharge of their responsibilities.
198.	Thirdly, I should like to report to the Council that since General Odd Bull and his staff have had to leave Government House, they have no wireless communication facilities for the purpose of contacting the observers. They have had to use mostly commercial services, commercial communications, which of course are very defective for the purpose of prompt reporting. Therefore, I should like to take this opportunity of appealing to the Government of Israel, through its representative, to restore the use of Government House to General Odd Bull so that he will be in a position to reach the observers promptly for the purpose of reporting officially to me in order that I may be in a position to report accurately to the members of the Council.
199.	Fourthly, one very essential element for the performance of their functions by the observers is to get freedom of movement. I think this is a must if the Security Council is to expect prompt and effective and accurate reporting from the United Nations observers on the spot, Therefore, I should also like to take this opportunity of requesting the parties primarily concerned to render all possible assistance to the United Nations observers to achieve complete freedom of movement for them.
200.	If those conditions are obtained, I am sure we will get the required information as soon as possible. But I do not think it is practical to expect an accurate report in the course of thirty minutes; that is physically impossible. I have no idea how long it will take. But if those conditions are met, I am sure the reporting will be prompt. I can assure the members of the Council that as soon as I receive the necessary report which is relevant to the matter under discussion, I shall see to it that the Council members get that report as promptly as possible.